BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 20 Jun (MENA) -- Today the Military 
Prosecutor's Office demanded the death penalty for defendants 
number one to five in the case pertaining to the attempted 
assassination of Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi. There are 17 
defendants in the case, two of them fugitives. The first five 
defendants have been named as Muhammad Rashad 'Abd-al-Hamid 
Hijazi, Muhammad 'Abd-al-'Alim Muhammad Khalifah, Mas'ud 
al-'Arif Ibrahim, Tariq Ahmad 'Abd-al- Hamid, and Usamah 
Muhammad Rashad (a fugitive). 
  The prosecution also demanded stiff penalties for the 
remaining defendants in the case. 
  The representative of the Military Prosecutor's Office told 
the court that the defendants attempted to kill Information 
Minister Safwat al-Sharif three times, they made two attempts on 
the life of Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi, and they tried to 
assassinate UN Secretary General Dr. Butrus-Ghali. 
  The prosecution reviewed the facts pertaining to the 
establishment of the organization to which the defendants 
belong, the criminal conspiracy they concluded, and the training 
they undertook in the use of weapons and explosives. 
  The prosecution said that the defendants received large sums 
of money from abroad, they provided the banks through which the 
funds were transferred with false names. They used the money 
thus received to rent apartments and to purchase vehicles and 
plots of land on which to build hideouts, weapons, and 
explosives. 
  The representative of the Military Prosecutor's Office said 
that the defendants have been divided into two groups. 
Defendants number one through nine are in the first group and 
defendants number ten through seventeen are in the second. 
  He said the members of the first group were recruited by the 
terrorists Nazih Nushi Rashid and 'Adil 'Awad Siyam. Rashid was 
killed during the attack on the interior minister and Siyam was 
recently killed in a police ambush in Cairo's al-Munib area. 
  He added that the organization's members purchased a tract 
of 
land in Bilbays in al-Sharqiyah Governorate where they built a 
hideout with cells for holding Egyptian and foreign hostages. 
  They bought a plot of land on the Suez road to build another 
hideout. Their hideouts were mainly found in al-Jizah area and 
Bilbays in al-Sharqiyah Governorate. 
  The representative of the Military Prosecutor's Office told 
the court that the defendants gave their own interpretations of 
some of the Koran's chapters and sayings of the prophet in a way 
that agreed with their ideology, which is based on murder, 
accusing the head of state and his aides of apostasy, and 
seeking to overthrow the government by force. He affirmed that 
Islamic shari'ah does not approve of their ideology, which 
advocates murder, bombings, and the killing of innocent men, 
women, and children. 
  The prosecutor said that the first terrorist act they 
carried 
out was the murder of a dissident member called 'Adil Anwar. 
They ambushed him in front of his house. After that they 
planted an explosive device at the al-Jazirah Youth Center in 
order to kill several police officers during their daily 
physical training session. 
  He added that when they tried to kill the interior minister, 
they rigged a motorcycle with explosives. The explosion caused 
the death of two members of the organization, Diya' Mahmud Hafiz 
and Nushi Rashid. 
  The prosecutor related how they killed Ahmad Yahya, the 
first 
witness in the case pertaining to the attempt on the prime 
minister's life, in a car showroom. 
  He explained how the defendants stole a Fiat 128 from in 
front of a church in al-Fajjalah and used it in the murder 
attack on Ahmad Yahya. Later the terrorist 'Adil 'Awad Siyam 
was killed in the same car in al-Munib area. 
  The prosecutor pointed out that the second group of 
defendants concluded a criminal conspiracy with the first group 
and provided them with weapons and ammunition for their 
operations. They also supplied them with cylinders to build 
explosive devices. 
  The prosecutor told the court: In this case we are not 
discussing a particular ideology or putting a system of thought 
on trial. We are examining concrete facts comprising criminal 
conspiracy to commit premeditated murders, membership of an 
illegal group with the aim of carrying out assassinations, and 
possession of weapons, explosives, and forged documents. 
  The Military Court adjourned the case until 25 June when the 
defense counsel will sum up the case. 

