BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Britain--A Base for Terrorism!"] </F>
  [Excerpts] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful. The British Government has agreed to the 
establishment of networks to guide the terroristic operations of 
the Monafeqin [hypocrites--pejorative term for Mojahedin-e Khalq 
Organization, MKO] on its soil. While revealing this, a source 
in the British House of Commons stressed that London has issued 
a permit for the Monafeqin to direct their terroristic 
operations from British soil after Paris had refused their 
request. Thus, Britain has been transformed into a base for the 
Monafeqin terrorists, who will henceforth receive their orders 
directly from London and will embark on crimes and killings. 
[passage omitted] 
  The oppressed Kurds of Iraq have not forgotten that at the 
height of their struggle against the Baghdad regime, the 
Monafeqin terrorists entered the fray suddenly on the side of 
the "executioner of Baghdad" and began massacring and torturing 
the revolutionaries. However, the Monafeqin did not reap any 
benefits from all this mercenary service and crime on behalf of 
Saddam. They incurred the ire of the Kurdish combatants and a 
short while later the Monafeqin's installations were the targets 
of the fury and vengeance of the combatant Kurds and their stay 
in Iraq was terminated. 
  Now that these Monafeqin have entered into London's service 
and have committed themselves to the British Intelligence 
organization, there is a strong likelihood that they will become 
the targets of the hatred and anger of the IRA and the IRA's 
revenge squads will be the nemesis of the remnant elements of 
the Monafeqin. 
  It is interesting to note that the mischief-mongering 
British 
seem helpless before the Irish combatants and will try to use 
the mercenary Monafeqin as their sandbags in their efforts to 
crush the IRA. If all the lackey Monafeqin are killed in the 
process, the mischief-mongering British will have lost nothing. 
[passage omitted] 
  Britain should seriously reply to these questions: Is it 
prepared to accept the consequences of this ill-fated investment 
in the Monafeqin? Does it realize the consequences of such a 
foolish policy and does it take direct responsibility for its 
latest decisions? There is a strong possibility that the 
explosion on Sa'di Avenue in Tehran recently, which resulted in 
human and material losses, was actually directed by Britain. 
  It is not yet clear how London will face the unpleasant 
consequences of its decisions and whether it comprehends what 
the reaction to this unwise step will be. It is difficult to 
predict what the reaction of the families of those martyred by 
the crimes of the Monafeqin will be when they hear of this. 
  It is essential for the Islamic Republic of Iran to stress 
the seriousness of the matter to London; and before London's 
malice provokes a severe and irrevocable reaction, Iran should 
ask the trouble-making British to rectify their deliberate 
mistakes and apologize to the Iranian nation. Otherwise Britain 
will have to take responsibility for its indiscreet decisions. 

