CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Baberdin: "The `Siriuses': We Were in </F>
Orbit With You"; the first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] We already have reported that the "Siriuses," 
Vasiliy Tsibliyev and Aleksandr Serebrov, the cosmonauts 
recently returning from the Mir orbital complex, were guests in 
our editorial offices. They were accompanied by the crew's 
physician, Vladimir Krivolapov. They all participated in a 
regular creative editorial office meeting. They told of the 
problems of manned cosmonautics and shared their impressions 
about the flight. We bring the record of this conversation to 
the attention of our readers. 
  V. B.: Your orbital expedition has ended. Not 
counting the accident occurring during the last minutes of the 
flight (KRASNAYA ZVEZDA has told in considerable detail about 
the collision in one of its publications), in general the watch 
went off normally. But surely you remembered something most 
clearly of all? 
  V. Ts.: There is much which can be said about the 
flight. Especially for me, being in space for the first time. 
That from above the Earth looks exceptionally beautiful is 
something about which you have heard more than once. No 
photographic, motion picture or video survey can convey all the 
colors which are there. Leonov and Dzhanibekov in their drawings 
attempted to use paints in conveying the colors of space, also 
in vain. It is not by chance that the favorite pursuit of all 
who have been in orbit has been visual and instrumental 
observation. 
  The northern and southern lights and noctilucent clouds are 
amazing when viewed from space. Although there is the 
superstition: if you see them, expect bad luck. In actuality, so 
it happened. Prior to the tragic October events in Moscow strong 
northern and southern lights were observed and there were many 
noctilucent clouds. Yes, and a full moon to boot. "The very time 
for the activation of schizophrenia," joked Serebrov at that 
time. And he hit the nail on the head. Information was 
transmitted on the state of the Earth's atmosphere, formation of 
cyclones and different kinds of vortices: typhoons and 
snowstorms. 
  V. B.: That is something not reported in any 
newspaper. The unfavorable days with respect to magnetic storms 
are listed. But is information on natural catastrophes in the 
making not far more important for people? 
  V. Ts.: Unquestionably. And if you set yourself a 
goal, it is easily attained. From above it can be seen clearly 
when different kinds of troubles are beginning to brew in the 
atmosphere. In America, for example, when we discovered that a 
hurricane was in the formation stage, the Earth was warned by 
amateur radio (on the Mir there is a special antenna and 
equipment for this purpose). Two days later they confirmed to us 
that hurricanes in actuality were observed in the mentioned 
regions. 
  On Sakhalin it could be seen that vortical movements were 
developing. And in the Black Sea not far from Novorossiysk it 
was noted that a waterspout was forming. The information was 
transmitted to the locals. "Thank you, fellows," was heard in 
response, "but everything is like normal, things will be OK." 
But after a day... Unfortunately, there is no such service today 
which could collect all this information, analyze it, warn the 
population in time and take other necessary measures. 
  V. B.: Tell about the condition of the orbital 
complex. After all, it has now been in service for eight years. 
  V. Ts.: Yes, a very respectable age. And an 
ever-increasing amount of time is being spent on preventive 
maintenance and replacing assemblies whose useful life has 
elapsed. To be sure, the body of the station also is wearing 
out. A whole series of experiments was devoted to a study of its 
condition, including emergence into open space. For Serebrov it 
became the tenth, a record. The work also was given the name 
"Panorama." We carefully inspected the entire station skin and 
used a video camera in scanning its individual components. 
  It could be seen that the station has been well peppered by 
meteorites. Fortunately, there have been no through 
penetrations, but there are indentations, there are very many 
pits on the glass in the ports and elements of solar cells have 
been cut through. 
  With respect to preventive maintenance within the station, 
the work there has no limit. It's pretty sick to fly into orbit 
for glory, for an award; on the station you have got plenty to 
do. You have to get in there with the head and the hands. You 
have to work as a mechanic -- with nuts, bolts and connecting 
pieces. Whereas under the schedule we were to go to bed at 2300 
hours, in reality we laid down at 0100, or 0200, or 0300... It 
was necessary to think out things which were not covered in any 
shipboard instructions. For example, we were able to repair a 
spacesuit for emergence into open space and it had cost many, 
many millions of rubles. 
  But all that is but half the trouble. The most important 
thing now is that there is no money and the necessary equipment 
and instruments are lacking. The cargo ships arrive not fully 
loaded. First one thing could not be delivered, then another. 
The food aboard the station came to be in short supply. Not 
without reason did we slim down quite a bit during the 
expedition. Earlier there were milk products in abundance -- 
then there was a problem. And remember, in space calcium is 
intensively excreted from the body. 
  V. B.: Is it possible that they could no longer 
find milk for the cosmonauts? 
  V. Ts.: Not just that. It turned out that boxes 
with canned meats on the Progress were empty or were packed with 
something else. If society is already sick, the sickness affects 
all aspects of its life. 
  V. B.: And nevertheless, when they asked you to 
remain in space for additional time you willingly agreed? 
  V. Ts.: It would be dishonest to say that it was 
entirely willingly. We simply appraised the situation and 
understood that there was no other recourse. Initially the 
program was to last for 147 days. It was assumed that it was 
necessary to remain in orbit for two or three weeks more. But it 
turned out to be two months. To be sure, psychological stress 
was involved and it had to be dealt with. And there was nothing 
which could be done about it. 
  V. B.: Speak frankly, during this time did you not 
become bored with one another? Did it not get on your nerves to 
be together in a restricted space? 
  V. Ts.: I tell you frankly and with complete 
responsibility that we had no such problems. And, indeed, there 
was no time to quarrel. Serebrov worked in one module and I in 
another. But we rushed to the table at dinner time like we were 
starving. On the other hand, we periodically made the effort to 
see one another. 
  The fact is that on the station in the space behind panels 
there are places where you can creep (under weightlessness 
conditions this is far easier to do), but from which you cannot 
extricate yourself without help. In addition, there are spaces 
not ventilated by fans. You get distracted by your work and 
carbon dioxide is released from your body, forming a stable 
spherical envelope around you. A person without realizing it 
first becomes intoxicated and then is poisoned by the gas and 
falls asleep. 
  V. B.: We've been talking about food, but tell us, 
for holidays did they not deliver an alcoholic beverage in tubes 
into orbit? 
  V. Ts.: Only if you tried to have it delivered. 
  V. B.: Did you try? 
  V. Ts.: And why does that interest you? 
  V. B.: Boris Serebrov. In your time you and 
Aleksandr Viktorenko were the first to test the SPK, the "space 
motorcycle," in action as a means for cosmonaut movement in open 
space. Since that time it's been forgotten. What happened to it? 
  A. S.: In general in a normal state it is placed 
in the locking chamber in a dismantled form. The machine is 
excellent, but there is no fuel -- a special compressed gas -- 
for it. When I arrived for training in the cosmonaut detachment, 
once again I tried out in the trainer to see if I had lost skill 
in controlling the "motorcycle." The exercise was not one of the 
easiest: with a weight of 50 kg on a hook, fly around the 
station. It turned out, quite the opposite, that my skill had 
improved. 
  Immediately I began to try to organize emergence with it 
into 
open space, a flight around the station. Indeed, using the SPK 
it would have been quite easy to perform well all the work under 
the "Panorama" program. Enter any zone, take photographs. Yes, 
and the Americans, I am sure, would be interested in it. 
  But here again the dealing has begun. Whose motorcycle is 
it? 
On the one hand, does it belong to the NPO Energiya, General 
Yuriy Semenov, or does it belong to the NPO Zvezda, Gay Severin? 
Each has its ambitions, its plans. Superposed on this is a 
struggle to save weight; it is necessary to carry along two 
gas-filled cylinders. Then it was found that someone had 
forgotten to order batteries... 
  V. B.: Tell us, during flight on the station were 
you not annoyed by UFOs? 
  A. S.: This time they caused no concern. But when 
Viktorenko and I tested the "motorcycle" in open space I recall 
that a healthy chunk of metal floated between us. Without 
identification marks. I understood that it was a UFO. 
  V. B.: Is it possible that there is so much trash 
in space? 
  A. S.: Far more than I would like. Even here 
mankind has laid its hand. But if all is thought through, even 
this problem can be solved, and quite simply. 
  V. Ts.: We were greatly annoyed not by UFO, but by 
identified objects -- meteor showers. The fact is that in the 
first half of August there was a strong stream of meteorites. On 
the 12th of the month it was maximum, emanating from the 
constellation Perseus. During this period the Americans even 
postponed the flight of the next Shuttle. We organized an 
around-the-clock watch on the station. Serebrov and I actually 
did not sleep these days and observed the stream. Naturally, in 
the shadow, from which bursts are clearly visible. 
  This was an unpleasant picture. Especially when bolides (the 
largest meteorites) burst into the atmosphere. Their combustion 
time was 2.5-3.5 seconds, followed by an explosion. A total of 
more than 240 meteorites were counted. Those are the ones which 
could be seen. Later we learned that on the Earth the search and 
rescue service had been brought into full combat readiness. 
Helicopters and aircraft stood ready along the entire flight 
trajectory in the territory of Russia in the event of our forced 
emergency descent from orbit. 
  V. K.: They told us that several hours after 
returning to the surface, when your aircraft made a landing in 
your native Chkalov, without anyone's assistance you quite 
buoyantly descended the stairs. Then, after several days, you 
looked fresh at the traditional press conference. Giving an 
impression as if there had been no flight? 
  V. Ts.: This is more a question for the 
physicians. I will only tell you that preventive measures are 
important. We have acquired enormous experience in their 
organization during prolonged flights. It was acquired by blood 
and sweat. Physical training is the most important. We engaged 
in physical training twice a day for an hour, other than for 
days off and holidays. Plus special biomedical measures directly 
before descent from orbit. 
  V. B.: And if a cosmonaut becomes ill on the 
station? Let's say with appendicitis or a bad tooth. What can be 
done in such a case? 
  V. Ts.: A question precisely for our physician, 
Vladimir Krivolapov. Incidentally, journalists for some reason 
do not write about them, the crew physicians. But they are like 
our nurses. 
  From the very first day of preparation for flight as part of 
a crew they are responsible for our health. Prior to the launch 
and after landing the crew's physician is the principal 
intermediary for all our encounters and work with specialists. 
  V. K.: (crew physician). Treatment aboard a 
station is always a problem. To be sure, first of all we lay our 
hopes on the successful diagnosis and prediction of the 
condition of the cosmonaut's body. But after a half-year, and 
especially a year, anything can happen. At one time it was 
proposed that all spaceflight candidates have their appendix 
removed. But the other internal organs remain. The teeth are a 
very vulnerable place in man. It also is better that there be no 
teeth. I'm not joking -- just that has been suggested, for 
example, with respect to cosmonauts flying to Mars. 
  With respect to the watch crew on the Mir, here we are 
counting more on the crew's capacity for keeping in good health. 
However, there was a case when because of this the flight was 
interrupted, when the sickness was treated in orbit: physicians 
advised the crew from the Flight Control Center. Fortunately, 
there have been few such cases. 
  V. Ts.: But traumas, especially microtraumas, are 
easy to experience in orbit. In a state of weightlessness you do 
not feel weight. It's all the same if you lift a 10- or 200-kg 
part. But mass and inertia remain. Push a little too hard and 
you get pressed against a sharp edge. The force, indeed, under 
the law of mechanics is equal to the mass multiplied by velocity 
squared, divided by 2. We joked: it's good that it's divided by 
half, or it could kill you. Yes, they teach you to give yourself 
first aid and to give it to a colleague, but there's no 
substitute for a physician. I think that in the future a 
physician should mandatorily be a crew member. 
  V. B.: In orbit you perform an enormous amount of 
work, but down below, on the Earth, in the meanwhile, everything 
is collapsing. Here they shoot and kill and industry tumbles 
down before one's eyes. How do you perceive this psychologically 
in space? Does it not dishearten you? 
  A. S.: It's impossible to lump everything 
together. We have our work, our professional duty. Duty to 
ourselves, to those who work in the space industry, and finally, 
to Russia. And we strove to perform this work as well as 
possible, since after us there are others to come. 
  Yes, we were frankly indignant about what was going on in 
the 
country, but we were not disheartened. Each must be occupied 
with his own task. Ours was space technology, not politics. 
There is a good American saying. If you are driving an 
automobile with the left hand on the steering wheel and with the 
right embracing a girl, you do both of these poorly. 
  In our day, when it is impossible to foresee the morrow, 
when 
you cannot depend on the train or plane schedule for the next 
day, in the space branch we plan events many years ahead and 
they are carried off with the greatest accuracy. And this is 
noteworthy. I am sure that the country will extricate itself 
from its crisis. Russia always has been rich with Lomonosovs and 
Kulibins. It is only necessary to move on from political 
squabbling to business, with our hands and minds making specific 
things useful to all. 

