Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kazimierz Groblewski: "Milczanowski Gives </F>
Promises to Kanther"] 
  [Text] Cooperation and joint interests in combating the 
problem of migration was declared on Monday [31 January] by 
German Internal Affairs Minister Manfred Kanther and his Polish 
counterpart, Andrzej Milczanowski. "The Germans do not have any 
complaints that they would like to submit to us," said 
Milczanowski following the conference. "Bonn-Direkt," an 
information program broadcast on Sunday evening in the second 
program of the German television network ZDF, carried a report 
on the complaints of the Federal Republic of Germany toward 
Poland for not implementing the duties stemming from an 
agreement on readmission signed on 7 May 1993. 
  It was stated on the ZDF program that Polish border troops 
employ all kinds of tricks just to avoid admitting refugees 
captured by German border police. However, the aforementioned 
agreement obliges Poland to begin asylum proceedings or return 
the refugees to their countries of origin. 
  The agreement on readmission, signed on 7 May 1993 by Poland 
and Germany, envisioned that from 1 July (that is, from the day 
the new asylum law came into force) until the end of 1993, 
Germany would be allowed to send back to Poland no more than 
10,000 refugees; from 1994 on, there would be no limits. By the 
end of 1994, Poland is supposed to receive 120 million German 
marks to secure the borders and establish an asylum system. 
  The head of the German Ministry of Internal Affairs [MSW] 
spoke in Warsaw with President Lech Walesa, Prime Minister 
Waldemar Pawlak, and Polish MSW Head Andrzej Milczanowski. At 
the conference following the meeting, no one spoke about 
Germany's complaints with Poland. Milczanowski even reported 
that the similarity of views of both ministers is as great as 
the convergence of their birthdays; they were born in the same 
year, the same month, and on the same day. 
  "We achieved a satisfactory agreement on the issue of 
readmitting foreigners who cross the border illegally." 
  "There are certain difficulties," conceded Kanther. 
  "Indeed, there are certain difficulties in the area of the 
interpretation of documents which are supposed to be a 
sufficient reason for us to admit asylum-seekers from Germany," 
said Milczanowski. He reported that from 1 July to the end of 
1993, Germany sent 2,679 people to Poland; there were 28 
controversial cases. 
  Kanther admitted that the German side has different data 
from 
those presented by Milczanowski, "but they cannot be identical 
because there are different legal categories." 
  Probably by the end of February, both sides will appoint 
liaison officers in the border areas. This step is supposed to 
make the process of establishing the identity of refugees "less 
bureaucratic" in situations when they have no documentation. 
  Asked by RZECZPOSPOLITA after the conference whether Poland 
had returned any refugees to countries of origin, he said that 
it had, but not by air. He was not able to say how many 
refugees we had sent away from Poland in this way. 
  During the conference the moderator did not let any of the 
Polish journalists ask a question; only German journalist were 
allowed to ask questions. 

