BFN 

<F P=106> ["Full text" of interview with President Muhammad Husni </F>
Mubarak by correspondent Faridah al-Shubashi in Cairo; date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Al-Shubashi] Your Excellency, welcome. This is the 
first interview you have granted to Radio Monte Carlo since you 
became the president of Egypt. 
  [Mubarak] Thank you. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Mr. President, millions watched on television 
the signing of the Palestinian self-rule agreement in which you 
played a major role. Those millions were stunned at the 
critical moment when they noticed there was a difference over 
the signing of a number of maps and documents. We would like 
the president to brief us on the hidden details of these moments. 
  [Mubarak] I want to make something clear. We must know that 
the Palestinian question is over 45 years old. Therefore, it is 
a complicated issue. It became more complicated following the 
emergence of the two frameworks of the Camp David accords. When 
the second framework, which deals with resolving all aspects of 
the Palestinian issue, was reached, the Israeli settlements in 
the West Bank and Gaza were no more than 48 small settlements. 
Today, after approximately 45 years, there are 180 large 
settlements. This further complicates the situation. They want 
to find new places for the settlers who will be moved; they also 
want to decide on the best way of dealing with those who will 
stay and their relationship with the Palestinians in the West 
Bank and Gaza. Therefore, the issue is very complicated and 
other complications will emerge in the coming stages of the 
negotiations. 
  They held negotiations over the details following the 
Declaration of Principles. They spent a long time here to 
discuss these details. They had almost reached an agreement at 
0200 on the day of the signing. We agreed on certain points. 
The problem was over the areas of Jericho and the Gaza Coast. 
They held negotiations until dawn. Meanwhile, I was in my 
office together with the American and Russian officials to help 
them. When we reached a delicate stage, the Palestinian 
brothers and Abu-'Ammar [Yasir 'Arafat] asked for my help. I 
spoke with Mr. Rabin to soften their stand on the issue of the 
coast because we want to solve the problem without undermining 
security. With regard to Gaza, we convinced them to give the 
Palestinians the largest area possible. What is left is 12 km 
for security measures [preceding two words in English]. They 
also added 6.5 km to the area of Jericho. However, after three 
months they [the Palestinians] will take more area. Abu-'Ammar 
objected to these two areas. However, one of the Palestinians 
suggested that even after the signing the talks on the areas of 
Jericho and the Gaza Coast could continue. They said that they 
agreed on this. 
  In the morning, Abu-'Ammar did not sign the map of Jericho 
and the Gaza coast. Mr. Rabin went to sign, but he returned and 
told me that he ['Arafat] did not sign the map. We reached a 
delicate stage. I asked Abu-'Ammar what the problem was. We 
summoned Nabil Sha'th and Abu-Mazin [Mahmud 'Abbas] and we began 
to talk on podium. We halted the speeches. Rabin said: What 
am I going to say now? Not all the documents are signed. We 
took a break and I spoke with them. I told them: You reached 
an agreement. But, there was no document to confirm the 
agreement they reached that night. They agreed that Rabin and 
Shim'on Peres would write a letter that would be approved by the 
two cosponsors, Christopher and Kozyrev, that they would resume 
the talks after the signing. 
  I believe that three months later, they [the Palestinians] 
will take a larger area in Jericho. When our Palestinian 
brothers go to control [preceding word in English] and make 
plans they will find that the administration on the ground is 
not an easy job. It is easy to talk while you are far away from 
the area, but when you come to the area you will face the 
problems of the people who want to live there. They want 
hospitals, education, and salaries. The new administration will 
face endless problems. Anyhow, we solved the problem within two 
minutes and we returned to the podium where they signed the 
documents. 
  It is natural to face problems even at the last moment 
because of the nature of the problem. The road is still long. 
The Palestinian problem is more complicated than any problem 
with Jordan or Syria. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Your Excellency the President: After achieving 
the Gaza-Jericho step, which is considered the beginning, what 
is your assessment of the peace process and do you expect 
expeditious progress, particularly on the Syrian-Israeli track? 
  [Mubarak] I believe this is the first step with regard to 
the 
Palestinian dimension. I was of the opinion that the 
Palestinians should take the first step. Then, they can start 
the process of confidence-building with the Israelis, so the 
Israelis will be reassured. This is because Israel is sensitive 
about the issue of security for its citizens in order not to 
instigate public opinion against the government. Therefore, I 
can say that 'Arafat made a very courageous decision and Rabin 
also made a very courageous decision in following the path of 
peace. 
  Perhaps it is the circumstances have created such a 
situation, but the Palestine question still has a long way to 
go. They will start discussing the final solution in a few 
years time and they will decide what to do with the settlements. 
It will be a more complicated process. In fact, it is the most 
complicated issue, that of the Palestinian people. 
  With regard to the Syrian track, I wish that during this 
year, or by the end of this year, they will have reached an 
agreement. This is because I believe the Syrian issue now is 
that of mistrust between Syria and Israel. Israel says: I 
would like to know if I will get something in exchange for 
returning the territory, for example. Syria says: In return 
for this thing, what will they give me? Thus, the issue is a 
crisis of confidence. I believe this will take some time. 
However, I wish that by the end of this year they will have 
reached an agreement. By that time, they must have understood 
each other well. Perhaps the Syrian question is not as 
complicated as the Palestine question. It is only the question 
of the Golan. Of course, Israel says: The Golan, yes, but we 
want full normalization of relations [preceding three words in 
English], including opening borders and establishing diplomatic 
relations. So it remains for our brothers in Syria to open 
borders and have an Israeli flag. It will be somewhat 
difficult. When we first had an Israeli flag, the people felt 
uneasy about it, but the people will get used to peace. One 
thing for another. Everything has a price. In the end, 
everything will seem normal. Israel is a state that exists. 
Let us be realistic so as to look toward the future and see how 
our people will live. 
  As for the Jordanian problem, there are some border 
questions, but I believe that the Jordanian problem is on its 
way to being solved. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Mr. President, what is Your Excellency's reply 
to those who have fears regarding the establishment of a Middle 
East market and their fear that Egypt's regional role will 
recede? 
  [Mubarak] As a matter of fact, I have heard about a Middle 
East market. Whenever anyone makes a statement, you hear many 
analyses and comments. At present, there is no Middle East 
market or anything of this sort. The people want anything to 
talk about. Anyone can raise any topic and then the people will 
start talking about it. This topic was raised by someone, I 
think Shim'on Peres, and the people are talking in detail about 
it. It is we who make the elaboration [preceding word in 
English]. No one will impose anything on us and nothing can 
happen in the region unless we are convinced about it. Egypt 
will stay in the lead of any market. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Mr. President, what are your expectations 
regarding what is happening in Yemen in light of your intensive 
contacts and efforts to contain the explosive situation? Arab 
and world public opinion is following with extreme interest your 
contacts with the parties of the Yemeni crisis. 
  [Mubarak] As a matter of fact, I spoke with the Yemeni 
president and Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid about the 
question of Yemen. I told them: The situation is not 
comfortable. There are forces from the north and south in 
adjacent camps. Please keep the forces away from each other to 
avoid collision, which may lead to armed conflict. If an armed 
conflict begins, it will be very difficult to end it. Even if 
this conflict is halted, many people will have already been 
killed or wounded, and grudges will result, which will lead to 
revenge. Afterward, you will engage in guerrilla warfare. The 
nature of Yemen's terrain is well known. They might fight for 
years and the cycle of revenge could go on for a long time. You 
will reach Aden, and then what? This war will not ensure unity. 
I also told them: War means occupation at a time when you are 
one state. War means a call for secession. Entry into Aden 
would mean occupation, and peoples would view it as occupation, 
and not unity. I cautioned them and then there were rumors that 
Egypt would send forces. We are not prepared to send a single 
soldier to Yemen, whether for peacekeeping or for any other 
purposes. Our forces would be dispatched if there were 
differences among states and when we see that the public 
interest calls for sending peacekeeping forces. This is an 
internal problem there, why send peacekeeping forces? To fight 
whom? I am not prepared to lose anyone in an improper operation. 
  They assure me that the question will be settled. However, 
to tell you the truth, I do not see any hope. I am not biased 
toward one side or the other. I am for peace and stability. We 
are for unity. However, the use of force will never achieve 
unity. It will create revenge operations. Is this part of the 
public interest? The state of affairs in the Arab world is truly 
strange. One country swallows up another; two people unite and 
then strike each other. All of these are aftereffects of the 
Gulf war. It is regrettable and sad. I hope they will reach a 
solution, even though I doubt it. 
  [Al-Shubashi] In light of the deterioration in the Arab 
situation, how much have you accomplished in your efforts to 
close Arab ranks so as to bypass the serious effects of the 
crisis resulting from the Gulf war, and do you believe that 
these efforts are achieving progress? Are the Gulf states 
responding to your efforts in this regard? In other words, will 
Iraq be kept frozen or are there signs of ending the siege 
imposed on Iraq and bringing it back to the international 
community? 
  [Mubarak] There are two points here: Closing Arab ranks and 
the stand on Iraq. 
  With regard to closing Arab ranks, you should not forget 
that 
the occupation of Kuwait and the expulsion of the Kuwaitis were 
a very serious matter, particularly since information indicated 
that they would not have just stopped there and that the 
situation would have developed until it affected the entire Gulf 
region. I did not create this information, reliable sources 
have leaked it in many places. Imagine what would happen if a 
person was expelled from his house, had his belongings seized, 
and was then thrown into the street. It is impossible to 
achieve reconciliation between the two parties in one or two 
years. We are human beings. This is what happened in Kuwait. 
The Gulf states were also scared because after taking Kuwait 
nobody knew where his ambitions would take him. He caused 
chaos. Closing Arab ranks will take long time, because the 
Kuwait war caused deep wounds. I am discussing the matter with 
our brothers. You saw Abu-'Ammar meeting with the custodian of 
the two holy mosques [Saudi Arabian King Fahd]. I spoke with 
the custodian of the two holy mosques and with the Gulf states. 
The situation with Jordan is slightly better now, but this 
needs time. Many countries, which had been helping King Husayn, 
feel bitter over what happened. They believe that King Husayn 
had a role in what happened. But we are trying to clear the 
air, and the situation today is better than it was two years 
ago. The matter, however, will take more time. And the Yemeni 
issue has emerged now. 
  Regarding the issue of Iraq, we are against the partitioning 
of Iraq. There are the northern, southern, and central parts 
now. We sympathize with the Iraqi people. But the 
international community and the Security Council insist on this. 
It is difficult to convince the international community, 
because they would say that the Iraqi president, who was 
responsible for this, is still in power. 
  We are opposed to the removal of a head of state through the 
intervention of foreign powers. The people are the ones who 
should decide whether or not a president should stay in power. 
We can never accept a foreign power removing a head of state. 
I have spoken to certain countries about this issue. Let the 
people, not any foreign power, decide. 
  Lifting the blockade on Iraq is not an easy process and 
requires more time. I hope the people of Iraq will have a 
chance to live. I greatly sympathize with the Iraqi people. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Your Excellency the President, the pioneering 
democratic experiment in Egypt is in the spotlight as it is an 
example to be followed in the region. Will the terrorist 
practices that are aimed at aborting the democratic march 
followed by Egypt under your leadership affect this march? 
  [Mubarak] Nobody can alter the democratic march. If it could 
be changed those terrorist elements and those behind them would 
have achieved something. We are keen on democracy and freedom. 
We tried all... [sentence incomplete as heard]. There has 
never been freedom like that which exists in Egypt now, not even 
under the monarchy, and not before or after. I am fully 
convinced that what we are doing will not arrest this pluralism 
and democracy. What we are doing is in line with the 
Constitution and the law. I do not like to violate them at all, 
because I am establishing bases for the future. If another 
person were in my place he might become nervous about all these 
practices and abort this democracy. But, if we did this, we 
would enter again into a vicious circle. I am against this. I 
support liberties. You notice that some papers here never 
stop... [sentence incomplete as heard]. Yesterday, they told me 
that a paper is calling for confusion. I want the Egyptian 
people to learn, to know right from wrong, and to discern good 
from bad. How can our nations learn? If I put an end to this 
process people will ask in case of any problem: Where is the 
government? Where is the government? 
  In the past, when any official was criticized -- and this 
happened when I first assumed office -- the official would come 
to me and tell me: Mr. President, they say this and that about 
me. But I am not the target. Rather, it is the regime. I 
would answer: Brother, may God damn this regime if it is unable 
to defend itself. Do you want the president to reply to every 
writer who attacks the regime for a mistake? No, every member 
of the regime who works properly must take criticism and reply 
if this criticism is not correct. Reply to it. We are 
concerned about democracy and freedoms. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Mr. President, before you won another term as 
president, you stressed your concern for the problems of 
low-income employees and you stressed the need to quickly 
improve social conditions so as to deepen political and economic 
stability and stem the roots of terrorism. To what extent is 
the state following the opinion and studies of experts in all 
fields regarding the problems of unemployment, poor regions, 
education, and other questions? 
  [Mubarak] I want to tell you one thing. When I assumed 
office in October 1981, I was not aware of the circumstances. I 
started to make studies to see how the situation was in general. 
I found that after the wars, if we were to continue that way, 
there would be no infrastructure. In Cairo schools you would 
see students wearing boots and wading in water. There was no 
water in homes; there was no electricity. If you took the 
Alexandria train, it would take you five hours and the train 
would break down. There were no roads, no telephones, nothing 
at all. The population was increasing. And if you want 
investment without solid infrastructure, no one will come. I saw 
many investors who came here to do business. When they wanted 
to call their company abroad to make a study, they would find 
the telephone dead. If the telephone was working, the operator 
would say to wait for a week or five days until you get a line. 
So Egyptian and non-Egyptian investors came here and found out 
there was nothing to be done. I saw these things. So I called 
an economic conference in March 1982, I think. I brought all 
the economists of the country together. We came up with a plan, 
which we have been following up until today. We introduced 
amendments to the plan from time to time. The country needs 
billions for the infrastructure. If I want to construct a 
building, I must have strong foundations. If I want to build a 
country, I must have strong foundations: water, sewage systems, 
telephones, electricity, etc. This is because no investors will 
come if there is no electricity; no investor will come if he 
cannot make a telephone call to order spare parts through DHL or 
via any other means quickly; no investor will come knowing there 
is no means of transportation; no investor will come when there 
are no industrial zones for him to build. So we started from 
the basic infrastructure. We did not have enough money. We 
barely eked out a living. So what could we do? Are we to leave 
the country this way, or is it better to get loans to build the 
infrastructure so the country can revive and then repay the 
money when our situation improves? We started with the 
infrastructure. We set priorities: water, electricity, and 
telephones. Some people would say: But, Mr. President, why 
don't you work on one project and finish it? Such as water. But 
if we do this, does the water not need drainage systems? What 
about electricity? This is an integral process. We started 
with the basic infrastructure for several years. The problem of 
the poor regions has existed since the sixties, or even before 
that. We have always had low-income people and poor people. The 
world is full of them. You have them in France, the United 
States, Britain. Name one country that does not have poor 
people. Unemployment? Name one country that does not have 
unemployment. All of this is the result of advanced technology 
and such things. We are not any different. We have covered a 
considerable distance in the infrastructure. When I assumed 
office, we had half a million telephone lines, including 300,000 
lines that were not working. As for the 200,000 lines that were 
working, I had to lift the receiver and place it next to me and 
drink tea waiting for the dial tone just to make a quick call. 
If I reached a wrong number, then I had to place the receiver 
back to wait for the tone. So it was better and quicker for a 
person who wanted to speak with a friend on the telephone to go 
on foot and see his friend and come back. 
  Today, we have 3 million telephone lines. In the past, if 
you wanted to speak with another country for any reason, you 
could not. Today, you can talk to Japan, the United States, and 
any other country in the world from any telephone. So we now 
have 3 million lines, compared to the half million lines we had 
from time the telephone was introduced to Egypt. 
  The same thing goes for water and electricity. We had 4,700 
megawatts of electricity. Electricity used to go off, and 
during examinations, the people would get angry because there 
was no electricity and they could not get a lamp. Today, we 
have 14,000 megawatts. Electricity production when I first 
assumed office in late 1981 was 18 billion kilowatts; today, we 
have 75 billion kilowatts. In December, it will become 80 
billion kilowatts. 
  In 1952, the Egyptian citizen used around 50 kilowatts; in 
1970, I think, 400 kilowatts; today, the individual uses 1,000 
kilowatts. Do you see the difference? The Shubra al-Khaymah 
power station alone cost us 3.3 billion pounds. No power 
station costs less than 2.5 billion pounds. These are huge 
stations. That one cost us a lot. Then, we faced some crises. 
There was no hard currency; the price of oil was going down; we 
were not exporting a lot because there weren't many industries. 
All of this created problems. God made things easier for us. 
Half of the debts are gone. Things started to improve. We 
then started looking at our priorities. The poor regions. I 
could not have done anything in the past because I had no money. 
Where can we get the money? Are we to get money out of 
nowhere? So I had my priorities: water, roads, and new cities 
for the industries and agriculture, so the people can get on 
with their life. But if I had huge financial resources, we 
would have addressed all problems. Take unemployment. It 
exists everywhere in the world. And we have also had 
unemployment throughout history. Increases in the population 
also contributes to unemployment. But if I have the figures I 
would tell you that over the past few years, we managed to find 
jobs for over 2 million people. And we are finding other jobs, 
despite the difficulties involved and the modern technologies 
that reduce the number of necessary workers. We are doing our 
best here. We have new cities that have many industries. We 
have 13 more new cities than in 1981. They include 6 Uktubar; 
10 Ramadan; al-Nubariyah; an agricultural community; al-Salhiya, 
an agricultural community; Burj al-'Arab, 
agricultural-industrial; al-Sadat, agricultural-industrial 
community; the Bani-Suwayf. We have many huge complexes. We 
have 13 new complexes. Houses and factories have been built in 
these complexes. There are around 100 factories in 10 Ramadan 
Complex. These factories provide job opportunities for many 
people and provide housing for many people. We are doing our 
best within our means to provide jobs. But we have a burden. 
The Egyptians do not want to work in the private sector. In the 
past, the private sector did not pay the people steady salaries. 
They would just give you a bonus and tell you good bye. Today, 
there is security if you work in the private sector, as well as 
in the government. But in our case, part of the unemployed work 
in the private sector. Despite this, they apply for a job with 
the government. I once asked a graduate who had been working 
for two or three months: My son, how much do they pay you? He 
gets 280 pounds and a bonus and other allowances. He then told 
me: Mr. President, I have applied for a job with the 
government. I told him: The government will appoint you in 
al-Jizah, al-Fayyum, or some other place. He said: I want to 
speak to Your Excellency, maybe a member of the People's 
Assembly would get me a transfer. I told him: Do you expect 
all the people to be appointed in the same place? You get a 
good salary. He wants to stay in the private sector and to work 
with the government and get all the benefits. I met an engineer 
once who visited me at home a few years ago. He told me: Mr. 
President, my salary is not enough. I asked him: Where do you 
work? He said: I work at an engineering office with the 
government in a certain governorate. I asked him: My son, do 
you go to work? He said: We are 10 in the office and we have an 
agreement between us, so I go two or three days in the week. He 
said my salary is not enough for me to eat in the club. I asked 
him: What club? He said: Well, the days on which I do not go 
to work, I stay in the club and the lunch is not enough. 
  I told him: My son, why don't you find another job in the 
afternoon. I gave him the following example. An engineer once 
came to me to build [word indistinct] air base at the airport. 
The engineer works in the private sector in the morning and at 
an engineering office in the afternoon. He was still young. He 
told me that he would fix the [word indistinct] better than any 
other engineer. I told him: Sure. Here is a tender. I asked 
them to give the tender to him and to help him. The young man 
worked hard and earned a good amount of money. He was happy, 
and I was happy for him. Another does not want to go back to 
Egypt and works at an engineering office. But this engineer 
works in the morning and in the afternoon. He earned around 
2,000-3,000 pounds in two or three years. He worked hard from 
morning to evening. 
  So the question of unemployment, no country can solve this 
problem overnight. The French prime minister said in an 
interview: Don't think that unemployment will end overnight. It 
needs years. You can't push a button and create jobs. If you 
take the government jobs, there are many problems: salaries and 
bonuses. You look at the state budget, you find that half of it 
is salaries. Employees who do not do anything complain that 
bonuses are getting smaller. This is because you cannot 
distribute all the money. 
  Someone will tell you: I am facing hardship; the salary is 
not enough. Okay. The government is facing a hard time, and he 
also wants to get a job with the government. But where do we 
get you a salary or office? We will not find chairs for them to 
sit on. Some people tell you: I do not find an office for me. 
Everybody wants an office and a chair to obstruct the people's 
formalities. When someone visits him, he will be too busy 
talking on the telephone and telling the people to come tomorrow 
or after tomorrow. You know this familiar stuff. All this is 
because of the huge number of workers. we have a huge number of 
employees and this burdens the economy because these employees 
are not productive. However, those who work at the factories 
are productive and the country depends on those people. 
  If someone says: I can solve the problem of unemployment 
overnight, we will tell him that this is impossible. The 
population is increasing. In all my interviews and meetings, I 
warn of the danger of this increase. Maybe we are coping with 
this increase now. However, in the long run, the country will 
suffer on account of the increase of its population. You will 
not find jobs and we will run into trouble. So regarding the 
question of unemployment, we have always had this problem. 
  Also, the poor regions have existed since 1924. In the 
1960's and 1970's, they increased. But I have no resources to 
build better homes and provide services. When I have 100 pounds 
and have many problems, I have to set my priorities. We are 
trying to solve the question of unemployment and the question of 
education and many other issues. 
  As for low-income people, it is our job to help those 
people. 
When someone has a factory and earns money, we start attacking 
this man because he has money and has a nice car. We tell them 
that the one who has money and has a Mercedes or another fancy 
car, this man is helping his country because he is investing his 
money here and hiring people and we must encourage him. Since 
he earns a good sum of money, he wants to have a decent living. 
Otherwise, he will leave this country and go somewhere else. 
So, let him have a Mercedes 1000. Why not? He pays duty of 
more than 1 or 2 million pounds. This money goes to the state 
budget for the low-income people. Let him buy 10 cars. This 
way, we will have 20 million pounds for the low-income people. 
  I encourage the rich people who invest their money in the 
interest of the people, not those who become rich through 
illegal methods, such as drugs and corruption. I am against 
those all the way. We will never accept this. I encourage 
patriotic capitalists who invest their money and create jobs for 
people. Why do I give exemptions to the owners of private 
projects? I recently told them that anyone who starts a project 
worth 10 million pounds will be exempted from taxes. Why? 
Because he will create jobs for 10, 15, or 20 families. This 
is better than taking taxes without solving the problem. If you 
employ 10 or 50 people, you will support 10 or 50 families. 
  Solving problems will take time. I have great piles of 
problems. Praise be to God, one shouldered all this heavy burden 
and solved many problems. Now, we are in a better situation. 
There are endless problems. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Mr. President, you spoke about your direct 
contact with the masses and their problems. You noted the 
problems facing bureaucracy in the government. Many 
intellectuals speak about corruption as one of the major causes 
of frustration and its detrimental effects. Meanwhile, the 
government reiterates its endeavor to combat corruption 
regardless of posts because everyone is equal before the law. 
Have the people felt this in a performance that reflects the 
government's policy aimed at confronting corruption? 
  [Mubarak] I would like to tell you something. Corruption 
exists among human beings wherever they are. Egypt is one of 
the countries that suffers the least from corruption. There is 
not a single crime of corruption that the state has not 
monitored or followed. I wish that those who are talking about 
corruption would reform themselves first. Some people talk 
loudly about corruption in order to cover up their own 
corruption. I do not want to mention names. We are one of the 
cleanest countries. The baser self of man incites to evil. 
Name one country where there are only angels. Freedom and 
democracy allow the press to write about corruption. However, 
this is not the case. Did corruption not exist in the past? 
There was corruption in the past, but nobody dared to open his 
mouth. Corruption exists, but we are the ones who reveal it 
before public opinion and send people to court. The important 
thing is that the government does not cover up any case. We 
speak about corruption a great deal because there is nothing to 
talk about. If you know about a corruption case inform the 
competent authorities about it. The court will look into such 
cases, and we do not intervene in the work of judiciary. We 
have never asked the public prosecutor to cancel any corruption 
case. Some people are acquitted by the court and others are 
found guilty. It does not matter whether those involved are 
relatives or friends of the president, or a minister, or 
official. This is the principle. 
  [Al-Shubashi] The administrative apparatus, Mr. President? 
  [Mubarak] When there are many officials in the government 
there will be many problems. Name me one country in the world 
where there is no bureaucracy. The public money makes people 
act like this. Those in charge know that they are held 
accountable. But the owner of a sum money is not scared because 
it is his money. A government employee will tell a citizen to 
come the next day because he is afraid of signing a document. 
This is one of the reasons. The government employees are too 
many therefore there are complications. When I was a vice 
president, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter told me that your 
bureaucracy has been delaying the implementation of a deal to 
buy buses for six months. I told him: Mr. President, we turned 
over the documents to you three months ago. You also have 
bureaucracy like ours, and maybe more. He said: Maybe. 
[preceding word in English] I told him: Not maybe. [preceding 
word in English] The documents were turned over to you three 
months ago. There is bureaucracy in any government in the 
world, because public money is involved. When private money is 
involved the situation is different. I confirm that Egypt is 
one of the cleanest countries in terms of corruption. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Some of the decisions made by low-level local 
leaders favor extremism by submitting to the demands of 
extremists in an effort to strike a balance between the 
government and tne extremists. What is the stand of the higher 
leadership toward these leaders? 
  [Mubarak] This might happen occasionally, but it is not a 
phenomenon. Praise be to God, people are well aware of what is 
happening, they know what is good and bad. 
  [Al-Shubashi translates into Arabic a question in French 
from 
the director of Radio Monte Carlo] Your Excellency the 
President, Radio Monte Carlo is a French station. Therefore, we 
are interested in knowing the state of diplomatic relations 
between Egypt and France. In another development, President 
Mitterrand yesterday celebrated the passage of 13 years since he 
assumed power. Do you want to address a message on this 
occasion? 
  [Mubarak] Our relations with France are excellent. I visited 
France for this first time in September 1974 when I was the 
commander of the Air Force. In the past, we were sent to the 
East. That was my first visit to London and Paris. Since then, 
I have wished everything good for France. I visited France in 
June 1975 when I was the vice president. I was one of those who 
always worked to strengthen relations with France as it is a 
leading European country. I have also visited France many times 
since and I, sometimes, reconciled issues between President 
d'Estaing and President al-Sadat when they differed. I spoke 
frankly with President d'Estaing, who always accepted what I 
said because I sought good relations with France. There is 
continuous cooperation with France in many fields. France has 
been our partner in a subway project and in many industries. We 
have the best relations with France. It supports us in 
international bodies, such as the IMF and the World Bank. 
President Francois Mitterrand, Jacques Chirac, and the French 
brothers are good supporters in this regard. 
  On this occasion, I greet President Mitterrand as a friend. 
When I was vice president, I visited President Mitterrand when 
he was elected as president in 1981. My visit to France 
coincided with a visit by the head of an Arab state. Mitterrand 
changed the time of the meeting so as to meet me before the head 
of an Arab state. Before this, I met him here in Cairo when he 
was a party leader. Since then, I can say that our relations 
have been good. I am very frank, and he can be trusted. Since 
then, our relations have been good. My relations with Jacque 
Chirac and Giscard d'Estaing are excellent. In fact, my 
relations with the French leaders are very good, because they 
are frank and clear. I greet President Mitterrand on the 13th 
anniversary of his assumption of power. He is one of the 
greatest politicians I have ever met. 
  [Al-Shubashi] It is known that you listen to local and world 
radios. What is the share of Radio Monte Carlo in this? 
  [Mubarak] When I was vice president, I wanted to make some 
remarks on Radio Monte Carlo. There were some incomplete news 
reports broadcast that would cause harm. I regretted this 
because relations with France were good. I did not mean that 
the news on Egypt should be inaccurate. I support true news. 
However, after contacting our brothers in Radio Monte Carlo, 
they understood the situation and broadcast unbiased facts. It 
is one of the stations that I always listen to and its news is 
very balanced. This does not mean that it aims at appeasing 
Egypt. It broadcasts true news. Some stations broadcast 
incomplete reports, thereby giving the wrong information. I 
believe Radio Monte Carlo does no do this. 
  [Al-Shubashi] Your Excellency the President, thank you for 
this testimony of which we are proud. Thank you for giving us 
this long time. We hope we will meet Your Excellency again. 
  [Mubarak] Thank you. 

