Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 8 Mar (NOTIMEX) -- The European 
Union (EU) will grant "top priority" to economic cooperation to 
Central America to support this region's integration, according 
to a document released here. The document is to be approved 
this month in Greece. The declaration, entitled "Economic 
Content of the San Jose X Joint Communique," was drafted on 7 
and 10 March by the Isthmus deputy foreign ministers and EU 
representatives. It will be approved on 28 and 29 March during 
the ministerial summit to be held in Athens, Greece. 
  According to the document, the European ministers will 
express satisfaction over the advances in Central American 
economic integration. The EU officials will recognize the 
progress made in the Isthmus by implementing actions to 
incorporate the area into the world economy. 
  The text cited the elimination of obstacles to commerce and 
the renegotiation of the Central American uniform customs 
tariff, as well as the agreements on the implementation of 
safeguards. The 12-page declaration mentioned the European 
position on the expansion of economic and social development in 
the Isthmus. 
  During the Athens meeting, the European and Central American 
foreign ministers will express their concern over the impact the 
economic adjustment programs have on the neediest sectors. The 
EU representatives reiterated their offer of support to handle 
the needs of the sectors hurt the most by those policies. 
  Concerning tax uniformity, the Central American side will 
ask 
its European counterpart to provide its knowledge and experience 
on the matter. The European ministers will stress multilateral 
commercial negotiations within the framework of the Uruguay 
Round, with the idea the implementation of these accords will 
have positive effects in relaunching the international economy 
on clear rules. 
  At the Athens meeting, the two regions will establish a 
commercial forum with yearly ordinary meetings to strengthen an 
exchange on the matter. Regarding access to the European 
market, the Central American ministers will explain their 
concern over the difficulties regional exports face in Europe. 
The document that must be approved by the foreign ministers of 
the two regions cited the advisability of overcoming obstacles 
that limit the growth of commercial flows. The officials will 
mention the importance of the preferences on customs tariffs the 
EU has granted to Central American exports. 
  They will also reiterate the agreement established in 
principle to review commercial aspects on a yearly basis. 
Officials from the two regions will discuss the marshaling of 
financial resources via the European Investment Bank and 
reaffirm the need to promote economic aid. 
  The ministers will assess the EU's aid to Central America in 
the past decade and will stress its importance for the peace, 
democracy, and development processes. The officials will also 
discuss topics concerning the environment, Central American 
refugees, coffee and bananas, social investment, and the area's 
peace process. 

