Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Draft state budget for 1994 presented by Deputy Prime </F>
Minister Marek Borowski to the Sejm in Warsaw--live] 
  [Text] Mr. Speaker, may it please the house. On behalf of 
the Council of Ministers I present to the house the draft state 
budget for 1994. As every presentation of income and expenditure 
of the state, the budget reflects the state and possibilities of 
the economy. It is also a synthetic expression of a programmatic 
line of the government. It is developing both from the past and 
the present conditions. It is necessary to distinguish where we 
inherit the legacy of the 50 years of recent history, where of 
the last four years and where of two months' work of the 
Waldemar Pawalak cabinet, not just to stop transferring 
responsibility between successive groups in power. The awareness 
of achievements as well as errors seems to be needed to 
formulate an effective economic policy for a period of several 
years, the policy, which we are initiating with this draft 
budget. 
  The parties making up the coalition will not keep secret the 
sins of real socialism. Although we do not consider it to be a 
period of only errors and failures, we still inherited an 
economy not adapted to competition in the world markets, with a 
developed but inefficient and highly expensive system of social 
benefits, and finally with enormous foreign debts. This 
inheritance has had and still has a serious impact on all 
budgets, beginning in 1990 and including the present one. 
Ignoring these facts would simply be dishonest. Everybody who 
thinks that this government wants to conceal anything is wrong. 
  It is the same dishonesty, however, to persist in 
proclaiming 
that a mess had been made of the economy until 1989, and from 1 
January 1990 it has been solely set right. Decisions were also 
made in the nineties, the negative effects of which we 
experience now and will experience for a long time to come. We 
consider it a mistake to completely open customs borders and to 
allow large imports of goods for consumption, undercutting many 
branches of industry and agricultural production, contributing 
to a large drop in output and increased unemployment. These 
effects become more intense by keeping fixed foreign currency 
rates for too long. This policy has been gradually abandoned, 
but considerable damage has already been done. 
  We also consider it a mistake to abolish an upper limit for 
the so-called obligatory dividend [tax on the book value of 
company assets] and later continuing to apply this and other 
discriminatory forms of taxation of state enterprises for a long 
time. A new solution was put forward after only three years 
within the framework of the state enterprise pact. Until then 
this policy was impairing the activity of many state enterprises 
and contributed to the increase of their debts, exceeding real 
capabilities for repayment. 
  We also consider the introduction of the policy of very high 
interest rates immediately after 1 January 1990 to be a mistake, 
not only as regards new, but also earlier bank loans. After few 
months a large number of enterprises, including those with big 
manufacturing potential, and also individual citizens, farmers 
in particular, were facing the prospect of complete insolvency, 
for which they were not to blame. The effect was the same as in 
previous cases--a drop in production and a rise in unemployment. 
These two occurrences undermined the financial foundations of 
the functioning of the state. A drop in production has a 
negative impact on the income side of the budget, and the rise 
in unemployment causes an increase of expenditures for benefits 
and social care, and for the pensions system. 
  A permanent deficit of the state budget since 1991 has only 
in part been caused by unavoidable events, such as the 
disintegration of the Soviet market. Economic policy of previous 
ruling groups considerably contributed to its existence. The 
deficit was not a creative one. Mining, metallurgy, and other 
branches of industry were not restructured thanks to it. Housing 
construction was not revived and there was no improvement in the 
public sector. There was, however, a gradual increase of 
domestic debt for financing this deficit. 
  The cost of servicing domestic debt, which in 1991 was about 
2 trillion zlotys [Z] will rise to Z66 trillion in 1994, and 
together with other settlements to Z82 trillion, and this is 
beyond recall. Interest paid by the budget to the banks for 
loans raised for financing the deficit has to be repaid 
regularly and in full, otherwise the banking system, weak and 
burdened with bad debts, faces complete disintegration. This is, 
in effect, the most negative inheritance from the economic 
policy of the governments of the nineties. 
  An increase of output and national income, which appeared in 
our economy in 1993, is, of course, a positive phenomenon. We 
have to maintain and consolidate this positive trend. We have to 
remember, however, the level from which this increase began. If 
we are able to maintain this rate of increase in the next years, 
we will reach the highest level of national income of 1989 as 
late as in 1997. Only then can we count on financing the public 
sector, for example, at the level of 1989, but still on the 
condition that we are able to cope with budget expenditures for 
servicing domestic and foreign debts. 
  Politicians who are indiscriminately praising the present 
economic growth behave a little like a doctor who, while 
treating a patient, accidentally breaks his hand and then tours 
the country showing slides depicting how well the broken hand is 
setting. 
  The whole thing, after all, is much more complicated: A 
patient's health condition does not depend on the condition of 
one hand, so the condition of the economy cannot be evaluated 
merely by the index of production growth. Exports have dropped, 
competitiveness of Polish goods has dropped, the deficit in the 
balance of payments has risen to disquieting levels, 
unemployment has risen to dangerous levels, and a process of 
material and civilization stratification of society continues. 
The system of social welfare and health protection has remained 
ineffective and untouched by any reform, despite the passage of 
four years. Very high levels of debt of enterprises--with almost 
half of them bringing losses--continue. Most banks are facing 
serious difficulties. Restructuring processes in industry are on 
in their initial stages. In agriculture there was a considerable 
drop in the stocks of cattle, pigs, and poultry. 
  May it please the house. I believe that arguments concerning 
the past should now be ended because society expects from us 
actions for the future. It expects the resolution of concrete 
problems. Certain conditions, however, have to be met in order 
that it can happen. I want to make it perfectly clear that 
Waldemar Pawlak's government recognizes and appreciates the 
efforts that his Solidarity predecessors took to reform the 
economy. He who opposes it, drastically misses the realities. 
  We are, however, demanding that while fighting against 
certain myths, we should not create new ones, that everything 
that was most important has been done, that the biggest problems 
have been resolved and that there is nothing else to be done but 
a simple continuation of the course started by our predecessors. 
Meanwhile, errors made in recent years and the accumulated 
negative phenomena convince us that such a one-sided propaganda 
of success is groundless. It would be better for all to give it 
up. 
  Mr. Speaker, may it please the house. The budget bill 
submitted to the esteemed house closes with the amount of Z610 
trillion on the credit side and the amount of Z693 trillion on 
the debit side. The deficit therefore amounts to Z83 trillion. 
Objectives that the government sets and that are a base for the 
construction of the 1994 budget, assume a further reduction of 
inflation, and at the same time the speeding up of the tempo of 
the development of the economy and an improvement in the foreign 
balance of payments. They also assume a real growth of pay and 
the reduction of the pace of the growth of unemployment. 
  Let me describe briefly some of the figures. It is assumed 
that the gross domestic product should increase by 4.5 percent, 
project investment by 6 percent, exports also by 6 percent and 
imports by 2.5 percent. To obtain such results we will have to 
depart from a hitherto passive state policy toward the growth in 
production and exports--it will require rationalization and a 
change in the structure of imports as well as application of 
many pro-investment and pro-export solutions. I will present 
these actions when I speak about the government priorities in 
the sphere of budget expenditure. 
  Two main factors are the source of inflation in Poland. 
First, the budget deficit, second, the increase of cost, partly 
brought about by price rises on energy carriers. Prices for 
electricity and gas unfortunately have to grow together with 
general inflation if we are to secure adequate funds for 
investment in these branches. The government cannot make only 
nice and easy decisions. On the other hand the government is 
fully aware of the impact of rises on citizens' standards of 
living. That is why, while preparing the budget, we assumed that 
prices of energy carriers would rise slower than so far, and 
slower than it transpires from an agreed World Bank scenario of 
approaching world prices. A planned pace of these price rises 
has also been reduced in comparison with the provisions of the 
budget policy prepared by the previous cabinet. I emphasize 
these facts because recently some media have been exposing only 
our intentions as regards price rises, as if it would have been 
invented by the Waldemar Pawlak government while previously 
there were only reductions. As far as a planned rise of the 
so-called council apartment rent, its introduction will be 
combined with the introduction of the government law on rent and 
housing allowances. Should the house reject the introduction of 
the allowances then the scale of rent rises would obviously be 
reduced. 
  Inflation in Poland has not been prompted by induced demand, 
but it can be the case with uncontrolled pay rises. Although the 
government is determined to abolish the so-called 
popiwek [excess wage tax]--an appropriate bill is 
ready--it could not accept a proposal to put it into effect from 
1 January without any other control of pay rises. The bill will 
soon be presented to trade unions for consultations. 
  We have been receiving signals, however, that some 
enterprises, guided by inaccurate information and unjustified 
expectations, are going to raise wages in anticipation of the 
law being introduced. I consider it necessary to state that 
until new regulations are introduced, the excessive wage tax 
will be calculated and collected in accordance with the present 
rules. 
  Keeping price rises within planned limits is a matter of 
utmost importance not only for the feasibility of the budget 
itself, but also for the economy as a whole, and for our 
citizens. 
  Fiscal policy is an important part of general economic 
policy. Its detailed provisions are included in the document on 
directions of fiscal policy prepared by the Polish National Bank 
[NBP] and submitted to the house. They will be presented by the 
NBP president. For my part, I would like to say that there 
exists the convergence of views and a mutual will for 
cooperation between the government and the central bank. 
  May it please the house. The shape of the budget adopted by 
the government is based on the following assumptions, arising, 
and I underscore this, from the program of the coalition. First, 
the budget for 1994 should be conducive, to a greater possible 
extent, to the growth of production, investment and export, and 
should maintain and consolidate economic growth. This month the 
government will adopt a decree on concessions on investments. 
They appear indirectly in the budget as a factor reducing income 
from taxes. 
  Both the state and private organizational units, domestic 
and 
foreign capital, and legal and natural persons, including the 
payees of the recently introduced fixed tax, are all equally 
entitled to these concessions. Exporters and economic units that 
will initiate project investment of a particularly high value 
will be able to take advantage from additional preferences. 
Moreover, the government will soon make amendments to the decree 
on tax concessions, when new jobs are created in areas 
threatened with particularly high unemployment. It will be done 
in such a way that a concession will be a real one, rather than 
just a theoretical incentive for investors, as has been the case 
so far. 
  In many countries an important role in stimulating the 
project investment and exports is played by special security, 
warranty, and collateral funds. Such activity in Poland is still 
in its early stages. The government has set aside resources in 
the budget bill for this purpose. The corporation for the 
assurance of export credits will receive extra funds thanks to 
which its operation and influence on the increase of Polish 
exports will be strengthened. A fund for credit guarantees, 
supporting investment and development as well as privatization 
of small and medium-sized enterprises, will be created, also 
from foreign resources and premiums of the interested economic 
units. In the budget bill we propose considerable, threefold, 
increases--from Z8 trillion to Z25 trillion--to the limit of 
State Treasury credit guarantees. The government is ready to 
increase its involvement in economic processes and will do so in 
the manner that is proper for the market economy. Guarantees as 
well as reguarantees for important investment and development 
projects, carefully and cautiously considered and granted, 
should galvanize the economy in a significant manner. A similar 
role is played by government orders in the arms industry to 
equip the Armed Forces. In the latest stages of work on the 
budget the planned expenditure by the Ministry of National 
Defense was increased, which ensured at the same time that 
several aims would be implemented: that the employment levels in 
the ailing arms industry would be maintained, that production of 
suppliers to the arms industry would be stimulated, and finally, 
that the condition of weaponry in the Armed Forces would improve. 
  Resources for the promotion of exports are increasing almost 
threefold. We are creating conditions for the increase of 
domestic and foreign project investment in Poland by conforming 
the relevant customs policy. Restructuring processes, of course, 
if only they are pursued properly, have a significant importance 
for the increase of efficiency throughout the economy. 
Experiences we have had so far in this sphere are not, 
unfortunately, the best. Much money has been spent with meager 
results. In the 1994 budget we are increasing resources for the 
restructuring of industry from our national and foreign 
resources from Z2 trillion to Z6 trillion--concentrating them on 
coal mining and sulphur industries. A real opportunity is thus 
being created, and at least seven of the most loss-making 
collieries will be shut down within two years, which will reduce 
the social costs of extraction of this basic raw material for 
energy. We know that this is a difficult and socially painful 
process, but it is inevitable from the point of view of the 
economy as a whole. Its implementation will require the 
allocation of considerable amounts of money for social welfare. 
The budget provides for relevant resources for this purpose. 
  One of the biggest obstacles in galvanizing the economy in 
Poland today is a low availability of credits and a high 
interest rate. We want to overcome those barriers by starting 
institutions of guarantees, which I discussed just a moment ago. 
The lowering of the interest rate is, however, not possible by 
just administrative decisions. The interest rate has been and 
will be dependent on the inflation index; its lowering always 
requires the allocation of considerable resources to compensate 
losses the banks suffer when they grant preferential interest 
rate credits. 
  Extensive involvement of funds from the budget for this goal 
is neither possible nor justified--with only one exception, 
which is agriculture. Its specific nature leaves it unable to 
invest and develop in the conditions of expensive credits. But 
agriculture, investing and buying means of production, is a 
factor for animating industry and the whole economy. The 
government decided to considerably increase--from Z1.5 trillion 
to Z2.5 trillion--the sum for partial financing of interest on 
preferential credits for agriculture. At the same time we want 
to establish a preferential interest rate on a level 
considerably lower than so far. Total outlays on agriculture, 
including payments from the Polish National Bank to the fund for 
restructuring and debt clearing of agriculture, and World Bank 
loans, will amount to Z18.7 trillion. This is Z2 trillion more 
than the previous government planned to allocate to agriculture 
in 1994. The largest increases concern partial financing of 
preferential credits, the agency of agricultural market, and the 
fund for restructuring and debt clearing of agriculture, that 
is, the mechanisms and institutions vital for the stabilization 
of the agricultural market and increased production. 
  The budget bill also includes other provisions important for 
agriculture, its infrastructure, and farmers themselves. One of 
them is the decision creating a possibility for giving 
assistance to the bank of food economy; another considerably 
increases contributions for the farmers' social insurance fund 
in connection with a rise of farmers' pensions. Many times from 
this rostrum words were spoken about farmers who feed and 
defend, about respect for farmers' toil, and about the 
importance of agriculture for the economy. Unfortunately, not 
much transpired from these words, and allocated funds were often 
wasted. These words would sound unnatural if spoken by me, the 
more so that history does not know the cases where the minister 
of finance becomes a farmers' favorite--except after his death. 
[laughter, applause]. 
  May I, therefore, ask the house to permit me, as the 
minister 
of finance, to address the farmers and their representatives in 
a language appropriate for my office. Esteemed farmers, we have 
common business to do. There is money, let us use it better than 
our predecessors. 
  May it please the house. The second government priority, 
after actions consolidating the growing trends, is the slowing 
down of the decrease of expenditures for the public sector, 
which has been decreasing for years. This assumption is to be 
implemented through the increase of the real value of wages, in 
accordance with the law on wages in the public sector, recently 
adopted by the house, and through maintaining real substantive 
expenditures at the level of 1993. Funds for the public sector 
make up nearly half all expenditures. Every pledge in this 
sphere means a great strain for the state budget. The government 
has decided, however, to make such a move, as further cuts for 
the public sector, which used to be a constant practice in the 
past, would mean a threat of complete collapse. 
  We are aware of the fact that employees of the so-called 
public sector have been expecting that this year's budget will 
bring a real increase in expenditure. Unfortunately, it is not 
yet possible, apart from the health and justice ministries. We 
will stop the decrease this year. Progress in this field will 
depend on the scale of future economic growth, discipline in the 
implementation of the budget principles, and on reasonable 
spending. 
  The government plans to speed up work on the implementation 
of generally binding rules of public commissions and the reform 
of the most expensive--apart from social security--part of the 
budget, which is the health service. We will prepare and present 
by the end of the first half of this year a complex idea for the 
reform of the welfare system, which at present burdens the 
budget with the need for subsidies amounting to many millions. 
Also, the systematic handing over of further institutions, which 
provide public services, to local government, should bring about 
the rationalization of public expenditure. 
  The third priority accepted with the drafting of the budget 
for 1994 is the strengthening of the protection system for the 
poorest. The lowest old-age and disability pensions were 
increased as of 1 January by decision of the Sejm. Also, 
spending on social welfare, including that for pregnant women, 
allowances for housing and for new residential and day care 
welfare institutions, will increase considerably. We are aware 
of the fact that resources allocated for this are not 
sufficient. That is why the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy 
and provincial governors, in cooperation with parishes, will 
undertake actions to improve their effectiveness so that only 
those who need these resources most will receive them. 
Additional, significant resources for the poorest will also be 
secured by reform of the system of family allowances. The 
government will put forward to the Sejm the draft law on this 
matter by the end of the first quarter of this year. 
  The problem of fighting unemployment and its negative 
effects 
is closely connected with the social welfare protection of the 
poorest members of society. The basic method of this fight is 
and will remain to increase economic activity and to encourage 
to create new jobs. The allocation of resources in the budget 
takes into account principles of the development of the 
infrastructure which is the part of economy that requires a lot 
of work. Resources for communications, telecommunications and 
construction of the road system will be granted. This will 
enable us to not only make up for our civilization's 
circumstances, but also to create new jobs. First, jobs can be 
created in the construction of communication networks and 
highways, and in industries which produce materials for this 
purpose, and later in the services created. 
  A significant 60 percent increase in active fighting of 
unemployment, which includes public works, is planned in 1994. 
The government will concentrate on regions where they will be 
most effectively used. 
  There are further ways to increase resources for allowances 
for those who are in need. In order to do so decisive steps must 
be taken and incidents of corruption eliminated. I mean here the 
illegal employment of Polish citizens and foreigners, which 
takes place without fear of punishment, avoidance of national 
insurance contribution payments by employing workers on single 
commission contracts. It is also about making more flexible the 
way periods of receiving allowances can be shortened in areas 
where there is a greater chance to find work, or extended in 
other regions. It is also about the implementation of unified 
rules applied to sick payments for state and private enterprises. 
  The government will present the appropriate proposals for 
the 
legislative regulation of all these issues to the esteemed 
chamber in the near future. The government has acknowledged the 
need to assure the resources that are indispensible for the 
successful completion of the operation to reduce foreign debt, 
and as a result the mobilization and effective exploitation of 
foreign capital as the fourth priority. This is a matter of 
fundamental significance, of which not everyone is perhaps 
aware. Poland needs foreign capital for two reasons, at least. 
First, because stable, long-lasting economic growth requires 
investments, and our internal savings are insufficient. Second, 
because we must gain the hard currency resources to help balance 
the deficit in foreign trade and also for the repayment of our 
debts. The inflow of this capital so far seems modest, since 
Poland is constantly treated as a country of increased risk. I 
wish to confirm that Poland is unchangingly interested in a 
final accord as to the reduction and restructuring of foreign 
indebtedness, including one with the London Club. This accord 
should, however, take into account the limited payment and 
budgetary possibilities of our country. 
  Mr. Speaker, may it please the house. The preparation of a 
budget, taking into account the above priorities, is not 
possible on the basis of the budget guidelines prepared by the 
government of Hanna Suchocka. Even with the most optimistic 
implementation programs there would have been a shortfall of at 
least Z20 trillion, without which there could be neither 
additional resources for agriculture nor for the increase of the 
lowest pensions and annuities, nor for investment allowances, 
nor for the assistance of exports and the restructuring of 
industry, nor for the increase of expenditures for social 
welfare assistance. Things would also have to end on a 
successive--already now traditional--cut of expenditures in the 
budgetary sphere. So as to prepare a budget that is in 
accordance with the program of the coalition, but also 
realistic, the government of Waldemar Pawlak has within a short 
period of time prepared the drafts of laws increasing budget 
revenue by a shortfall of 20 trillion, that is, by 1 percent of 
the gross national product. The additional income will come 
primarily from those spheres of our economy where, on account of 
legal allowances, taxes were not paid, and also from those where 
people succeeded in not paying them. An increase in the rates of 
universal taxation is also deemed to be necessary. Here, 
however, the principle was adopted of a just allocation of the 
tax burdens, burdening to a lesser degree the persons with 
average or low incomes. The allowances that could only be fully 
taken advantage of by the rich have been limited. The principles 
of taxation of the churches have been changed. The critics of 
the government's policy make efforts to draw attention to only 
one strand of the income side of the operation, the increase of 
taxes on the personnel incomes of the populace. Meanwhile, 
additional incomes on this account will be lower than the 
incomes that the previous government acquired in 1993 as a 
result of freezing taxation thresholds, to say nothing of the 
fact that this maneuver most strongly effected people on the 
lowest incomes. Changes in taxation principles, such as the 
application of duty-paid seals to excise products, the 
obligation to declare all bank accounts, a wider than hitherto 
application of bank accounts rather than cash payments, a ban on 
lowering incomes from one activity through the addition of 
losses on other activity, a widening of the obligation to 
document expenditures with VAT [value-added tax] invoices, and 
the introduction of lump-sum taxation for some taxpayers will be 
decisive for the increase of revenue. 
  Simultaneously, the appropriate resources have been reserved 
in the budget to ensure an increase in employment and an 
improvement in the remuneration payments for the Treasury and 
the customs services. It is also planned to create a so-called 
customs police, together with a statutory subservience of the 
Main Customs Office to the Minister of Finance. Alongside the 
aforementioned customs seals for excise products, the esteemed 
chamber will have presented to it the drafts of laws on the 
registration and identification of taxpayers and also a law 
improving the implementation of tax inspection. If all these 
activities were not undertaken, incomes would increase by around 
31 percent. This is the result the previous government planned 
to achieve. On the other hand, the draft budget presented to the 
esteemed chamber assumes that incomes will increase by 35.2 
percent, within which the incomes from VAT and excise payments, 
as well as from customs duties--which are in the greatest degree 
associated with the so-called gray sphere--will increase 
respectively by 44 and 39 percent. 
  Taxations on income from enterprises and individuals are, on 
the other hand, rising by only around 30 percent, which is the 
result of the introduction by the government of investment 
allowances, and also the need for repayment to citizens in the 
current year of the taxes overpaid over the last year, which 
also limits the field of maneuver by the government. This year, 
this will be an especially high sum, amounting to around Z7 
trillion. Of other incomes, it is worth mentioning the incomes 
from backlogged taxes that have been or are being abolished, 
inter alia from turnover tax and the obligatory dividend, which 
total Z4.2 trillion. This is the result of the introduction of a 
mechanism for debt restructuring for economic entities on 
account of these taxes, taking the situation at 31 December 
1992, or else 30 June 1993 at the latest with respect to certain 
taxes, and which is assumed in the economic program of the 
coalition. I stress these dates with emphasis, so as to warn the 
enterprises that have in the last few months--counting upon a 
restructuring of debts--ceased to pay their due taxes on time. I 
also draw attention to the fact that this will not be a 
straightforward remission of debts, but the creation of an 
opportunity for enterprises. In exchange for the repayment of 
some of their overdue payments for the current year and the 
coming years [as heard], their remaining part will be deferred, 
and next, even remitted. 
  The increase of incomes assumed in the budget law is very 
high. The government holds the view that their further increase, 
together with an increase in expenditures, could indeed 
facilitate the adoption of the budget, but will thereby hinder 
or altogether make impossible its later implementation. For, if 
it then transpired, after a few months, that the planned incomes 
are not received, and that the assumed budget deficit cannot any 
longer be increased, cuts in expenditures would be necessary, 
and these are always significantly more painful and socially 
embarrassing in the course of the year than when we consciously 
adopt specified limits at the start of the year. The government 
perceives the need for and possibilities of an effective search 
for other sources of budget income. A plan for the transfer of 
road tax into the price of fuel is being considered, which could 
assure additional incomes from motorized foreign tourists. The 
introduction, to a certain degree, of border payments, and also 
the taxation of stock exchange operations--in all of these cases 
however, a careful analysis is required, as is preparation of 
the appropriate legal solutions, and also care. For instance, 
the transfer of road tax requires finding a method of 
compensating parishes [gminy] for their loss of income. The 
universal border payments that are being proposed by some people 
require a careful study of the law in force and at international 
agreements. And a clumsily introduced taxation of the stock 
exchange might lose the State Treasury significant incomes from 
privatization. This issue arouses much emotion, which is why I 
will allow myself to devote it a little more time. 
  Ownership transformations occupy an important place in the 
economic policy of the government--Minister for Ownership 
Transformations Wieslaw Kaczmarek will speak about this more 
widely later. This is reflected in the draft budget, in the 
increase of incomes from privatization from Z7.5 trillion to 
Z12.3 trillion. The basis for such planning is the intention to 
more widely exploit the stock exchange as a source of income for 
the State Treasury. The fact that there is a favorable market 
trend here, and also that this form of privatization enjoys, 
relatively, the greatest social support, constitute a good 
prognosis. 
  The bext examples are given by the flotation of the 
Wielkopolska Credit Bank and the Bank Slaski. The Wielkopolska 
Credit Bank was sold before the bull market began and at prices 
that came to around 80 percent of the book value, which gave to 
the budget around Z350 billion. A few months later, for Bank 
Slaski, the budget gained over Z3 trillion, of which sum half 
was already earned, thanks to the decisions of the present 
cabinet. It is precisely thanks to these incomes that we will be 
able to significantly increase the preferential credits for 
agriculture and increase the resources for restructuring 
industry. 
  We hear words of criticism on the part of various people, 
including those admitting to left-wing views. Once they opposed 
any form of the sale of banks. Now, they have nothing against, 
but are sour about the fact that the Bank Slaski was sold too 
cheaply, expressing the astounding thesis that this sale took 
place at the cost of society. Simultaneously, they demand the 
decisive taxation of stock exchange incomes, counting on 
significant incomes on this account and treating this as a 
litmus test for the left-wing credentials of the government. 
Meanwhile, the benefits to the State Treasury from the bull 
market on the stock exchange exceed all the incomes that are 
capable of being attained from the taxation of stock exchange 
turnover. Rather, it is necessary to consider how to accelerate 
the introduction onto the stock exchange of new companies, 
thereby normalizing its functioning. A tax on incomes would, on 
the other hand, cause a fall in share prices, and thereby a fall 
and not an increase of budgetary incomes. On the other hand, as 
was justly noted by Prime Minister Pawlak in his speech a week 
ago, stock exchange investors obtain significant profits and 
should at least in part share them with the budget. That is why 
the government is analyzing the possibility of applying a small 
treasury payment to stock exchange transactions, and after also 
collecting the indispensible information from foreign stock 
exchanges, will consider the presentation to the esteemed 
chamber of the appropriate draft law. I will repeat once more 
that special care is required, since it is not permitted, for 
any doctrine, irrespective of whether it be liberal or left 
wing, to deprive the budget of incomes intended for important 
social purposes. 
  Mr. Speaker, may it please the house. I have discussed the 
planned expenditures and incomes in the draft state budget for 
1994, concentrating not so much on dry figures as on the guiding 
idea that accompanied the government in the course of its work 
on the budget. I would in similar fashion like to present the 
problem of the budget deficit. It has been set at a level of Z83 
trillion, that is 4.1 percent of the gross national product. 
This is not any kind of magic figure, such as the famous 5 
percent from two years ago. This is also more than the budget 
deficit for 1993. The deficit is after all nothing more than 
just the part of expenditures not covered by incomes. The 
government must thus find another source to finance it. The 
possibilities are in essence, three. First, direct finance by 
the NBP, or more simply, the issue of additional money. The 
government has agreed with the NBP that this finance should come 
to at least Z30 trillion at source, with the option of 
increasing this sum by a further Z5 trillion. In the view of the 
NBP and many experts a further growth of this finance would be 
dangerous for the meeting of one of the fundamental guidelines 
of the budget--lowering the rate of inflation to 27 percent on 
annual average. A second possibility for financing the deficit 
is for the state to borrow from citizens and enterprises in the 
form of the sale to them of state treasury bonds. The government 
assumes a significant increase of this sale, from Z8 trillion to 
Z13 trillion, that is by almost 60 percent, but the 
opportunities here are in an obvious way, limited. Finally, the 
third source is borrowing money from the banks. The budget here 
functions like every other drawer of credit, only that it is an 
especially reliable one. In exchange for credits, the budget 
tranfers treasury bonds to the banks and they must be bought out 
on time, otherwise no bank will grant successive credits. The 
borrowing of money at the banks has, however, two faults. When 
the deficit grows, and with it bank credits for the budget, the 
credit available for the economy falls, which weakens the 
developmental trend. Second, credit is expensive, and the budget 
must pay high interest payments in return. This precisely is the 
famous servicing of the internal debt that burdens the budget 
for 1994 and succeeding years. For these two reasons, counting 
on the fact that the banks will finance any deficit is not only 
unrealistic, but dangerous. 
  The government and the NBP assume that the budget deficit 
now 
finds itself at the limit of the possibilities of its financing 
by the banks. It could even be that the sum exceeds this 
threshold, since the detailed analyses of many, albeit not all, 
government, bank, and independent experts have indicated Z80 
trillion as the maximum sum for the domestic deficit, this of 
course with the inflation rate that has been assumed. This is 
thus with certainty a deficit that is difficult to finance, and 
the government addresses a strong plea for it not to be 
increased by the esteemed chamber in the course of work on the 
budget. 
  Mr. Speaker, may it please the house. The most important 
problem for Poland at the moment is the crisis in public 
finance. In 1991, the costs of servicing the internal debt came 
to Z2.5 trillion; in 1992 it was Z24 trillion; in 1993 it was 
Z48 trillion; in 1993, Z82 trillion. We have already come to a 
point where the size of the deficit and the interest paid to the 
banks for credit granted to cover it, and increasing without a 
break since 1991, are almost equal. With a certain degree of 
simplification, this signifies that all the money that the 
budget will borrow this year for the coverage of the deficit 
will have to be immediately returned to the banks by way of 
repayment of interest. The crisis of the Polish public finances 
is all the greater since we are also repaying interest on 
foreign credits. In 1994, this will cost Z30 trillion, which 
together with the servicing of the internal debt comes to Z112 
trillion, over 50 trillion greater than in 1993. Everyone who is 
not satisfied with this budget must take this fact into account. 
  The question what to do next should be asked. The government 
treats this problem seriously. Soon after the draft budget was 
submitted to the Sejm we started to work on possible ways of 
development of the state budget in 1995, and even further until 
1997. Only the prediction that we will soon put forward will be 
able to plan further, long-term activities, including working 
out realistic principles of the socioeconomic policy until 1997. 
  The government hopes that such budget predictions will be 
widely discussed in the parliament, by economists, trade unions, 
employees, and employers. It seems that Poland must go through 
not one but at least two major tests during the period of 
transformation. We have put behind us the shock therapy of 
1990-91. Another test is ahead of us--overcoming the crisis in 
public finances. We are convinced that together we will find the 
best way out of this difficult situation. 
  May it please the house. In the discussion on Prime Minister 
Pawlak's statement last week some deputies expressed doubts on 
whether or not the government has an economic program. Well, 
Prime Minister Pawlak's government has the program and, what is 
more, this program is no secret. It was widely presented in the 
coalition agreement adopted by the Polish Peasant Party and the 
Democratic Left Alliance at the beginning of October 1993. The 
government is faithful to this program, and slowly but 
consistently implements it. This program has certain gaps, we 
are not hiding this fact, because some problems have been left 
to be discussed later. 
  The coalition is new, and learning, and this process is not 
strange or unusual. However, the program is something different 
from concrete laws, decisions, and instructions, which are the 
tools for its implementation. Those tools are systematically 
created according to the hierarchy and time necessary to carry 
out an analysis. First, laws have already been adopted by the 
chamber and they have been implemented. Today, on behalf of the 
government I have presented the most important of those 
tools--the draft budget law. 
  The government fully supports preferences from the election 
programs written into the coalition agreement. Not all of them 
can be immediately implemented, for obvious reasons--lack of 
resources. The conflict between long-term commitments and the 
present ones has been the main dilemma for the economy from its 
very beginnings. The welfare of states and societies always 
depends on whether this dilemma is wisely solved. If we can rise 
above particular interests of the groups and look at the budget 
with the long-term interests of the state in mind and secure 
consistent and joint implementation of its aims, then in the 
next few years we will consolidate economic development and 
speed up investments, increase exports and improve 
competitiveness on international markets. We will create better 
conditions for integration with the EC, we will overcome the 
crisis in public finances. We will stop and slowly limit the 
extent of unemployment, and finally we will cure the system of 
services and social welfare. 
  The draft budget for 1994 mirrors the choice made between 
right, but competing aims. I am deeply convinced that time will 
show that choices made by us were right. As to repeated 
accusations of continuation and not sufficient changes, I will 
repeat what we have been saying over and over again. We admit 
that we want to continue the stabilization of the economy, the 
limitation of inflation, and the reshaping of inefficient 
structures. On the other hand, we are changing to a more active 
stance toward investments, exports and agriculture, and also 
moving toward a privatization policy that is more pragmatic and 
favorable to the interests of working people. We are 
strengthening the protection of the poorest, we are holding back 
the degradation of the budgetary sphere, we are more justly 
allocating burdens and sacrifices. We want to have a pragmatic 
policy, free from superflous ideology and doctrinarianism, and 
according to the principle: As much continuation as is 
necessary, as much change as is possible. 
  Mr. Speaker, deputies. The budget for 1994 is in your hands. 

