BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Do a Good Job of Holding Leading </F>
Cadres' Meetings on Honesty and Self-Discipline"] 
  [Text] After the second session of the CPC Central 
Discipline Inspection Commission set the "five-point 
regulations" on the honesty and self-discipline of party and 
government leading cadres at and above the county (section) 
level, the third session of the CPC Central Discipline 
Inspection Commission this year laid down five new regulations 
according to the instructions of the central leadership on 
leading cadres' use of cars, housing, internal reception, 
arrangements of wedding and funeral ceremonies, and borrowing 
and using public money and materials. The opinion of the 
Central Discipline Inspection Commission on the concrete 
implementation of the regulations has also been made public. 
Party and government organs at and above the county level 
throughout the country are actively making preparations 
according to the requirements of the central leadership for 
holding special democratic-life meetings to examine the leading 
cadres' behavior according to the regulations. Some localities 
have already held such meetings. 
  It is of great importance to conscientiously rather than 
perfunctorily hold such special democratic-life meetings. Only 
when leading cadres at all levels set a good example in keeping 
themselves honest and properly exercise self-discipline can they 
play an exemplary role among the vast number of cadres in 
carrying forward the party's fine style, resisting the corrosive 
influence of the decadent ideology and life-style of the 
exploiting classes, gain the initiative in the anticorruption 
struggle, promote the improvement of the party style based on 
honesty, and better serve the purposes of reform, development, 
and stability. Through these special democratic-life meetings 
on promoting honesty and self-discipline, the leading cadres 
will more clearly understand the behavior norms under the new 
situation. This gives expression to the party's constant 
principle for setting strict demands on leading cadres. This is 
also an opportunity to issue warnings [da zhao hu 2092 2156 
0729] and conduct education and demonstrates the party's 
profound loving care for the cadres. 
  The key to honesty and self-discipline lies in one's 
consciousness. All leading cadres should further enhance the 
sense of self-discipline, constantly set strict demands for 
themselves, constantly seek truth from facts, and constantly 
carry out serious criticism and self-criticism. At the special 
democratic-life meetings, they should take the initiative in 
examining all problems and should not try to dodge the serious 
problems and only mention the minor ones. They should not try 
to sidestep any problems. If a problem is related to a 
collective decision, the responsibility should still be properly 
affixed so that a lesson can be learned. It is necessary to 
overcome and prevent the unhealthy trend of "only mentioning 
minor problems in a general way or citing some obvious problems 
without exposing serious and covert problems" among leading 
cadres in some localities. The individuals concerned should 
take the initiative in actually correcting the exposed problems 
in the course of self-examination. Self-examination should be 
thorough; any ill-gotten money and materials should be returned 
resolutely; and mistakes should be corrected to a degree that 
satisfies the organizations and the masses and also eases one's 
own conscience. Serious action must be taken to solve problems 
that have not been solved and corrected since they were exposed 
in last year's self- examination, and we must also deal with 
some problems that those involved failed to examine and correct 
conscientiously, a situation about which the masses are very 
discontented. 
  In order to ensure the leading's cadres' honesty and 
self-discipline and to prompt them to make conscientious 
self-examination and self-correction, we must also strengthen 
supervision and inspection by giving play to the external 
forces. That is, self- discipline should be combined with other 
people's supervision. Play should be given to the supervisory 
role of the party organizations at all levels and the masses. 
Before the special democratic-life meetings are held, the party 
organizations should first discover the problems in the 
implementation of the five-point regulations, seriously listen 
to complaints and criticisms made by ordinary cadres and the 
masses, and relay their findings to the leading cadres 
concerned. The party organizations at the upper level should 
send cadres to attend the meetings, thus giving more effective 
guidance and carrying out more effective supervision. The 
criticisms and self-criticisms made at the meetings should 
respond to the complaints made by the masses. The conditions of 
self-examination and self-correction should be made public in a 
certain scope after the meetings so that the leading cadres can 
be further subject to mass supervision. The party organizations 
should help those comrades who are involved in many problems and 
who lack the will to correct their behavior and should prompt 
them to change their attitude toward self-examination and 
self-correction. Those who do not seriously conduct 
self-examination and self-correction, do not face their own 
problems squarely, and thus arouse strong discontent among the 
masses should be ordered to repeat the process of 
self-examination and self-correction. Party and administrative 
discipline actions should be taken against those who refuse to 
criticize their mistakes and mend their ways after being found 
to violate the regulations in order to safeguard the solemnity 
of discipline, to guarantee the quality of the special 
democratic-life meetings, and to prevent the superficiality of 
such meetings. 
  Under the leadership of the party central body and the State 
Council, the nationwide anticorruption struggle is developing in 
depth. Party leading cadres at all levels must grasp this 
opportunity to enhance the sense of performing official duties 
honestly through such effective activities as holding special 
democratic-life meetings and must set a good example for the 
vast number of ordinary cadres with their honest behavior and 
spirit of self discipline. 

