BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hizballah spiritual leader Muhammad Husayn </F>
Fadlallah by Faysal Jallul in Beirut; date not given] 
  [Text] [Jallul] Are you still the spiritual leader of 
Hizballah? 
  [Fadlallah] Should I apologize for having such a title? 
This title has never had any significance on the organizational 
level. It was given to me by Western intelligence services when 
they found nobody else in the arena. For 40 years now, I have 
been an Islamic activist on a broad level; I have never tied 
myself down to any specific party. In Iraq, I opened up to the 
al-Da'wah Party, while I was not one of them. I also have had 
ties with Hizballah and other parties in the Islamic world. I 
am an active Shiite not in the ideological sense, but in the 
Islamic sense. At the same time, my mind was open to all other 
secular streams. Since the fifties, I have struck up 
friendships with communists, nationalists, and Ba'thists. I 
always talk to them because I do not believe in having a closed 
mind toward anybody else, since everybody who believes in, 
respects, and takes pride in his thinking should respect the 
thinking of others. 
  [Jallul] It seems that the Islamic stream should today 
confront the progress made on the level of establishing the 
state institutions. This means the Islamic stream either 
confronts or accommodates this development. What will this 
stream choose? 
  [Fadlallah] I do not think that any Islamic current can have 
reservations about the establishment of the state, in its broad 
sense, since it is either a state or anarchy. We as Muslims 
think that, as the leaders of the faithful say, the people 
should have a ruler, because a vacuum does not serve anybody and 
because anarchy can contribute more to the disintegration of 
society than a bad government. Therefore, no one can put 
forward the option of having or not having a state. The only 
option is that there should be a state; people can then work 
within this state to oppose its plans and to propose ideas that 
could change its attitudes in the future. The opposition acts 
within the state, and not outside it. We in Lebanon oppose 
security, social, and political disorder. 
  [Jallul] Does this mean you are for a peaceful transfer of 
power and agree to the Constitution and all other pillars of the 
state? 
  [Fadlallah] There is a difference. To feel that there must 
be a state does not mean you believe in all its components. We 
coexist with falsehood, but do not recognize its legitimacy. It 
is similar to anyone who promotes a certain thinking: this 
person believes his thinking is the legitimate authority, in the 
principled sense of legitimacy; however, this person does not 
defy the legitimate authority he finds in his country that 
preserves public order. He might, of course, ask people by 
peaceful means to join his legitimate authority. 
  [Jallul] Do you condone modern activities and appearances in 
your region? 
  [Fadlallah] When you come to the suburb, Ba'labakk, or some 
areas in the south, you will see an unveiled woman walking next 
to a veiled woman. You will also hear one radio carrying all 
sorts of songs, as well as another radio carrying Islamic songs. 
People exercise their freedoms in a very normal way. Since the 
Islamic movement was launched, it has never been reported that a 
woman was beaten because she was not wearing a veil. Also, 
schoolgirls have never been forced to wear a veil. 
  [Jallul] Can the Communist Party hold a political symposium 
near your residence? 
  [Fadlallah] It used to do that. Perhaps, when there was an 
act of sedition, some people had fears in view of the general 
atmosphere so they refrained from any activities. There is no 
such thing as an Islamic republic in the suburbs or Ba'labakk or 
about Islam being enforced, one way or another. 
  [Jallul] But you know that a criminal was executed at your 
party's headquarters, the Islamic way? 
  [Fadlallah] The issue was related to a tribal movement, and 
the area was heading toward sedition, in which blood could have 
been shed indiscriminately. The Islamists did not move to 
arrest or execute the killer, but the people called for the 
implementation of the Islamic law. So, the killer was executed 
with the consent of all the tribes concerned with this issue. 
There was an official silence by various officials who approved 
this without declaring it. The state could not prevent the 
shedding of blood due to the circumstances of the tribal 
community. Moreover, you know that the state has never been 
able to stop tribal acts of revenge except through 
reconciliation and accord. 
  [Jallul] The state says that the media must be organized. Do 
you agree with this? 
  [Fadlallah] The fact is that anyone who has money in Lebanon 
can establish a television station. It is a paradox that those 
who own the illegal television stations, as they say, occupy 
prominent positions in the state. So parties who used to own 
television stations have sold them to those who have money. 
Making money the basis for the establishment of television or 
radio stations regardless of the policy of this or that news 
media could be a serious issue. However, the issue which 
imposes itself in every democratic state, or any state which 
believes in freedoms, if we do not want to use the word 
democracy, is that who determines the seriousness of or the need 
for another news media? Is it the state? 
  [Jallul] Yes, if we accept the state's authority. 
  [Fadlallah] Perhaps, the state is responsible for people's 
security concerning what they hear or read. This could be true 
when the state and its men are trustworthy people. The state 
that used to own television and radio stations did not prevent 
its men from establishing illegal television and radio stations 
at their own expense, why? I wonder if the militias, as they 
say, violate the law, why don't the state men violate the law? 
Why do they have their own news media if the state's news media 
meet the country's need? This means that the state did not 
present a successful media program to the people that meets 
their needs and fulfills their aspirations, and which represents 
the democratic slogan of the state. 
  [Jallul] Are not we supposed to give the state some time, 
especially since less than two years have passed on its plan to 
enforce the law? 
  [Fadlallah] We note that some people have contributed to 
confusing the state by adding news media to the state run media 
and encouraged others to do so. This means that they have not 
strengthened the state's plan, but their own positions. The 
problem is that any president, whether he is number one, two, or 
three works to plant his men in the state institutions in order 
to be a reserve for him in the future to maintain his influence 
after he leaves his post. 
  [Jallul] Have not things always been this way? 
  [Fadlallah] They were not as aggressive as they are now. The 
problem in the past was that the statesmen used to take bribes, 
and the problem these days is that the statesmen bribe other 
people. This is why some people have contributed to corrupting 
the state. The deputy, the minister, the director general, this 
man of religion, that economic position are all taking bribes. 
We heard that no sect or party is allowed to have its own news 
media. So, since you recognize sectarianism and parties and you 
act in your position as a representative of this or that sect, 
then what is the difference between your sectarianism to which 
you resort and from which you derive strength, and that 
sectarianism which exists in a newspaper or a television 
station? If the government includes licensed parties why 
shouldn't these parties be allowed to have their own news media? 
  [Jallul] There is a great deal of fear that the "Islamic 
resistance" seeks to gain domestic weight? 
  [Fadlallah] I can say that the Islamic resistance is a 
movement that confronts Zionism, particularly in Lebanon. This 
resistance is not an exhibitionist or an adventurous movement. 
I can also assert to everyone that the Islamic resistance does 
not have any internal plan in Lebanon unless it, as a community, 
is subjected to mad repression, in which case it is natural for 
the Islamic resistance to defend itself. 
  [Jallul] Why did other currents leave the resistance? 
  [Fadlallah] The problem is that these currents have isolated 
themselves from the scene. I talked to some of them who 
informed me about their economic problems. In the past, they 
used to have financial support, and I believe this support has 
stopped. 
  [Jallul] Do you agree on the decision which dissolved the 
"Lebanese Forces?" 
  [Fadlallah] I do not have any data in this regard. We 
differ with "the forces" whether over their relations with 
Israel or their political proposals. 
  [Jallul] Do you believe that the Syrian-Iranian differences 
over the Middle East issue could have repercussions on the 
Islamic current in Lebanon? 
  [Fadlallah] I believe that Syrian-Iranian relations are 
based on an understanding of the circumstances surrounding 
Syria. The Islamic Republic [of Iran] appreciates these 
circumstances although it rejects the idea. Moreover, there is 
a strategic political situation surrounding the Iranian-Syrian 
relations, so you feel that both countries need one another. 
Thus, I do not imagine that the future relations with Iran 
would deteriorate even if Syria actually achieves reconciliation 
[with Israel]. This is so because there are other very deep 
issues which transcend the differences in political views, 
especially since Iran, which is opposed to reconciliation [with 
Israel], did not wage a fierce war on this issue. 
  [Jallul] You have frequently announced your support for the 
Islamic Salvation Front in Algeria. Do you not fear being 
accused of interfering in Algeria's internal affairs? 
  [Fadlallah] All influential parties are interfering in 
Algeria. I know that the French are interfering strongly, and 
France has a broad current inside the Algerian Government. I 
also know that the United States is interfering effectively, and 
sometimes it may suggest that it is supportive of the Salvation 
Front. There are Arab states which support this or that team. 
Perhaps, Iran is the state that is extending the least support 
in Algeria. Others, however, have an arrogant media policy 
which tries to influence all their moves and schemes. The 
problem in Algeria is that it has turned into a scene for many 
international intelligence services. We are very sad about the 
situation in this country which was a symbol of awareness and 
freedom; we grew up on the heroic deeds of the Algerian 
mujahidin. We feel that the Algerian state is a victim of the 
U.S.-French conflict. As long as the United States is chasing 
France everywhere, and as long as France is trying to maintain 
its positions here and there, each country in the Arab World and 
in the Third World in which there is French influence will 
suffer in one way or another from what Algeria is suffering. 

