BFN 

<F P=106> ["Henan Provincial Interim Regulations on Arrangements for </F>
Placement and Education of Persons Who Have Been Released After 
Serving Their Sentences and Persons Who Have Been Released From 
Re-education Through Labor (Adopted at the Fifth Meeting of the 
Standing Committee of the Seventh Henan Provincial People's 
Congress on 1 September 1988, and Revised in Accordance With the 
`Decision Concerning the Revision of "Henan Provincial Interim 
Regulations on Arrangements for Placement and Education of 
Persons Who Have Been Released After Serving Their Sentences and 
Persons Who Have Been Released From Re-Education Through Labor' 
Made at the Seventh Meeting of the Standing Committee of the 
Eighth Henan Provincial People's Congress on 28 April 1994")] 
  [Text] Article 1. These regulations have been specially 
formulated in accordance with the Constitution, laws, and 
administrative rules and regulations, and in light of the actual 
situation in our province, in a bid to make better arrangements 
for the placement and education of persons who have been 
released after serving their sentences and persons who have been 
released from re-education through labor, to safeguard social 
order, and to benefit the building of the socialist material and 
spiritual civilizations. 
  Article 2. Arrangements for the placement and education of 
persons who have been released after serving their sentences and 
persons who have been released from re-education through labor 
are important measures in bringing about a comprehensive 
improvement in social order, and are the due responsibility and 
obligation of state organs, social organizations, enterprises, 
establishments, neighborhood offices, and residents' 
(villagers') committees. 
  People's governments at all levels should strengthen 
leadership over arrangements for the placement and education of 
persons who have been released after serving their sentences and 
persons who have been released from re-education through labor, 
and should organize the public security, judicial, planning, 
economic, labor, personnel, education, civil affairs, 
agricultural, grain, industrial, commercial, and other 
departments concerned to jointly do a good job in making 
arrangements for placement and education. 
  Article 3. The principle of "giving one a chance" should be 
adhered to in making arrangements for the placement and 
education of persons who have been released after serving their 
sentences and persons who have been released from re-education 
through labor. They should be given opportunities for study, 
work, and labor, and their legitimate rights and interests 
should be protected. Persons who have been released after 
serving their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor should energetically look for jobs in 
accordance with state laws, policies, and regulations. 
  Article 4. State organs, enterprises, and establishments 
that need more people for their work and have additional or 
vacant posts to fill may employ those persons who have been 
released after serving their sentences who did a good job in 
reforming themselves through labor and who have acquired 
considerable professional knowledge or production skills, 
provided they pass the recruitment examinations. 
  Article 5. Arrangements for the placement of persons who 
have been released after serving their sentences and whose 
status as a staff member or worker has been retained are to be 
made by the units for which those persons originally worked; 
arrangements are to be made by merged units or units that have 
become independent if the original units have been merged or 
have become independent; and arrangements are to be made by the 
state in accordance with the regulations concerned if the 
original units have been disbanded or gone bankrupt. 
  Wages and other kinds of remuneration after placement are to 
be reappraised and fixed by the units that make the placement in 
accordance with the actual professional ability and technical 
level of the persons concerned, and years of service are to be 
calculated in accordance with the regulations concerned. 
  Article 6. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and whose status as a staff member or worker has 
not been retained can be employed like other unemployed 
personnel in society if they pass the recruitment examinations 
given by recruiting units; priority can be given to those with 
certificates showing that they did a good job in reforming 
themselves through labor and who meet one of the following 
requirements: 
  1. Graduates of institutions of higher learning or secondary 
technical schools, former science and technology personnel, or 
former well-trained technical personnel -- as proved by 
examinations -- who have committed ordinary crimes; 
  2. Those who committed unpremeditated crimes and crimes of 
dereliction; 
  3. Those who committed ordinary crimes as a first offense, 
whose crimes were not serious, and whose sentences were less 
than three years; 
  4. Those who have rendered major meritorious service while 
serving their sentences. 
  Article 7. Arrangements for the placement of persons who 
have been released from re-education through labor and whose 
status as a staff member or worker has been retained are to be 
made by the units for which those persons originally worked; 
arrangements are to be made by merged units or units that have 
become independent if the original units have been merged or 
have become independent; and arrangements are to be made by the 
state in accordance with the regulations concerned if the 
original units have been disbanded or gone bankrupt. 
  Article 8. Arrangements for the placement of persons who 
have been released after serving their sentences and persons who 
have been released from re-education through labor if their 
status as a staff member or worker has been retained should 
conform with the relevant stipulations of the state personnel 
and labor systems. 
  Article 9. If it has been arranged for persons who have been 
released after serving their sentences and persons who have been 
released from re-education through labor to work in state 
organs, or in state or collective enterprises and 
establishments, they should go along with these arrangements; if 
they refuse to go along, the units in charge of making the 
arrangements are not to make other arrangements. 
  There is to be a probation period of one year for all 
persons 
who have been released after serving their sentences for whom it 
has been arranged to work at state organs, or at enterprises and 
establishments owned by the state or collectives. 
  Article 10. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor, if they were originally unemployed 
residents in towns and cities, or if their status as a staff 
member or worker has not been retained, are to register for 
employment with the neighborhood offices where their residence 
is registered. They are to be treated the same as ordinary 
unemployed personnel and are not to be discriminated against. 
Labor departments or neighborhood offices, in accordance with 
current policies, should widen channels for employment and adopt 
various forms to make arrangements for such people. 
Encouragement and support should be given to those who want to 
become self-employed businessmen, and industry and commerce 
administrative departments are to issue business licenses for 
them in accordance with the relevant regulations. 
  Article 11. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor, if they originally belonged to the 
agricultural population, are to be received by the people's 
governments of townships (towns), and the villagers' committees 
of villages where their residence is registered, and 
arrangements should be made for them. They are to be treated 
the same as other villagers. 
  While serving their sentences or receiving re-education 
through labor, the contracts or management of their 
responsibility plots (slopes) and their plots of land (slope) 
for personal needs normally are to be continued by their 
relatives. If they do not have relatives, the land and slopes 
are to be kept in reserve by villagers' committees so that 
timely and appropriate arrangements can be made when they are 
released after serving their sentences or after receiving 
re-education through labor. If their land and plots are taken 
back, villagers' committees are to help them solve the problem 
when they are released after serving their sentences or after 
receiving re-education through labor. 
  If persons who have been released after serving their 
sentences and persons who have been released from re-education 
through labor do not have production tools or housewares, their 
relatives can help them solve the problem. If they do not have 
relatives, the people's governments of townships (towns), and 
the villagers' committees of villages where their residence is 
registered are to help them solve the problem. 
  Article 12. Houses, production tools, housewares, and other 
legitimate property of persons who have been released after 
serving their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor -- if they were taken away by others 
while such persons were serving their sentences or receiving 
re-education through labor -- are to be returned to them, and in 
case of any damage, compensation is to be made by those who took 
such articles. 
  Article 13. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor, if they are old, weak, sick, or 
disabled, and can no longer work, are to be supported, provided 
for, or brought up by their relatives who have the obligation to 
do so under the law. Regarding those who really have no one to 
turn to and who have no source of income, the people's 
governments of the places where their residence is registered 
are to help them solve the problem according to the social 
relief regulations concerned or are to provide them with 
appropriate subsidies for subsistence. 
  Article 14. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor should be allowed to resume schooling 
if they were originally students in school, meet the age 
requirements for schooling, have good conduct, and pass the 
relevant examinations. 
  Parents or guardians of persons who have been released after 
serving their sentences and who are below 16 years of age and 
have not completed nine years of compulsory education are to 
apply for them to enter schools in accordance with Article 5 of 
the "Procedures for the Implementation of Compulsory Education 
in Henan Province," and the schools concerned are to admit them. 
  Persons who have been released after serving their sentences 
and persons who have been released from re-education through 
labor can apply on their own for entrance examinations for 
institutions of higher learning, secondary technical schools, 
vocational schools, or spare-time schools in accordance with 
relevant state regulations provided they have records of formal 
schooling or the equivalent. Those who meet the requirements for 
enrollment are to be enrolled by the schools concerned. 
  Article 15. The residence registration and grain supply of 
persons who have been released after serving their sentences and 
persons who have been released from re-education through labor 
are to be handled in accordance with the relevant regulations. 
  Article 16. Reform through labor organs and re-education 
through labor organs are to make separate appraisals of the 
conduct of persons who have been released after serving their 
sentences and persons who have been released from re-education 
through labor while they were serving their sentences or 
receiving re-education through labor, to complete forms on their 
discharge from prison or release from re-education through 
labor, and to transfer them to police stations in the places 
where it has been arranged for the released persons to settle 
down. They also should properly make visits to these persons. 
  Article 17. Organs, organizations, enterprises, 
establishments, neighborhood offices, and residents' 
(villagers') committees should establish and perfect systems and 
measures to help and educate those persons who have been 
released after serving their sentences and persons who have been 
released from re-education through labor whom they employ or 
take care of; strengthen ideological and political education, 
education on the legal system and discipline, and education on 
socialist ethics among the released persons; help them solve 
practical problems in work, study, and livelihood; and strive to 
do a good job in changing their ideology. 
  Public security organs should strengthen guidance over the 
work of helping and educating persons who have been released 
after serving their sentences and persons who have been released 
from re-education through labor. 
  Article 18. Persons who have been released after serving 
their sentences and persons who have been released from 
re-education through labor are to consciously accept the help 
and education offered by the units for which they work, by local 
police stations, by neighborhood offices, and by residents' 
(villagers') committees; to strengthen study of policies and 
laws; set strict demands on themselves; observe discipline and 
abide by law; respect and love themselves; and strive to become 
qualified builders of socialism. 
  Article 19. Departments, units, and individuals that achieve 
remarkable results in implementing these regulations are to be 
commended and awarded by people's governments and departments 
concerned at various levels. 
  Article 20. The power of interpretation of specific 
application of these regulations is vested in the Henan 
Provincial People's Government. 
  Article 21. If other regulations previously in force in the 
province are discovered to be in contravention of these 
regulations, these regulations are to prevail. 
  Article 22. These regulations come into force on the date of 
their promulgation. 

