CSO 

<F P=106> [Republic of Georgia Prime Minister Otar Patsatsia's report </F>
at an expanded meeting of the Republic of Georgia Cabinet of 
Ministers on 9 February 1994: "The Country's Future Depends on 
the Implementation of Reforms and Revival of the Economy"] 
  [Text] At today's meeting the specific issue to be 
discussed is the draft indicator plan for 1994-1995 and the 
revised edition of the anti-crisis program of macroeconomic 
stabilization and systematic changes. In my report I will 
discuss the most important economic results of last year and the 
most pressing problems requiring immediate solutions. 
  Last year, important measures were carried out in the 
republic with regard to reforms and normalizing life, reflected 
primarily in the preparation of the necessary legal-normative 
base. The republic's leadership has substantially overcome the 
country's lengthy state of isolation, and good prospects are in 
store for foreign economic cooperation with the industrially 
developed countries and various international organizations. 
Joining the CIS and concluding the broad treaty with Russia have 
created an environment favorable to the republic's economic 
development, and so forth. 
  Nevertheless, owing to familiar political and 
social-economic 
internal and external factors we have not yet succeeded in 
activating mechanisms to stabilize the economy, or in overcoming 
the energy crisis. The result is that a substantial portion of 
our economic potential is cut off from economic circulation, and 
the crisis has become systematic and structural. This is 
reflected in the fact that the macroeconomic indicators of 1993 
are only about half those of 1992. In particular, the republic's 
domestic product last year dropped by 46 percent, and national 
income dropped by 54 percent, falling to the 1964-1965 level. 
Social labor productivity has declined to the level of almost 30 
years ago. Further development of the economy is gravely 
threatened by the fact that investment in the republic's 
production sphere has virtually halted. Only 10 percent of the 
total domestic product was spent on accumulation in 1993. The 
level of fixed assets put to work by centralized capital 
investment stands at only 6.6 percent of the comparable 1992 
figure. The return on capital in the republic's economy declined 
by 45 percent, while the ratio of material costs grew by 30 
percent. 
  The unemployment problem has gradually overwhelmed 
us, and under conditions of inflation and limited consumer 
resources living standards for most of the population are 
extremely low, and in some strata the problem of hunger is a 
reality. 
  A variety of substantial problems have accumulated in the 
development of sectors of the material sphere. As a result of 
economic and non-economic, domestic and outside destabilizing 
factors, a substantial portion of the republic's economic 
potential came to be cut off from economic circulation in 1993 
and stood idle for months; naturally, this induced a further 
decline in the volume of production in every sector and complex 
of material production. 
  The situation that has taken shape in the agrarian 
sector is especially grave. The livestock and poultry 
population and productivity have declined, and indicators of 
supplies of crop and livestock products to meet the needs of the 
state and production have dropped. I will cite some figures: in 
1993, 6.8 times less grain, seven times less potatoes, almost 
three times less vegetables, and 13.8 times less fruit were 
delivered to the state than the previous year. The three-year 
program to bring the agroindustrial complex out of its crisis, 
which was approved by a special decree of the Cabinet of 
Ministers, called for the procurement of 300,000 tonnes of 
top-quality tea leaf, 365,000 tonnes of grapes, 360,000 tonnes 
of fruit, 10,000 tonnes of tobacco, and 180,000 tonnes of citrus 
in 1993. All that the state got, however, was 132,000 tonnes of 
tea leaf (44 percent of the target), 71,000 tonnes of grapes (20 
percent), 10,000 tonnes of fruit (2.7 percent), 36,000 tonnes of 
citrus (20 percent), and 600 tonnes of tobacco (6 percent). A 
substantial portion of these products were sold in circumvention 
of the state, through private agencies. Indicators of the 
procurement of other agricultural products also declined. A 
number of rayons simply do not acknowledge the necessity of 
delivering agricultural products to meet state needs. Last year, 
for example, practically all of the livestock products produced 
in the agricultural enterprises of Akhalkalaki, Ninotsminda, 
Dedoplistskaro, Signakhi, and Tsalka rayons were marketed in 
circumvention of the state. 
  The very grave critical situation in the agrarian sector is 
due to many factors. Most notable is the unstable 
social-political situation which has left its mark on all 
results of economic activity and prompted tendencies of 
squandering and looting state property and basically improper 
implementation of the first stage of agrarian reform and 
processes of destatization and privatization of state property, 
and so on. 
  The main thing, however, is that the measures taken by the 
Agriculture and Food Ministry have not been sufficient to 
stabilize the sector. Moreover, the Ministry proved unprepared 
to cope with the difficulties and problems generated by land 
privatization, the disarray in the centralized supply system of 
material and technical resources, and the reorganization of 
agricultural enterprises. In the state agricultural enterprises 
that do remain in the countryside there is practically no 
economic mechanism at work, irrigation and drainage systems have 
been looted and wrecked, the technical base is in a shambles 
(most of the vehicles and tractors have been stolen or ruined), 
and no concrete obligation or responsibility for delivering 
products to the state exists, as the greater portion of loans 
taken out by most of the enterprises have regularly been written 
off to the account of domestic state debts or else deferred for 
three to five years. 
  The Ministry has also been passive with regard to forming 
market structures in the countryside, organizing enterprises 
based on different forms of ownership (private, cooperative, 
joint-stock, leasing, and so on), providing the necessary 
material-technical resources to develop agroservices, and 
adopting a state reciprocal contract system with producers of 
goods. 
  The tendency of production volume to go down also 
continued in the republic's industry. Preliminary figures 
indicate that the decline, compared with the previous year, 
stood at 25 to 26 percent and equalled the 1963 level. In this 
period, there was a substantial decline in amounts of fuel and 
products of industry, metallurgy, machine building, and light, 
food, and timber and woodworking industries. 
  The republic's economy has been negatively impacted by 
lagging energy industry development and energy supplies. In 
1993, the republic generated 9.8 billion kwh of electricity, 
which was 84 percent of the previous year's figure and 91 
percent of the total amount consumed. A portion of the demand 
was met by importing electricity from neighboring power systems. 
The oil production target was met by only 68 percent, and 
prospecting targets were met by only 69 percent. Instead of 
500,000 tonnes of coal last year, only 82,000 tonnes were mined; 
of that figure, only 21,000 tonnes were marketable grade. 
  Keep in mind that energy is the sector which determines the 
operation of the whole economy, in particular the material 
sphere. Hence, that sector needs to be boosted as the basis for 
invigorating the economy. A governmental commission has been 
created to draw up an energy program and put it into operation 
in the shortest possible time. For our part, we must immediately 
make preparations to achieve a fundamental breakthrough this 
year in providing the economy with energy resources. This year 
we need to generate at least 13 to 14 billion kwh. To this end, 
we have to make more effective use of hydroresources. We need to 
rebuild and technically renovate hydrostructures. 
  In the coming years, and this year, we need to substantially 
boost coal production and perfect primary coal processing 
technologies. We need to carry out measures to stabilize oil 
production with the aim of producing 180,000 to 200,000 tonnes 
of oil per year. We need to expand the search for oil and gas. 
  Another thing: we need to start preparing today for the 
coming season, to ensure energy supplies. We will have to lay in 
stocks of at least 300,000 tonnes of fuel oil before autumn and 
put the energy infrastructure in order. This must be the prime 
concern of every ministry, department, association, and 
enterprise. 
  The republic's economic development is gravely burdened by 
the unsatisfactory performance of the basic sectors of industry 
enterprises of the light and food industries. Last year, in 
particular, the production of food industry products declined by 
almost 40 percent, and production output in light industry 
declined by 2.5 times. The 1993 production figures were: 20,000 
tonnes of packaged tea (27 percent of the target), 5.6 million 
decaliters of wine (36 percent), 6 million bottles of champagne 
(40 percent), 30 million bottles of mineral water (25 percent), 
and only 50 million standard cans of fruit and vegetables (17 
percent). And, as you know, these are goods that are not only 
essential to meet the needs of our population but also principal 
items of export and, consequently, essential in order to bring 
in imports. Hence, special attention needs to be focused on 
these sectors in the future. 
  You have to agree that our transportation systems are a 
complete shambles, and, unfortunately, this is equally true of 
all forms of transportation. The situation on the railroads 
is especially grave. As railroad officials have said so many 
times, it is going to take tens of billions of Russian rubles to 
restore the normal operations of the republic's railroads. In 
such circumstances it would be well for us to think about 
creating a fund to rebuild and develop Georgia's railroads with 
the help of European, Asian, and other interested countries. 
  Construction has almost halted in the republic owing to 
lack of resources. Amounts of capital investment last year 
were only 1.5 percent of the 1993 figure [as printed]; and the 
funds that were spent were not all that wisely used. Funds, 
which were skimpy anyway, have been wasted and are not being 
used to complete scheduled projects and make them operational. 
One direct result of that is that not one important industrial 
project was delivered ready for operation last year--yet many 
were supposed to have gone operational two or three years 
before. Capacity start-up indicators in sectors of the social 
sphere are extremely skimpy (105,000 square meters of 
residential living space, schools for 2,730 pupils, and 
hospitals with 138 beds). 
  Unfortunately, these gaps are partly due to subjective 
factors which need to be dealt with immediately. In particular, 
it is essential to deal with the capital construction plan and 
necessary financing by the beginning of this year [as printed], 
draw up a number of normative and legislative acts, strengthen 
reporting and accounting procedures, and so on. 
  The economic crisis has been especially hard on 
people's standard of living. Along with objective causes, 
the grave situation in this sphere is also due to the inflexible 
efforts of sectors in the social sphere. This is true 
specifically of the trade system. In particular, the state trade 
system and the consumer cooperatives have failed to provide the 
population with even minimum guaranteed supplies of prime 
necessities and essential goods, and their efforts are confined 
to the organization of a couple of normed items of food and 
bread. Hence, the population is basically left to the mercy of 
the private sector and the kolkhoz market. In these 
circumstances, the private sector totally dictates prices on the 
consumer market. 
  In order to at least partly alleviate the situation, it is 
necessary to provide for the marketing of food and other prime 
essentials by the quota/norm method. 
  The health care system is in a state of emergency. 
The republic's population is virtually without emergency medical 
aid, which is just about criminal and needs to be corrected 
immediately. This needs more attention on the part of the 
Saknavtobproduktebi [Georgian Oil Products] Company's 
leadership, and emergency medical services should be the first 
to be provided with necessary amounts of fuel. 
  There are many other painful problems in this sphere. The 
population does not have the means to buy medicine at commercial 
prices. The cost of patient services has gone sky-high. To some 
extent this is why the number of patients in medical 
establishments has gone done recently and death rates have risen 
accordingly. The Health Ministry must study this problem 
immediately and report to us as soon as possible about the facts 
and the measures taken. 
  The question of the network of tuition-charging schools 
also needs to be looked at; the system is virtually out of 
balance with the need for specialists, the necessary 
material-technical base, and the number of professors and 
teachers required. Today this problem involves only material 
costs; in the near future it could bring about significant 
social difficulties. 
  In short, what is virtually an emergency economic 
situation has taken shape in the republic, and it will require 
immediate implementation of the appropriate measures. What this 
requires, in particular, is some well coordinated and, most 
important, effective and systematic steps taking account in 
advance of their social-economic consequences, overcoming 
elements of mounting chaos, and improving the quality of the 
regulation and directed management of the economy. Our 
experience--and the experience of others besides--shows that a 
purely monetary policy, despite its great importance, is not 
sufficient to achieve stability and solve the crisis under 
conditions in which market structures and relations on the 
micro-level are extremely underdeveloped. Hence, the Cabinet of 
Ministers believes the prime task is to connect financial 
stabilization measures organically to the revival of production, 
to measures of restoration, measures to achieve comprehensive 
improvement of the structural and management system and develop 
market structures. 
  Foremost among urgent measures under today's 
conditions, nevertheless, are problems of stabilizing and 
imposing order on the monetary credit and financial sphere; 
unless these are dealt with in a systematic way, it will be 
impossible to create the necessary conditions for reviving the 
economy. 
  The focus of comprehensive measures to get out of the 
republic's financial crisis must be on solving the money 
question. In order to comprehensively work out and implement the 
most acceptable form of the several possible solutions to this 
problem at this stage, it is advisable to create a governmental 
commission made up of officials of the National Bank, ministries 
and departments of finance and economics, scientists, and, if 
possible, foreign experts. It is also advisable to create a 
special, nongovernmental commission to work on the same problems. 
  The commissions will have to work out comprehensively 
substantiated and specified projects on money questions; we will 
have to map out the path to take: how long the coupon should 
remain in circulation, and how we can strengthen it during that 
period, when it will be advisable and possible to introduce our 
own currency and what prerequisites are needed for it, how we 
can create these essential conditions, whether direct entry into 
"ruble space" is inevitable (using the ruble), whether it is 
possible to join the currency union, and so on. We need to keep 
in mind, moreover, that money does not mean cash alone. Most of 
our enterprises today are isolated because we do not have 
account settlement abroad. This situation will be fatal if it 
continues. Hence, the commissions must urgently deal with this 
question. But even that does not exhaust the problem. We need 
simultaneously to work on balancing the republic's balance of 
payments and questions of foreign debt. Preliminary calculations 
are needed, otherwise any long-term stabilization of our 
currency is out of the question. At this stage we cannot afford 
to repeat the mistakes we made earlier, even though they were 
inevitable at the time. 
  From this standpoint, we cannot afford to slacken our 
efforts 
with the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the 
Euro-Association, and other international bodies. Our efforts 
along these lines must be corrected immediately. 
  The grave monetary-credit and financial situation in our 
republic, which is already bad enough, is made even worse by the 
existence of large amounts of overdue debts in a number of 
economic links. In the Sakgazi [Georgian Gas] Department system, 
for example, the total accounts receivable has reached the 
astronomical figure of 1.4 trillion coupons; in the Sakenergo 
[Georgian Energy] system it is 400 billion coupons, and in 
Navtobproduktebi it is 162 billion coupons. The Rustavi 
Metallurgy Plant owes Sakgazi 145 billion, Tbilisi GRES [State 
Regional Power Plant] owes it 580 billion, the Tbilisi Central 
Power Plant owes it 21 billion coupons, and so on. 
Navtobproduktebi's delinquent customers also include the Port of 
Poti (almost seven billion), the Railroad Department and its 
offices (19 billion), the Defense Ministry (six billion 
coupons), and so on. 
  The question of people's overdue bills for gas and 
electricity requires special discussion. Sakgazi's accounts 
receivable add up to 379 billion coupons, while Sakenergo's add 
up to 200 billion coupons. The total amount of the population's 
overdue bills is growing constantly. Under such conditions we 
probably ought to think about whether it might be best for the 
state to take over these bills. 
  Though somewhat late, officials of the National Bank have 
submitted proposals on mutual offsetting of accounts receivable, 
which we will discuss and approve at a meeting soon. The 
National Bank will have to exercise strict control over the 
implementation of decisions. 
  At this point I want to discuss an organizational aspect of 
the problem. In the current economic emergency, it is 
advisable, for purposes of implementing a unified state economic 
policy, to discuss whether to make the National Bank subordinate 
both to the Parliament and to the Cabinet of Ministers. 
Resolving this question will make cooperation more directed and 
efficient and will improve coordination of the activities of the 
economically-oriented ministries and the banking system. 
  Under conditions of the general economic and financial 
crisis, prices continued to rise intensively last year. 
According to preliminary expert estimates, consumer prices from 
January to December 1993 (including the kolkhoz markets and 
commercial outlets) rose by almost 90 times--that is, the 
average monthly rate of inflation was 45 percent; this is 
substantially higher than the previous year's figures. 
  In most cases today, retail prices are equal to and 
sometimes 
higher than average prices in Russia (on meat, sugar, vegetable 
oil, cigarettes, fish, and other items). This fact, in view of 
the fact that average wages in the republic lag far behind those 
in Russia, poses the danger that our already-skimpy domestic 
market will go empty. This makes it even more mandatory to bring 
wages, pensions, and so on into line. It is essential, however, 
first to resolve the question of currency stabilization, because 
it simply makes no sense to raise wages in today's coupons. 
  The Economics Ministry has pledged to submit to the Cabinet 
of Ministers in the next few days its own proposals on urgent 
measures to strengthen the manageability of price-formation 
processes and anti-inflation policies. These proposals must 
necessarily call for effective measures to strengthen and 
improve the price offices in the ministries and departments, 
enterprises, associations, and commercial outfits. Owing to a 
one-sided and false interpretation of the market economy, 
unfortunately, these central links of the economic service, in 
some ministries and departments, have not become stronger but 
actually weaker; in some cases this is reflected by their 
complete abolition. This is why, in some economic links, there 
have been cases of distortion and improper setting of prime 
costs, profits, excise and value-added taxes, and other elements 
of prices. 
  In our opinion, officials of the Economics Ministry have 
properly addressed the necessity of strengthening the 
price-formation service within the Ministry itself. Perhaps we 
also ought to think about the possibility of creating a 
scientific-research and information center in this sphere. What 
is needed above all, however, is to make more effective use of 
the actual resources we already have. We need to put the price 
control mechanism fully into action, to be implemented by the 
price inspectorate service. We must put up insurmountable 
barriers to arbitrary price-setting that is devoid of any 
objective grounds in circumvention of the Economics Ministry on 
the cost of goods and services that are vitally essential to the 
public. 
  Under today's conditions, it is especially important to 
solve problems of supplying the republic with resources, 
providing the resources necessary to meet the state's needs, and 
to unconditionally enforce government decisions on export and 
import quotas and licensing. 
  Last year these targets were not met by the Ministry of 
Industry, the Agriculture and Food Industry Ministry, and the 
Defense Ministry (with regard to the production of agricultural 
and food industry goods), and this prevented fulfillment of 
trade and economic agreements on the governmental level. 
  According to 11-month figures from the Ministry of Trade and 
Material Supply, the following deliveries were made to countries 
with which we had inter-governmental agreements in 1993 
(Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Kyrghyzstan, 
Turkmenia, and Moldova): only 13.3 percent of agreed-upon 
deliveries of rolled ferrous metal, 57.5 percent of the steel 
pipe, 5.8 percent of the coal, 8.2 percent of nonferrous alloys, 
15.1 percent of the lithopone, 20.6 percent of the lathes, 54.3 
percent of the tower cranes, 7 percent of the trucks, 17.7 
percent of the welding units, 10 percent of the mineral water, 6 
percent of the wine, 1.8 percent of wine products, 34.7 percent 
of the tea, and so on. In general, no deliveries were made of 
farm product processing equipment, trailers, tractors, gas 
ranges, galvanic batteries, cotton fabrics, champagne, cognac 
alcohol, and others. Contracts in 1993 called for deliveries of 
604.77 million dollars' worth of goods; in actuality, deliveries 
totalled only 100.26 million dollars' worth--16.6 percent. 
  Separate mention must be made of our failure to meet state 
obligations for the delivery of goods to Turkmenia in 1993, 
which is of crucial importance to the republic's supply of gas. 
Instead of goods worth 138.82 million dollars, only 46.65 
million dollars' worth of goods were delivered to 
Turkmenia--33.6 percent of the commitment. Delivery commitments 
to the various countries through 11 months of last year were 
fulfilled as follows: 21.2 percent with Azerbaijan, 1.5 percent 
with Moldova, 1.9 percent with Armenia, 3.5 percent with 
Ukraine, 19.7 percent with Kazakhstan, and 8.5 percent with 
Kyrghyzstan. Accordingly, resource imports into the republic 
have been very small; we have large debts; state reserves have 
not been replenished; and we are getting the reputation of an 
unreliable partner. 
  We will probably be forced to forbid enterprises and 
organizations, regardless of their form of ownership, to ship 
products outside the republic until they fulfill product 
delivery quotas to meet the needs of the state. On our 
instructions, the Economics Ministry has drawn up and submitted 
proposals on new delivery quotas for the most important types of 
industrial and agricultural goods to meet the state's needs; we 
will examine and approve them in a few days. Our position in 
this matter will be most firm and resolute. We will see to it 
that all enterprises, whether state-owned or private, which have 
commitments to deliver goods to meet the needs of the state, 
will unconditionally fulfill them in full. 
  We will carry out similar measures with respect to the 
regions. The prime task and matter of honor for every economic 
link and territorial unit must be to unconditionally meet target 
quotas. Every official--whether village- or republic-level--must 
have a sense of personal responsibility, otherwise any economic 
success is out of the question. 
  The country's level of foreign economic activity has 
declined badly in recent years. Our trade balance deficit 
with foreign countries stands at 10 percent of the republic's 
total domestic product; this is the highest figure in the past 
five years. 
  The disintegration of the former USSR's economic space and 
the breakdown in the mechanisms of clearing relations among the 
former republics, have greatly weakened our country's 
foreign-economic positions. Rising prices on imported goods have 
greatly outstripped the growth of prices on exported goods; 
naturally, this has made our country's negative balance of 
payments even worse than it was. 
  Georgia's joining the CIS and concluding trade and economic 
agreements with the Russian Federation have somewhat brightened 
the prospects of overcoming the crisis in the sphere of foreign 
economic relations. We are hoping to restore our traditional 
economic ties. Our main task, however, remains that of raising 
the integrated character of our country's economy and making 
maximum effective use of our potential for self-sufficiency. 
  One of our urgent tasks, as I see it, is to create a 
mechanism to protect our national economic space against 
undesirable outside factors; the mechanism must encompass an 
improved customs system, efforts to combat the removal of 
capital, the prevention of damage inflicted by economic 
expansionism, and so on. 
  Reform efforts, however afflicted with obstacles and 
shortcomings, are being carried out despite the republic's grave 
economic and crime situation. Our legal base was enlarged 
and perfected in 1993; a number of fundamentally important laws 
and legislative acts were passed. The first steps toward 
privatization were taken starting in March 1993. By the end of 
the year, 762 outfits had been privatized; over 42 percent of 
the state's housing stock was transferred to citizens' private 
ownership free of charge. Still, sad to say, these transactions 
were accompanied by the looting of state property and "hidden 
privatization," fostered in part by the fact that government 
structures have not been able to control the reins of the 
management, protection, and use of state property. Not only 
that, even the most rudimentary record-keeping is not yet in 
place in the state sector. Many state enterprises, including 
those which produce vital strategic goods for the republic, have 
been totally plundered. We have detected cases of the sale of 
facilities at artificially reduced prices. We need a better 
system for selecting objects to be privatized, assessing their 
fixed assets, forming commissions, and carrying out other 
methodological and organizational measures. All of the above, 
however, fosters the theft and squandering of state property and 
gross violations of principles of social justice in the 
privatization process. The Property Management Ministry needs to 
deal with these matters in a more principled manner. 
  As soon as possible we need to compile a list of the 
enterprises and organizations which must, at the present stage 
of reforms, remain state property; we need to work out 
appropriate and precise procedures for their protection, 
management, and operation. 
  Owing to objective and subjective factors, agrarian reform 
has not been systematic and consistent. It has been drifting at 
random; property is being wasted and stolen. The reorganization 
of agricultural enterprises is basically just a formality. To 
this day, the republic still has over 1,200 kolkhozes and 
sovkhozes--yet their conversion to organizational forms 
characteristic of market structures was supposed to be completed 
back in 1992. This has generated much misunderstanding and 
depersonalization of the land, so that lands remain 
uncultivated. Some of the farms are loss-making, and their 
existence in traditional forms cannot guarantee profitable 
operation. It is essential, then, to immediately, 
before the end of spring farm work, to examine and decide the 
question of the organizational form of those enterprises. The 
country's agrarian sector needs to have new kinds of farm 
management such as individual farms, agricultural partnerships, 
cooperatives, and so on. 
  There are numerous shortcomings in this first stage of land 
reform, due chiefly to the fact that the necessary juridical 
base does not exist, lands are being usurped and occupied, norms 
of land area to be conveyed are being violated, household 
categories are being confused, boundary disputes are breaking 
out between villages, and other negative phenomena are taking 
place. Large areas of tea plantations, vineyards, and orchards 
have been misappropriated. In Ozurgeti Rayon, for example, 55 
percent of the total area of tea plantations has been privatized 
in this way. 
  In Telavi Rayon, all the area allotted to unique varieties 
of 
grapes on the experimental nursery farm in Shalauri was parceled 
out to the population, who uprooted and chopped down 
phyloxera-resistant parent and root stocks. 
  People appropriated land areas of the Galavani Experimental 
Farm in Mtskheta Rayon, and experimental work stopped as a 
result. An eight-year-old industrial walnut orchard was chopped 
down. 
  Lands of the Skra Orchard Experimental Station in Gori Rayon 
were parceled out without authorization. People commandeered 
experimental plots and selective breeding orchards of many 
years' standing, and chopped down and uprooted high-yield 
plantings. 
  On the Dzalisi Seed Breeding Farm in Mtskheta Rayon, land 
areas allotted for the production of elite seeds were illegally 
given away. A similar situation prevails in Gardabani Rayon's 
Martkopa Experimental Station. 
  Considering the situation today, it is essential to 
carry out structural reform of the agrarian sector, which 
will bring about a change in the quantitative proportions of the 
layout of agricultural crops and sectors. In particular, we need 
to speed up the development of sectors which are of vital 
importance to the job of supplying the population with food. It 
is necessary to transform the food complex in accordance with 
the structural reform of the agrarian sector, in order gradually 
to liberate the country from food imports. 
  Because of the vital importance of anti-monopoly policies in 
state regulation of the economy, work continued last year on 
creating the necessary legislative base. A number of Cabinet of 
Ministers decrees were prepared and passed. Now it is essential 
to take effective, practical steps along these lines, otherwise 
it will be impossible to adopt free market mechanisms. 
  As we can see, today's historic stage of Georgia's 
statehood reconstruction is going on under very difficult and 
complex conditions. Our country's future will depend wholly on 
how soon and how thoroughly we can revive the economy and 
transform its structures and orientation in accordance with 
today's requirements. 
  During today's meeting we will hear the Economics Ministry's 
reports about overcoming the country's crisis, the stabilization 
program, and the indicator plan of the republic's 
social-economic development for 1994-1995. These will map out 
the most important strategic directions of the country's 
social-economic development, the parameters of development of 
particular sectors of the economy, and the specific system of 
economic policy measures necessary to accomplish this. 
  Our task is to undertake practical measures to implement our 
programs, plans, and decisions. This year must be decisive with 
respect to putting the country's economy on the path toward 
market principles. But this process must be carried out in a 
directed and integrated manner in accordance with our country's 
economic and political situation. In the future we must not 
allow the kind of situation in which we adopt forms of classical 
market relations in one sphere of economic life yet allow 
complete stagnation in other spheres. I repeat: the country's 
economic transition to market relations must be conceived of in 
entirety, as a package, and we must direct it within the 
framework of market relations without impairing those relations. 
  The effort to activate the system of state regulation 
of the economy necessarily requires precise coordination and 
subordination of the work of all the republic's ministries and 
departments--in particular, ministries and departments of 
economic profile, as well as focus on the key links in matters 
of economic policy and reforms. In this regard, we need to 
think about the necessity of enhancing the role of the Economics 
Ministry in the overall system of state administrative bodies, 
for that ministry must serve as the state's coordinating body in 
matters of economic policy. It must be constantly on top of the 
situation in every sphere of economic reform and economic life. 
It must provide top echelons of state administration with 
constant, well-substantiated proposals concerning ways to ensure 
that particular sectors of the economy are working at full 
capacity, measures to ensure the profitability of sectors and 
enterprises, the establishment of new economic and production 
ties, ways to change the profile of enterprises under the new 
conditions, measures to shut down, abolish, merge, or reorganize 
existing unprofitable enterprises, and so on. The Economics 
Ministry will have to provide us with well-argued proposals on 
how to strengthen the economic services in individual sectors 
and spheres of the national economy, individual enterprises and 
associations, state and non-state structures, autonomous 
republics, cities and rayons, and see to it that these are 
monitored and implemented in practice. 
  Unfortunately, the Economics Ministry today cannot give 
exhaustive answers to these and numerous other urgent questions. 
  It seems to us that the role and functions of the Economics 
Ministry, as the main administrative body for state regulation 
of the economy, ought to grow and be filled with new content in 
the process of forming market relations. We must think about 
formulating and enacting the necessary mechanisms for 
implementing this role and these functions. 
  Comprehensive realization of the principles of the 
market economy requires the efficient functioning of 
republic-level and local statistical and record-keeping 
services. Let me say frankly that unless this is done, I believe 
it is impossible to successfully build an independent state. We 
have not yet managed to obtain statistical information from 
state enterprises, let alone the private sector. According 
to official Sotsekonominpormi [Social Economic Information 
Committee] reports, only 45 percent of all industrial 
enterprises supplied the Committee with information reflecting 
the results of production activity in 1993; 732 enterprises 
failed to submit reports of the year's results. 
  It is no exaggeration to say that in the private sector, 
there is no such thing as statistical reporting. The state does 
not know who is producing what and how much, who is shipping 
what, to where, and how much, who is importing what and how 
much. Complete anarchy and chaos reign in this regard. This 
cannot go on any longer. Sotsekonominpormi officials, and the 
Committee as a whole, must be more efficient and flexible to 
detect and completely cover statistical records on all our 
economic activities. 
  The Cabinet of Ministers is now again raising the 
question of the necessity of making Sotsekonominpormi be 
subordinate to it. Unless the quality and timeliness of the 
information are improved, I don't think it is possible to make 
correct economic decisions, much less implement them in a timely 
manner. 
  We are aware that today's meeting is being participated in 
by 
officials of the councils of ministers of the autonomous 
republics and local administrative bodies of cities and rayons, 
and so we deem it essential to raise another important question. 
It has to do with regional problems. Our task is to 
achieve political stability and economic development in the 
regions in order to provide public order and economic 
development on a republic-wide scale. 
  In the process of economic reforms we must take full account 
of local characteristics and potential; we must make rational 
use of the regions' natural, financial, and human resources and 
industrial potential; we must put these resources into economic 
circulation and promote the development of local 
entrepreneurship, in particular the kind that creates wealth, 
also small and medium-sized businesses. One of the most pressing 
items on the agenda is the matter of optimally harmonizing 
territorial and statewide interests and coordinating them 
effectively. 
  In order to accomplish these goals it will be necessary 
to make a thorough analysis and assessment of the economic 
situation and the state of production and the consumer market in 
each region, and to map out specific ways to get out of the 
crisis. We all know that state administration has virtually 
broken down in many regions, that crime and economic chaos have 
devastated their economy and made economic reforms slow or 
practically impossible. 
  Local administrative bodies need to take measures to 
normalize the economic and social situation in the regions, 
while the central state authorities, in particular the 
appropriate structures of the government, must be much more 
exacting toward the management and economic regulation of the 
regions in order to implement economic reforms properly and 
restore and reactivate economic services. 
  It is essential to make a scientific study, preliminary 
determination, and substantiation of the strategic directions of 
the regions' social and economic development, draw up 
appropriate programs, and strengthen territorial aspects of 
indicator planning. We have to admit that the rich experience 
and scientific potential which the republic has in this regard 
are not being properly utilized right now. 
  The Economics Ministry will have to take steps to restore 
the 
economic services in the regions, draw up indicator plans for 
each region, and strengthen relevant scientific-practical 
research. We are ready to discuss and, as far as possible and to 
the extent it is advisable, to decide on proposals that have 
been submitted to the Cabinet of Ministers for this purpose, 
including the proposal to create scientific-research centers 
concerning economic and social problems based in regional 
departments of the Economics Institute. 
  As we can see, numerous economic and social problems 
have built up in the country. It will take the dedicated effort 
of every economic link to solve them. Every ministry and 
department will have to step up their efforts along these lines. 
In this regard I want to make special mention of the importance 
of our entrepreneurs and private structures. I am aware of how 
the role of this sphere is growing both in terms of overall 
production volume and in terms of meeting the population's need 
for goods and services. I ask the representatives of that sphere 
to make a bigger contribution toward solving the tasks of 
statehood. Don't be angry if I say that there are still too many 
cases where the republic's interests are of hardly any concern 
to certain outfits and businessmen. We will have to overcome 
that mentality and those tendencies; we will have to band 
together in the effort to restore the economy to health and 
solve social problems, in order to provide guarantees to 
overcome the crisis and further enhance the economy. 

