BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Lu Yongjian (7773 3057 1696)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 3 Jun (XINHUA) -- Flooding in various 
areas in southern China has reminded people of the impending 
annual flood season north and south of the Chang Jiang. 
According to the State Flood Control and Drought Relief 
Headquarters, the key flood control provinces of Hubei, Hunan, 
Anhui, Jiangsu, Henan, Hebei, and Shandong, as well as the key 
flood control municipality of Beijing, began charting this 
year's flood-control plans in the immediate wake of last year's 
flood season. They have completed preliminary preparations for 
preventing heavy floods and combating major disasters. 
  Mindful of the frequent incidence of floods and drought in 
our country, Chen Junsheng, state councilor and head of the 
State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters, last 
October noted that the end of the 1993 flood season would signal 
the beginning of advance preparations for the 1994 flood season. 
Acting in the aftermath of last year's flood season, the key 
flood control municipality and provinces paid close attention to 
harnessing rivers, repairing water-damaged structures, and 
reinforcing defective and hazardous reservoirs. Drawing lessons 
from last year's accidents at Qinghai's Gouhou Reservoir and 
Shandong's Longshan Coal Mine, various localities stressed both 
construction speed and quality in building flood-control 
projects. Last year, Shandong Province invested 500 million 
yuan in water conservancy projects, mainly to harness rivers, 
combat waterlogging, repair water-damaged structures, and 
reinforce defective and hazardous reservoirs. Hubei Province 
also devoted close attention to the construction of flood 
diversion and storage zones. The provinces are now intensifying 
efforts to complete the final stages of projects or to conduct 
acceptance tests. Most projects may become operational and 
yield flood-control benefits during the flood season. The 
provinces have strengthened the management of projects that 
cannot be completed before the flood season, and called for the 
formulation of measures to ensure safety in tiding over floods. 
  Since last winter, good progress has been made in projects 
aimed at clearing river obstacles. Hubei has instituted a 
system by which administrative chiefs assume responsibility for 
clearing obstacles, established relevant files, set deadlines 
for clearing obstacles, and designated responsible personnel. 
Henan has made unremitting efforts to remove sludge from small 
and medium streams, whereas Jiangsu and other provinces have 
stepped up efforts to clear obstacles and improve their 
flood-discharge capability. 
  To make adequate preparations for preventing heavy floods, 
the key flood-control provinces have paid attention to 
instituting and improving preventive flood-control filing 
systems to guard against problems that have arisen during 
previous floods. Plans for mobilizing and using large and major 
mid-sized reservoirs in those provinces during the flood season 
are undergoing the examination and approval process. 
  Preparations should be made in advance. After last year's 
flood season, all localities conducted a general inventory of 
their flood-control emergency supplies, overcame difficulties in 
channeling funds and materials, and actively stockpiled relevant 
materials whose delivery has now been completed. 
  A State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters 
official reminded all localities of the need to heed these 
problems regarding advance preparations for the flood season: A 
significant number of people lack a strong foreboding sense 
about flooding, current flood-control projects are of unduly low 
standards, and flood-control administrative bodies are poorly 
structured and insufficiently funded. It is hoped that the 
departments concerned will help solve these problems, and that 
people in all sectors of society will show concern for 
flood-control work, join forces in confronting the flood season, 
and make every effort to ensure safety in weathering floods. 

