BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 18 (XINHUA) -- China National Offshore 
Oil Corporation (CNOOC) is inviting foreign oil companies to a 
new acreage promotion in which 13 blocks in the South China Sea 
are offered. 
  This is the first acreage promotion held by the CNOOC, 
following four rounds of international bidding for offshore oil 
and gas exploration and development. The 13 blocks, with a 
combined area of 40,000 square kilometers, are situated in the 
basins of the Pearl river mouth, Yinggehai and Qiong Dongnan in 
the South China Sea. 
  Gong Zaisheng, CNOOC's chief geologist, told XINHUA that the 
principal objective of this acreage promotion was to expand 
offshore oil and gas exploration, and his corporation would 
present the geology of the blocks and the key targets for 
exploration. 
  A total of 33 targets have been initially selected inside 
the 
blocks, he revealed, adding that CNOOC will answer questions on 
the promotion and discuss technological issues with companies 
interested in specific blocks. 
  He said the blocks in the Yinggehai and Qiong Dongnan basins 
have good natural gas prospects. These blocks, originally 
reserved for self-financed exploration, are now being promoted 
only because of some inadequacies in funding and technology. 
  He said that especially the deep stratum in the region, so 
far barely drilled because of high temperature and pressure, is 
considered an exploration domain with great potential. 
  On the other hand, he said, the blocks in the pearl river 
mouth basin were redefined, after careful analysis and 
evaluation by Chinese experts, to include a batch of hopeful 
targets for exploration. 
  CNOOC has told 80 foreign companies about the promotion, and 
it was well received, said Gong, who is expected to head a 
delegation to the United States for the promotion from June 20 
to 24. 
  A seminar will be held in Adam's Mark Hotel, Houston, on 
June 
20, followed by detailed technical exchanges and discussions, 
Gong added. 
  The oil companies will not need to worry about marketing 
their products from natural gas exploration and development in 
Yinggehai and Qiong Dongnan, he said, adding that the market in 
the coastal area is vast. 
  CNOOC is considering the construction of a gas pipeline, as 
soon as enough deposits are discovered, to link all the big 
cities along the coast in the provinces of Guangdong, Fujian and 
Hainan. "This long-distance pipeline will give the gas to be 
produced access to the market," Gong said. 
  The CNOOC signed 94 agreements and contracts with 55 oil 
companies from 15 countries over the past ten years. Altogether 
78 oil and gas-bearing structures have been discovered on 
China's continental shelf, through cooperative and self-financed 
exploration. 
  So far 1.2 billion tons of oil in place, and 180 billion 
cubic meters of natural gas have been proven and controlled, 
according to experts. The daily crude output of the corporation 
has risen to 130,000 barrels, bringing the projected total for 
this year to 5.5 million tons. 
  By 1997, the CNOOC is expected to produce 265,000 barrels of 
crude and 10 million cubic meters of gas each day, experts said. 

