CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by L. Roketskiy, chief of oblast administration: </F>
"On Economic Successes in the Functioning of the Agro-industrial 
Complex of Tyumen Oblast in 1994"] 
  [Text] The socioeconomic situation in the oblast 
agro-industrial complex in 1993 developed under the influence of 
further liberalization of economic activity, a restricted 
financial-monetary policy, and reduction of centralized 
allocations. 
  Under these conditions the oblast administration devoted a 
considerable amount of attention to problems of reforming 
agricultural production, it directed material and financial 
resources to supporting rural commodity producers, and it 
rendered assistance in strengthening business ties with 
enterprises of the petroleum and gas complex. 
  As a result, we managed to keep the production of eggs, 
milk, 
potatoes, and vegetables at the 1992 level and in terms of a 
number of other indicators the rates of reduction of volumes 
were lower than the average for Russia. 
  But on the whole measures for reforming agriculture did not 
produce the desired results. The decline of the volumes of gross 
output continued, the areas planted in agricultural crops and 
the number of head of cattle decreased, and their productivity 
dropped. The process of creating farmer-run farms slowed up. 
Social conditions in rural areas deteriorated. 
  In order to create the necessary conditions for the 
functioning of the oblast agro-industrial complex in 1994: 
  1. The main tasks of the oblast administration and the 
administrations of the cities and rayons shall be: 
  further reform of the agrarian sector; 
  provision of stabilization of the reproduction basis, 
prevention of a sharp decline of production volumes, and raising 
of the level of marketability of agricultural products; 
  rendering of financial support for agriculture and the 
creation of economic conditions for the functioning of 
enterprises with all forms of ownership and the development of 
the social infrastructure of rural areas; 
  training of personnel for the agro-industrial complex 
capable 
of managing effectively in market relations. 
  2. The deputy chief of the oblast administration, S.A. Pak, 
the Administration of Agriculture and Food (V.A. Antonyuk), the 
Committee for Food and the Processing Industry (V.Ye. 
Kostomarov), the Committee on Economics and Prognostication 
(S.S. Chikirev), and the Finance Committee of the oblast 
administration (S.N. Martynushkin), and the chiefs of the rayon 
administrations shall earmark and implement measures for 
structural rearrangement of the agro-industrial complex, the 
creation of a competitive environment, and the insurance of 
guaranteed sale of products delivered to the oblast food fund. 
To these ends the following shall be envisioned: 
  in the crop growing branch, increased production of food 
wheat, oil bearing and cereal crops, at the same time 
envisioning financial support from the oblast budget in the form 
of advances for producers of food wheat and grain for the 
production of cereal who have concluded contracts for their 
delivery to the oblast food fund; 
  incentives for producers of elite seeds of grain crops 
through the establishment of increments to procurement prices 
for their production with compensation for expenditures from 
budget funds for these products; 
  the Administration of Agriculture and Food of the oblast 
administration and the state association Tyumenkhleboprodukt 
(A.A. Kalyuzhnyy) some time before 1 April 1994 shall conclude 
contracts with commodity producers for the delivery of food 
wheat to the oblast food fund. 
  In the animal husbandry branch, preservation of the volumes 
of production of animal husbandry products and the herd of cows 
for reproduction through the allotment of subsidies to producers 
of milk, regardless of forms of ownership, with differentiation 
of the rates of subsidies per unit of output taking into account 
the level of productivity of the dairy herd; 
  the allotment of subsidies to producers of beef on 
specialized fattening farms and complexes and also producers of 
pork, poultry, and eggs, in order to render support to large 
animal husbandry complexes and poultry farms and prevent 
curtailment of their production since they are the main 
producers of these products and promoters of progressive 
technology in the branch and a base for further reproduction; 
  encouragement of the development of sheep raising on public 
farms through subsidizing producers of wool and creating 
capacities for processing leather raw material in the oblast. 
  In order to increase the genetic potential of the livestock, 
the work of breeding farms shall be stimulated through 
guaranteed purchase from them of highly bred young animals at 
contractual prices which increases their motivation to develop 
breeding work. 
  In the sphere of processing, during the time before 15 May a 
concept is to be drawn up for the development of the food and 
processing industry as well as a plan for distribution of 
facilities in the territorial cross section, taking into account 
a rational combination of large enterprises and facilities for 
small-scale processing and provision of raw material for them; 
  in conjunction with the Committee for Administration of 
State 
Property the oblast administration (G.A. Burtsev) shall develop 
the question of the possibility of a secondary issuance of 
shares in private joint-stock companies for processing milk and 
meat or their transformation into public joint-stock companies 
in order to grant additional opportunities for acquisition of a 
controlling block of shares by rural commodity producers under 
preferential conditions, and before 1 April of this year resolve 
issues of creating a joint-stock company out of the 
Tyumenkhleboprodukt Production Association, taking the interests 
of agricultural commodity producers into account. 
  In the sphere of sales in order to create a more effective 
commodity producing network for the sale of agricultural 
products and products from their processing and to create a 
competitive environment when they are sold, in conjunction with 
the Committee on Trade of the oblast administration (L.M. 
Anufriyeva), the Oblast Consumers Union (M.V. Yudakov), the 
oblast AKKOR [Association of Peasant Farms and Agricultural 
Cooperatives of Russia] shall prepare proposals and city 
administrations shall search for possibilities of allotting 
agricultural commodity producers trade areas and refrigeration 
capacities in order to organize firm trade in agricultural 
products and assign trade spaces in city markets; 
  the administration of agriculture and food and the 
committees 
for trade, food, and the processing industry of the oblast 
administration shall within a month's time submit proposals for 
creating a network of organized commercial food markets and an 
agricultural marketing service in the system of the 
agro-industrial complex. 
  In the sphere of investments the draft oblast budget for 
1994 
shall envision funds for payment in the first quarter of 1994 of 
indebtedness to enterprises and organizations of the 
agro-industrial complex for subsidies and compensations that 
were in effect in 1993 and also for the volumes of capital 
construction actually done on facilities financed from the 
oblast budget; 
  budget financing shall be envisioned for maintenance and 
development of facilities for social and cultural purposes and 
municipal services, construction of roads and bridge crossings 
in rural localities, gas and water supply for rural population 
points, and the construction of communications facilities; 
  in conjunction with administrations of autonomous okrugs, 
volumes and sources of financing shall be determined for the 
oblast-wide program "priority development of the agro-industrial 
complex"; 
  managers of enterprises of the agro-industrial complex shall 
use funds released from the maintenance of objects of the social 
sphere and municipal services for implementing measures related 
to structural rearrangement of production and expansion of 
individual housing construction; 
  deputy administration chiefs S.A. Pak and Yu.B. Kutalov 
shall 
make sure of complete assimilation and utilization of allotted 
budget funds for their intended purpose. 
<H5>  In the Area of Personnel Training </H5>
  The formation of a principally new concept of personnel 
support for the oblast agro-industrial complex under the 
conditions of the establishment of a market economy and the 
diversity of forms of ownership, which is based on integration 
of education, production, and science, and envisions 
occupational training for personnel for all levels of business 
and management and consolidation of the network of centers for 
training and retraining personnel, providing a broad spectrum of 
specialized educational services; 
  rendering of aid in the creation of a material and technical 
base for the Tyumen agricultural academy that is being formed on 
the basis of the UNPK [training scientific production complex] 
Tyumen Agricultural Institute in keeping with the decision of 
the board of the Ministry of Agriculture of Russia of 18 
November 1993; 
  the Administration of Agriculture and Food, the Committee on 
Education of the oblast administration (V.G. Novikov), and the 
UNPK Tyumen Agricultural Institute (I.D. Komissarov) shall 
within two months' time prepare coordinated proposals for the 
creation of a consolidated system of personnel and scientific 
support for the oblast agro-industrial complex which unites the 
agricultural academy and a network of colleges and lyceums; 
  the agricultural administration and the UNPK Tyumen 
Agricultural Institute shall take measures to develop 
methodological support for new programs for training and 
retraining personnel who are specialists with high 
qualifications, managers of small forms of agricultural 
business, and heads of peasant (farmer-run) farms under the 
conditions of the economic reform being conducted on the basis 
of the UNPK Tyumen Agricultural Institute; 
  the agricultural administration and the committee on 
education of the oblast administration shall envision measures 
for improving training and retraining of personnel in mass 
occupations, middle level specialists and managers, and farmers 
on the basis of the oblast school for management, rural 
vocational and technical schools, and training combines. 
  3. The sector of private plots of citizens shall be regarded 
as one of the most dynamic and real reserves for increasing the 
volumes of agricultural products and the social sphere for the 
development of farming. 
  The administrations of rayons and cities shall provide for 
allotment of land for grazing livestock, haying, planting 
potatoes and vegetables, the development of collective gardening 
and orchard growing, and the provision of the population with 
young livestock and poultry, seeds, and planting material. 
  The administration of agriculture and food, the committee on 
the food and processing industry of the oblast administration, 
and the rayon administrations in conjunction with the oblast 
consumers' union, Severpotrevsoyuz, and processing enterprises 
before 15 April shall create a system of procurements of 
agricultural products (milk, meat, potatoes, vegetables, etc.) 
produced on private plots of citizens. 
  4. The rayon administrations, the administration of 
agriculture and food of the oblast administration, and the 
oblast AKKOR shall render assistance to beginning farmers in 
obtaining credit, selling the products they produce, and 
creating joint ventures for processing agricultural products and 
providing technical and technological service. 
  5. The heads of rayon administrations, the Committee for 
Social Protection of the Population (V.K. Vorobyeb), and the 
Committee for Labor, Employment, and Migration of the Population 
of the oblast administration (Ye.A. Zalesov) shall take measures 
to strengthen the social protection of the rural population who 
have been discharged as a result of agrarian transformations and 
organize work for retraining personnel and creating new jobs in 
rural areas, including employment in the sphere of processing 
agricultural products, the development of subsidiary 
productions, the revival of handicrafts, and the gathering of 
wild plants and medicinal raw material. 
  6. The deputy chief of the administration, S.A. Pak, the 
Administration of Agriculture and Food, the Committee on Land 
Reform (A.V. Kryakhtunov), the Committee on Economics and 
Prognostication of the oblast administration, and the oblast 
Center for Agrarian Reform (M.P. Korepanov) shall step up work 
for deepening the agrarian reform on farms of the oblast and 
developing optimal scenarios for reorganizing the agrarian 
sector on the basis of market relations. 
  Preparatory work shall be done for developing normative 
documents regulating questions of efficient utilization of land, 
land improvement, and the creation of a land cadaster. 
  7. The oblast Committee on Statistics (S.D. Anokhin) shall 
take measures for more timely depiction and complete elucidation 
of the course of the agrarian reform and the activity of new 
organizational-legal forms, including reflection of the volumes 
of production of agricultural products, questions of employment 
of the rural population, and the changes in land relations. 
  8. Monitoring the execution of the decree shall be the 
responsibility of the deputy chief of the administration, S.A. 
Pak. 

