BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] The dumping and trading of hazardous chemical waste 
have become a major environmental concern globally. The issue 
was raised at a recent international environment conference in 
Geneva. At the meeting, the leader of the Bangladeshi 
delegation and State Minister for Environment Gayeshwar Roy said 
the dumping of toxic and hazardous waste must stop, as much as a 
halt should be called to end the export of such commodities by 
the West to the Third World. The Bangladeshi delegation chief 
said definite international restrictions must be applied to the 
movement of chemical waste. 
  The large and massive industrial complexes of the West 
generate most of the hazardous waste globally and a good part of 
it is dumped in the Third World, either through arrangements or 
surreptitiously in the high seas surrounding the developing 
countries. Once, some Third World countries agreed to take the 
chemical waste of the West in return for financial assistance. 
There were reasons for that. Environment awareness was poor in 
those days and most developing countries were cash-strapped and 
looked for an avenue for resources wherever they could be 
obtained. But now, with the increasing public awareness of the 
environment and of the need to protect one's ecology, Third 
World governments are not willing to allow their backyards to be 
used as dumping grounds for the waste of the industrial 
countries. Even allurements offered through aid are not enough 
to change their stands on accepting anybody's waste. 
  So a different strategy is being used by some Western 
chemical complexes in disposing of their hazardous waste by 
taking those by the shipload and throwing them in the sea near 
the coast of the Third World countries, because these nations do 
not have the means to police their coasts adequately against 
such threats. Bangladesh has been a victim of such illegal 
dumping by these waste-carrying ships. The Bangladeshi Navy and 
the Coast Guard have detected such waste dumping and have taken 
punitive and legal action against the unlawful acts. 
  Another way of transferring waste to the Third World is by 
exporting chemical fertilizers mixed with hazardous waste. 
These products are made in the industrial countries and sold to 
the developing countries. Such illegal trade have been detected 
in many Third World countries, including Bangladesh. Very 
recently, a consignment of imported fertilizer in Bangladesh was 
found to contain chemical waste. After contamination was 
discovered, the government immediately swung into action and 
took legal measures against the exporting American company and 
its local agent. 
  Bangladesh has asked the international community to draw out 
definite measures in the face of trading of such hazardous 
waste. A constant vigil should be kept on the movement of such 
chemical waste throughout the world. There should be an 
international authority entrusted with this responsibility. 
  More dangerous is the revelation that nuclear waste are 
being 
dumped in oceans by countries which possess nuclear facilities. 
This dumping is contaminating the oceans and is endangering the 
environment. The radioactive poisoning is spreading around the 
world. There should be an international regime to protect the 
oceans -- the common heritage of mankind -- from nuclear 
pollution. Perhaps the Geneva international environment 
conference will pave the way for establishing such a regime. 
Bangladesh will always support any move that is aimed at 
safeguarding the planet that belongs to all nations. 

