Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "ASEA Takes Over Renault Robotics Operations"] </F>
  [Text] Its marriage with Sweden's beautiful Volvo has not 
even taken place yet, but Renault is already making eyes at the 
other Swedish beauty, ASEA [Swedish General Electric 
Corporation], which is going to take over its robotics 
operations and set up a joint venture. Renault Automation's 
robotics branch (ACMA, employing 350 and accounting for from 10 
to 12 percent of Renault's turnover, which totaled 1.4 billion 
francs in 1992) is the leader in the French industrial robot 
market, but until now it has had only limited access to the 
international market. Its integration with ABB Robotics, the 
world leader, which had a turnover of $450 million (2.6 billion 
francs) in 1993 and faces such heavyweight competitors as 
Japan's Fanuc, Yaskawa, Matsushita, and Kawasaki, will enable 
the Swiss-Swedish group to strengthen its presence in the French 
market, notably by increasing its turnover fourfold to 360 
million francs. The purpose of the joint venture, whose owners 
will be equal partners, will be to develop activities in the 
area of auto body assembly systems so as to offer turnkey 
automatic systems to automobile manufacturers and other 
industrial sectors. That market is growing steadily, and Stelio 
Demark, president of ABB Robotics, estimates that it is worth 
some $1 billion (about 6 billion francs). The agreement will put 
the Swedish group in a position to reach all of Renault's 
customers and some of Peugeot's as well. Although Renault will 
continue to manage their joint venture -- which has now shifted 
its attention to special machine tools, automated assembly 
operations, and machining (in Castres) -- for at least two 
years, it is a good bet that the powerful Swedish electrical 
engineering firm will not stop there. All of Renault Automation 
is likely to become Swedish, and Volvo, which is already one of 
the ABB's biggest customers, might help expand that cooperation. 
Getting rid of Renault's automatic controls subsidiary with its 
chaotic operating results has long been the French 
manufacturer's express wish. Selling Renault Automation piece by 
piece began with the sale of the April programmable robots to 
Merlin Gerin. Then it was the turn of industrial engineering, 
which was taken over by Dynatech. Lastly, a subsidiary of the 
Italian group Elsag Bailey--the DEA [San Giorgio Electronics 
Company-Institute for the Reconstruction of Industry]--bought 
the measurements branch last year. Renault then tried to reach 
an agreement to sell the robotics branch, whose turnover had 
dropped by almost half in two years' time (170 million francs in 
1992), to Comau, a Fiat subsidiary. ABB Robotics, whose sales on 
the French market totaled 119 million francs in 1992, has long 
supplied automobile production lines with manipulator arms and 
other electronic controls. The result is that automobile 
manufacturers have long been its natural allies, and it is very 
dependent on them. The decline in investments in the automotive 
industry as a whole is making itself felt in the world robotics 
market, which is deteriorating steadily even in Southeast Asia, 
where the ABB already faces strong Japanese competitors. 
<H3>  Contact: ABB, Inc. (Christophe Bouvet), 6 rue des Peupliers, 
92004 Nanterre, France. Cedex. Telephone: (1) 47-69-72-00. </H3>

