1994 
<DATE1>   14 June 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<H3> <TI>     Proceedings of the State Duma January-March 1994 </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    Proceedings of the State Duma January-March 1994 </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   945C0020A Moscow DNEVNIK ZASEDANIY GOSUDARSTVENNOY DUMY in 
Russian 1994 pp 1-43--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 945C0020A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow DNEVNIK ZASEDANIY GOSUDARSTVENNOY DUMY </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Book "Daily Record of Meetings of the State Duma </F>
(January-March 1994)," Federal Assembly and Parliament of the 
Russian Federation, Redaktsionno-izdatelskiy otdel Upravleniya 
informatsionno-tekhnologicheskogo obespecheniya Apparata 
Gosudarstvennoy Dumy] 

<H8>    [Text]11 January </H8>
<H5>  In accordance with the Constitution of the Russian </H5>
Federation the first meeting was opened by the oldest deputy of 
the State Duma, G. G. Lukava. 
  The procedure of the first meeting of the State Duma 
proposed 
by the Organizing Committee for Preparation of the First 
Meetings of the State Duma: 
  1. Opening of the meeting of the State Duma. 
  2. Report by the Russian Federation Central Electoral 
Commission on the results of elections of deputies to the State 
Duma. 
  3. Election of the Electronic System Monitoring Commission. 
  4. Election of the Vote-Tallying Commission. 
  5. Election of the Interim Secretariat of the State Duma. 
  6. Approval of the Provisions of Regulations of the State 
Duma on Factions and Deputy Groups. 
  (Recess to form factions and deputy groups.) 
  7. Briefing of the Interim Secretariat of the State Duma on 
factions and deputy groups formed. 
  8. Proposals by factions and deputy groups on further work 
of 
the State Duma. 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy G. G. Lukava Presiding </H5>
  Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Government of the 
Russian Federation V. S. Chernomyrdin spoke to the deputies. He 
announced Russian President B. N. Yeltsin's welcome to deputies 
of the State Duma. 
  The presiding deputy reported that according to registration 
records 430 of 444 elected deputies of the State Duma were 
present at the meeting. 
  Russian Federation Central Election Commission deputy 
chairman A. V. Ivanchenko reported the results of national 
balloting on the draft Constitution and of the elections to the 
State Duma to the deputies. 
  Personnel were elected to the Commission to Monitor the 
Electronic System of the State Duma, to the Vote-Tallying 
Commission for Secret Balloting in Elections of the Chairman of 
the State Duma and His Deputies, to the Interim Secretariat of 
the State Duma and to the Interim Commission on Regulations. 
  Provisions of the Interim Regulations of the State Duma on 
Factions and Deputy Groups were adopted as the basis. 
  The leaders of interim bodies of the State Duma were elected 
during a recess: Interim Secretariat (S. B. Stankevich, 
director, and M. A. Mityukov and V. I. Naumov, deputies), the 
Vote-Tallying Commission (I. M. Bratishchev, chairman, Ye. Yu. 
Loginov, deputy, and G. A. Medentsov, secretary), the Interim 
Commission on Regulations (G. S. Bondarev, chairman, and V. V. 
Semago, secretary) and the Commission to Monitor the Electronic 
System of the State Duma. 
  In his statement to the deputies S. B. Stankevich, director 
of the Interim Secretariat of the State Duma, turned attention 
to the fact that five working groups were formed within the 
Interim Secretariat: for registering deputy associations (V. I. 
Naumov), for supporting conduct of the meeting of the State Duma 
(S. B. Stankevich), for receiving and disseminating statements 
and proposals of deputies (L. V. Babukh), for relations with the 
press and invitation of guests, and for generalizing proposals 
on the program of the State Duma (M. A. Mityukov). 
  On a motion by Deputy V. I. Selyunin a decision was made 
that 
prior to election of the Chairman of the State Duma the meetings 
will be conducted successively by the seniormost deputies and 
faction representatives. Voting results: ayes--240 (54.1 
percent), nays--86 (19.4 percent), abstentions--11 (2.5 percent). 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy V. A. Bokov Presiding </H5>
  Following lengthy debate the State Duma decided by a 
majority 
vote that deputy groups numbering not less than 35 persons shall 
be subject to registration. Voting results: ayes--256 (57.7 
percent), nays--147 (32.9 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
  S. B. Stankevich gave a briefing on the procedure for 
forming 
and registering deputy groups. 
  Deputies approved the procedure of State Duma meetings. 
Voting results: ayes--365 (82.2 percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), 
abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
<H8>  13 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Deputy O. T. Bogomolov Presiding </H5>
  The Interim Secretariat of the State Duma proposed the 
following issues for the agenda upon coordination with the 
factions: 
  1. A briefing by the Interim Secretariat of the State Duma 
on 
registration of deputy associations. 
  2. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Procedure of State Duma Meetings. 
  3. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Chairman of the State Duma and Deputies of the 
Chairman of the State Duma, and on the Council of the State Duma. 
  4. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Procedure for Nominating Candidates and 
Electing the Chairman of the State Duma. 
  5. On the Chairman of the State Duma (nomination of 
candidates, voting on candidates for the position of Chairman of 
the State Duma). 
  S. B. Stankevich, leader of the Interim Secretariat, 
communicated the preliminary results of registering deputy 
associations. 
  The issue of participants of the Leningrad blockade was 
placed on the agenda on a motion by Deputy V. A. Marychev from 
the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party faction. Voting results: 
ayes--243 (54.7 percent), nays--96 (21.6 percent), 
abstentions--38 (8.6 percent). 
  The issue of forming a Mandate Commission was placed on the 
agenda on a motion by Deputy G. E. Burbulis from the "Russia's 
Choice" Bloc faction and Deputy K. M. Karmokov from the "New 
Regional Policy" deputy group. Voting results: ayes--288 (64.9 
percent), nays--93 (20.9 percent, abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
  Deputy G. S. Bondarev, chairman of the Interim Commission on 
Regulations of the State Duma, reported on provisions of the 
draft Interim Regulations of the State Duma on the Procedure for 
Its Meetings. Following the discussion, articles 1, 5, 8, 11, 
12, 13 and 14 of the Interim Regulations were adopted in their 
entirety. Voting results: ayes--333 (75 percent), nays--30 (6.8 
percent), abstentions--12 (2.7 percent). Articles 21, 24 and 25 
of the Interim Regulations were adopted as the basis. 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy V. A. Tumanov Presiding </H5>
  The deputies examined the issue of nominating candidates for 
the position of Chairman of the State Duma. 
  Nominations were V. V. Zhirinovskiy from the Russian 
Liberal-Democratic Party faction; S. M. Shakhray from the Party 
of Russian Unity and Consensus faction; V. A. Kovalev from the 
Russian Communist Party faction; V. S. Medvedev from the "New 
Regional Policy" deputy group; V. P. Lukin from the "Yavlinskiy 
- Boldyrev - Lukin" Bloc faction; I. P. Rybkin from the Russian 
Agrarian Party faction. Deputy A. G. Nevzorov nominated Deputy 
A. I. Lukyanov. S. A. Kovalev was nominated from the "Russia's 
Choice" Bloc faction; A. P. Braginskiy from the "12 December 
Union" deputy group; Yu. P. Vlasov from the "Russian Path" 
deputy group. 
  Deputies S. M. Shakhray and A. I. Lukyanov declined their 
nominations. 
  As a result of a rating vote Ivan Petrovich Rybkin and Yuriy 
Petrovich Vlasov were nominated for a secret ballot. The final 
decision on the issue of electing the Chairman of the State Duma 
was postponed to the following day. 
  V. A. Lisichkin, chairman of the State Duma Commission on 
Monitoring the Electronic System of the State Duma, reported on 
the commission's organizational meeting. 
<H8>  14 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Deputy V. I. Selyunin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the Chairman of the State Duma (secret ballot). 
  2. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on Deputies of the Chairman of the State Duma and on 
the Council of the State Duma. 
  3. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Procedure for Nominating and Electing Deputies 
of the Chairman of the State Duma. 
  4. On the Mandate Commission of the State Duma. 
  5. The Vote-Tallying Commission's report on the results of 
the secret ballot for election of the Chairman of the State Duma. 
  6. On deputy chairmen of the State Duma (nomination and 
discussion of nominations). 
  7. Voting on nominations for State Duma deputy chairmen. 
  During the time of the Vote-Tallying Commission's work a 
motion was made to examine the issue of drafting a legislative 
act amending the status of persons awarded the "For a Resident 
of Blockaded Leningrad" badge. 
  Vote-Tallying Commission chairman I. M. Bratishchev proposed 
approving Protocol No 4 of the meeting of the State Duma 
Vote-Tallying Commission on establishing the format of the 
secret ballot to be used in election of the Chairman of the 
State Duma. The deputies approved Protocol No 4 of the meeting 
of the Vote-Tallying Commission. Voting results: ayes--365 (82.2 
percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), abstentions--6 (1.4 percent). 
  State Duma Interim Secretariat member G. A. Tomchin gave the 
report on drafting of a legislative act amending the status of 
persons awarded the "For a Resident of Blockaded Leningrad" 
badge. Deputies V. A. Marychev, M. M. Molostvov and A. G. Golov 
spoke during the discussion on the issue. The deputies approved 
the personnel of the commission to draft a legislative act on 
amending the status of persons awarded the "For a Resident of 
Blockaded Leningrad" badge. Voting results: ayes--328 (73.9 
percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
  Vote-Tallying Commission chairman I. M. Bratishchev reported 
to the deputies that by its Protocol No 4 the Vote-Tallying 
Commission approved the format of the secret ballot for election 
of candidates for the position of State Duma Chairman, and gave 
a briefing on the procedure of a secret ballot. 
  Following a recess the presiding deputy proposed not 
approving the agenda, and instead initiating examination of the 
next issue--the provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of 
the State Duma on Deputy Chairmen of the State Duma and on the 
Council of the State Duma. Deputy G. S. Bondarev spoke in behalf 
of the Interim Commission on Regulations. Participants of the 
discussion on this issue included deputies I. S. Anichkin, I. D. 
Grachev, M. V. Seslavinskiy, O. O. Mironov, V. Ye. Zhuravlev, S. 
A. Glotov, A. G. Golov, V. P. Mironov, V. N. Yuzhakov, N. S. 
Stolyarov, A. I. Aleksandrov, Ye. A. Ambartsumov, O. A. Finko, 
N. I. Travkin, Kh. M. Karmokov, V. D. Filimonov, A. S. 
Dzasokhov, Yu. V. Sokolov, S. N. Yushenkov, A. M. Traspov, M. I. 
Lapshin, V. V. Goman, B. A. Zolotukhin, V. V. Igrunov, V. I. 
Zorkaltsev, V. A. Marychev, A. N. Zaytsev, Yu. M. Ten, V. P. 
Lednev, S. B. Stankevich, V. Ye. Bulavinov, Yu. A. Nisnevich, 
Ye. P. Zhirkov, T. E., Chepasova, T. V., Zlotnikova, V. A. 
Bokov, V. B. Isakov, A. A. Ponomarev, K. F. Zatulin, V. V. 
Zhirinovskiy, Yu. A. Rybakov, A. Ya. Sliva, I. V. Muravyev, V. 
G. Vishnyakov, V. V. Semago, A. M. Dorovskikh, V. A. Tikhonov, 
Ye. A. Fedorov and B. I. Zamay. The debate on this issue was not 
concluded. 
  Vote-Tallying Commission chairman I. M. Bratishchev reported 
that Yu. P. Vlasov and I. P. Rybkin were placed on the ballot 
for the secret election of the Chairman of the State Duma of the 
Russian Federation Federal Assembly. 
  As a result of the secret ballot Deputy I. P. Rybkin was 
elected Chairman of the State Duma of the Russian Federation 
Federal Assembly. Results of the secret ballot: ayes--223, 
nays--111. The deputies approved Protocol No 7 of a meeting of 
the Vote-Tallying Commission--on the Vote-Tallying Commission's 
vote recognizing the ballot to be valid for secret voting 
(ayes--241 (54.3 percent), nays--106 (23.9 percent), 
abstentions--21 (4.7 percent), and Protocol No 6 of the meeting 
of the Vote-Tallying Commission--on the results of the secret 
ballot to elect the Chairman of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly (ayes--254 (57.2 percent), nays--72 
(16.2 percent), abstentions--25 (5.6 percent). 
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin thanked the deputies for 
supporting his nomination. 
  Then the deputies turned their attention to approving the 
personnel of the Mandate Commission. Deputies A. A. Dolgopolov 
and T. V. Chertoritskaya were added to the personnel of the 
Mandate Commission. Voting results on the personnel of the 
Mandate Commission: ayes--355 (80 percent), nays--2 (0.5 
percent), abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
<H8>  17 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on State Duma Deputy Chairmen. 
  2. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Council of the State Duma. 
  3. On the procedure for nominating and electing State Duma 
deputy chairmen. 
  4. On State Duma deputy chairmen. 
  5. On the list of State Duma committees. 
  6. On the chairmen of State Duma committees. 
  In his introductory remarks State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin 
summarized the work of the State Duma for the first week, and 
described the work done in deputy groups and factions and by 
individual deputies to prepare coordinated proposals associated 
with completing the organizational stage of the work of the 
State Duma. 
  The agreed list of State Duma committees was put up for a 
vote without discussion, and the corresponding decree was 
adopted. Voting results: ayes--307 (69.1 percent), nays--29 (6.5 
percent), abstentions--6 (1.4 percent). 
  G. S. Bondarev, chairman of the Interim Commission on State 
Duma Regulations, gave a report on the first three issues on the 
agenda, and answered questions from deputies. After discussion 
of amendments to articles 27, 28, 29 and 30 of the Interim 
Regulations of the State Duma, these articles were adopted in 
their entirety. Articles 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 of the Interim 
Regulations of the State Duma were also adopted in their 
entirety. 
  Regarding the fourth issue on the agenda, the deputies 
decided to put the agreed coalition list of State Duma deputy 
chairmen and the chairman and deputy chairman of State Duma 
committees to a vote. Voting results: ayes--289 (65.1 percent), 
nays--56 (12.6 percent), abstentions--10 (2.3 percent). 
  Deputy M. A. Mityukov, a candidate for the position of First 
Deputy Chairman of the State Duma, described his vision of this 
official's role and the pending tasks. M. A. Mityukov answered 
questions from deputies. 
  Candidates for positions of State Duma deputy chairmen V. A. 
Kovalev, A. V. Fedulova and A. D. Vengerovskiy related brief 
information about themselves and about the objectives of the 
legislative process and the State Duma. 
  The tasks facing the corresponding committees were discussed 
by committee chairman candidates V. B. Isakov (Committee for 
Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform), S. V. Kalashnikov 
(Committee for Labor and Social Support), B. A. Denisenko 
(Public Health Committee), L. P. Rozhkova (Committee for 
Education, Culture and Science), G. I. Klimantova (Committee for 
Women's, Family and Youth Affairs), M. M. Zadornov (Committee 
for the Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances) and S. Yu. Glazyev 
(Committee for Economic Policy). 
  The decree of the State Duma of the Russian Federation 
Federal Assembly "On Deputy Chairmen of the State Duma, Chairmen 
and Deputy Chairmen of State Duma Committees, the Chairman of 
the Mandate Commission of the State Duma, the Chairman of the 
Vote-Tallying Chamber and the Authorized Representative on Human 
Rights" was adopted. Voting results: ayes--290 (65.3 percent), 
nays--63 (14.2 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
<H8>  18 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On provisions of the draft Interim Regulations of the 
State Duma on the Procedure for Forming State Duma Committees. 
  2. Formation of State Duma committees. 
  On a motion by Deputy V. S. Grigoriadi, the issue as to the 
suitability of building a new parliament complex was 
additionally placed on the agenda without a vote. 
  G. S. Bondarev, chairman of the Interim Commission on State 
Duma Regulations, gave a report on the first issue on the 
agenda. Articles 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 of the Interim 
Regulations of the State Duma were examined and adopted. 
  S. B. Stankevich, chairman of the Interim Secretariat of the 
State Duma, gave a report on the second issue on the agenda. The 
proposed membership of the committees was adopted as the basis. 
Voting results: ayes--357 (80.4 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  A statement as to the unsuitability of building a new 
parliamentary complex was adopted in accordance with 
instructions of the State Duma regarding the issue additionally 
placed on the agenda. Voting results: ayes--365 (82.2 percent), 
nays--9 (2.0 percent), abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
<H8>  19 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the plan for legislative work of the State Duma. 
  2. On the Interim Statute on Supporting the Activity of 
Deputies of the State Duma. 
  The status of the agroindustrial complex was placed as an 
issue on the agenda on a motion by A. G. Nazarchuk, chairman of 
the State Duma Committee for Agrarian Issues. Voting results: 
ayes--256 (57.7 percent), nays--45 (10.1 percent), 
abstentions--21 (4.7 percent). 
  A decision was adopted at the end of the meeting on the 
basis 
of a motion by Deputy A. N. Mikhaylov to reserve time for 
announcements, brief statements and other communications. Voting 
results: ayes--315 (70.9 percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), 
abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
  A decision to reserve the last hour of Friday meetings for 
questions to members of the Government was adopted on a motion 
by Deputy G. I. Zadonskiy. Voting results: ayes--318 (71.6 
percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
  M. A. Mityukov, first deputy chairman of the State Duma, 
presented a report on the first issue on the agenda. The 
following deputies took part in the discussion on the report: S. 
V. Kalashnikov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Labor 
and Social Support; L. N. Zavadskaya (from the "Women of Russia" 
Political Movement faction); S. Yu. Glazyev, chairman of the 
State Duma Committee for Economic Policy; N. S. Kotov (from the 
Russian Agrarian Party faction); L. P. Rozhkova, chairman of the 
State Duma Committee for Education, Culture and Science; V. I. 
Ilyukhin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Security; Ye. 
P. Ishchenko (from the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party 
faction); B. B. Zhamsuyev, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Nationality Affairs; S. V. Burkov, chairman of the State 
Duma Committee for Property, Privatization and Economic 
Activity; V. I. Ustinov, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Geopolitical Issues; A. A. Piskunov, deputy chairman of the 
State Duma Defense Committee; S. A. Shapovalov, chairman of the 
State Duma Committee for Federation Affairs and Regional Policy; 
I. I. Zaslavskiy; K. F. Zatulin, chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States 
and Ties With Compatriots; T. V. Zlotnikova, deputy chairman of 
the State Duma Committee for Ecology; G. A. Zyuganov, leader of 
the Russian Communist Party faction; M. M. Zadornov, chairman of 
the State Duma Committee for Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances; 
B. A. Zolotukhin (from the "Russia's Choice" Bloc faction); N. 
S. Stolyarov; V. K. Gusev, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Industry, Construction, Transportation and Power; V. A. 
Marychev, A. S. Dzasokhov, V. A. Tumanov (from the Party of 
Russian Unity and Accord faction). 
  The first division of the plan of legislative work of the 
State Duma was adopted in its entirely on a motion by Deputy V. 
N. Manannikov. Voting results: ayes--255 (57.4 percent), 
nays--59 (13.3 percent), abstentions--16 (3.6 percent). A decree 
on the plan of legislative work of the State Duma was adopted in 
its entirety. Voting results: ayes--329 (74.1 percent), nays--2 
(0.5 percent), abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
  A. G. Nazarchuk spoke on operation of the Russian 
Federation's agroindustrial complex in 1994. The State Duma 
decree "On Adoption of a Decree by the Government of the Russian 
Federation" was adopted. Voting results: ayes--311 (70.0 
percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), abstentions--9 (2.0 percent). 
  V. A. Bauer, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on the 
second issue of the agenda. Items 1-5 of the draft Interim 
Regulations on Supporting the Activity of Deputies of the State 
Duma were adopted. Further discussion of the issue was postponed 
to the next meeting of the State Duma. 
<H8>  20 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the Interim Statute on Supporting the Activity of 
Deputies of the State Duma (continuation of the issue's 
discussion). 
  2. On forming committees of the State Duma (continuation of 
the issue's discussion). 
  3. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the State Duma 
administration. 
  Deputy S. N. Baburin made a motion regarding the need for 
examining the issue of returning property of the former Supreme 
Soviet of the Russian Federation to the Federation Council and 
State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly. The 
motion was passed. Voting results: ayes--235 (52.9 percent), 
nays--59 (13.3 percent), abstentions--47 (10.6 percent). 
  On a motion by Deputy V. P. Lukin, a decision was made to 
hear a briefing from State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin on the 
results of a meeting with Russian Federation President B. N. 
Yeltsin. 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin spoke on the draft decree 
of 
the State Duma on the State Duma administration. Participants in 
the issue's discussion included State Duma First Deputy Chairman 
M. A. Mityukov and deputies I. M. Bratishchev, B. A. Zolotukhin, 
Ye. A. Ambartsumov, V. A. Bokov, V. N. Manannikov, V. P. Lukin 
and R. G. Gostev. The corresponding decree was adopted. Voting 
results: ayes--304 (68.5 percent), nays--24 (5.4 percent), 
abstentions--15 (3.4 percent). 
  V. A. Bauer, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, spoke on the first 
issue on the agenda. After discussion of amendments it was 
decided to postpone voting on the text of the Interim Statute on 
Supporting the Activity of State Duma Deputies with regard for 
the examined amendments to the next meeting of the State Duma. 
Voting results: ayes--241 (54.3 percent), nays--66 (14.9 
percent), abstentions--7 (1.6 percent). 
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  G. A. Tomchin, a member of the Interim Secretariat of the 
State Duma, spoke on the second issue on the agenda. Decrees 
were adopted forming the following State Duma committees: 
  Committee for Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform. 
Voting results: ayes--294 (66.2 percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), 
abstentions--1 (0.2 percent). 
  Committee for Labor and Social Support. Voting results: 
ayes--295 (66.4 percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), abstentions--1 
(0.2 percent). 
  Committee for Public Health. Voting results: ayes--295 (66.4 
percent), nays--6 (1.4 percent), abstentions--7 (1.6 percent). 
  Committee for Ecology. Voting results: ayes--253 (57 
percent), nays--38 (8.6 percent), abstentions--24 (5.4 percent). 
  Committee for Education, Culture and Science. Voting 
results: 
ayes--310 (69.8 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), abstentions--2 
(0.5 percent). 
  Committee for Women's, Family and Youth Affairs. Voting 
results: ayes--306 (68.9 percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), 
abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  Committee for Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances. Voting 
results: ayes--305 (68.7 percent), nays--11 (2.5 percent), 
abstentions--1 (0.2 percent). 
  Committee for Economic Policy. Voting results: ayes--291 
(65.5 percent), nays--0, abstentions--0. 
  Committee for Property, Privatization and Economic Activity. 
Voting results: ayes--298 (67.1 percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), 
abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
  Committee for Agrarian Issues. Voting results: ayes--286 
(64.4 percent), nays--11 (2.5 percent), abstentions--4 (0.9 
percent). 
  Committee for Industry, Construction, Transportation and 
Power. Voting results: ayes--297 (66.9 percent), nays--1 (0.2 
percent), abstentions--3 (0.7 percent). 
  Committee for Natural Resources and Nature Use. Voting 
results: ayes--284 (64.0 percent), nays--11 (2.5 percent), 
abstentions--6 (1.4 percent). 
  Committee for Defense. Voting results: ayes--274 (61.7 
percent), nays--30 (6.8 percent), abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  Committee for Security. Voting results: ayes--288 (64.9 
percent), nays--8 (1.8 percent), abstentions--7 (1.6 percent). 
  Committee for International Affairs. Voting results: 
ayes--259 (58.3 percent), nays--27 (6.1 percent), 
abstentions--12 (2.7 percent). 
  Committee for Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent 
States and Ties With Compatriots. Voting results: ayes--285 
(64.2 percent), nays--10 (2.3 percent), abstentions--7 (1.6 
percent). 
  Committee for Nationality Affairs. Voting results: ayes--296 
(66.7 percent), nays--7 (1.6 percent), abstentions--7 (1.6 
percent). 
  Committee for Federation Affairs and Regional Policy. Voting 
results: ayes--288 (64.9 percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), 
abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  Committee for Local Self-Government Issues. Voting results: 
ayes--289 (65.1 percent), nays--5 (1.1 percent), abstentions--3 
(0.7 percent). 
  Committee for Affairs of Public Associations and Religious 
Organizations. Voting results: ayes--277 (62.4 percent), 
nays--23 (5.2 percent), abstentions--10 (2.3 percent). 
  Committee for Organization of the Work of the State Duma. 
Voting results: ayes--293 (66.0 percent), nays--9 (2.0 percent), 
abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  Committee for Information Policy and Communications. Voting 
results: ayes--273 (61.5 percent), nays--16 (3.6 percent), 
abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  The decree on forming the Committee for Geopolitical Issues 
was not adopted. Voting results: ayes--210 (47.3 percent), 
nays--58 (13.1 percent), abstentions--24 (5.4 percent). 
<H8>  21 January </H8>
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the draft of a decree of the State Duma on supporting 
the activity of deputies of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly; 
  2. On the draft of a State Duma decree on supporting the 
activity of committees, the Mandate Commission, factions, and 
deputy groups of the State Duma. 
  During discussion of the agenda, motions to place the 
following issues on it were passed: 
  on approving the size and personnel of the State Duma 
Committee for Geopolitical Issues (V. V. Zhirinovskiy, leader of 
the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party faction). Voting results: 
ayes--275 (61.9 percent), nays--16 (3.6 percent), 
abstentions--14 (3.2 percent); 
  on the situation in the former Yugoslavia (deputies from a 
number of factions). Voting results: ayes--247 (55.6 percent), 
nays--59 (13.3 percent), abstentions--19 (4.3 percent); 
  on provisions of the Interim Regulations on the State Duma 
Committee for Organization of the Work of the State Duma (Deputy 
G. S. Bondarev). Voting results: ayes--275 (61.9 percent), 
nays--27 (6.1 percent), abstentions--21 (4.7 percent); 
  on resuming the "Parliamentary Hour" television broadcast 
(Deputy V. A. Marychev). Voting results: ayes--255 (57.4 
percent), nays--62 (14.0 percent), abstentions--10 (2.3 percent); 
  on terminating the powers of the Interim Secretariat of the 
State Duma and the Interim Commission on Regulations (Deputy B. 
I. Zamay). Voting results: ayes--232 (52.3 percent), nays--48 
(10.8 percent), abstentions--33 (7.4 percent). 
  V. A. Bauer, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on the 
first issue on the agenda. Following its amendment the Interim 
Statute on Supporting the Activity of Deputies of the State Duma 
was approved. Voting results: ayes--306 (68.9 percent), nays--13 
(2.3 percent), abstentions--14 (3.2 percent). 
  The draft of a decree on supporting the activity of deputies 
of the State Duma was examined. The decree was adopted in a 
revised wording. Voting results: ayes--280 (63.1 percent), 
nays--6 (1.4 percent), abstentions--12 (2.7 percent). 
  G. S. Bondarev, chairman of the Interim Commission on State 
Duma Regulations, presented provisions of the Interim 
Regulations of the State Duma on the Committee for Organization 
of the Work of the State Duma. The document was adopted. Voting 
results: ayes--283 (63.7 percent), nays--5 (1.1 percent), 
abstentions--7 (1.6 percent). 
  A decree terminating the powers of the Interim Secretariat, 
the Interim Commission on Regulations, and the Commission to 
Monitor the Electronic System of the State Duma was adopted in 
connection with approval of the provisions of the Interim 
Regulations. Voting results: ayes--305 (68.7 percent), nays--5 
(1.1. percent), abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
  A briefing was heard from State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin 
on 
his meeting with the President of the Russian Federation and on 
eliminating the interim administration of the Federal Assembly. 
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  A draft decree of the State Duma on supporting the activity 
of committees, the Mandate Commission, factions and deputy 
groups of the State Duma was submitted by G. S. Bondarev, member 
of the State Duma Committee for Organization of the Work of the 
State Duma. The final decision of the text of the decree was 
adopted at the end of the meeting. Voting results: ayes--237 
(53.4 percent), nays--15 (3.4 percent), abstentions--6 (1.4 
percent). 
  A briefing was given by Russian Deputy Minister of Foreign 
Affairs S. V. Lavrov on the crisis in former Yugoslavia. 
  Then the personnel of the State Duma Committee for 
Geopolitical Issues were approved. Voting results: ayes--258 
(58.1 percent), nays--17 (3.8 percent), abstentions--4 (0.9 
percent). 
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  V. P. Lukin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
International Affairs, made a motion to adopt a draft statement 
on the crisis in former Yugoslavia with regard for amendments by 
deputies. The statement was adopted after additional amendments. 
Voting results: ayes--280 (63.1 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
  M. N. Poltoranin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Information Policy and Communications, spoke on resumption of 
the "Parliamentary Hour" television broadcast. The draft decree 
drawn up by the committee as the basis was not adopted. Voting 
results: ayes--169 (38.1 percent), nays--45 (10.1 percent), 
abstentions--36 (8.1 percent). Discussion of the issue was 
postponed to the next meeting. 
<H8>  4 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on decisions adopted by the Council of the 
State Duma. 
  2. Introduction of A. M. Yakovlev, authorized representative 
of the President of the Russian Federation to the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly. 
  3. On changes in the composition of deputies of the State 
Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly. 
  4. On a draft federal law on the procedure for publishing 
and 
enacting federal constitutional laws, federal laws, and acts of 
the chambers of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly. 
  5. On the State Duma delegation to the 8-9 February 1994 
meeting in St. Petersburg of the Council of Interparliamentary 
Assemblies of Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. 
  6. On a draft decree of the State Duma on supporting the 
activity of the State Duma. 
  7. Political statements by factions and deputy groups. 
  8. "Government Hour." 
  The issue of one-time compensation to depositors with the 
Savings Bank of the Russian Federation possessing deposits as of 
1 January 1992 was placed on the agenda on a motion by V. B. 
Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Legislation and 
Judicial and Legal Reform. Voting results: ayes--284 (64 
percent), nays--17 (3.8 percent), abstentions--20 (4.5 percent). 
  A briefing regarding the feelings of the President and 
Government concerning documents of the State Duma on 
construction of a complex of buildings for a parliamentary 
center, on supporting the functions of Russia's agroindustrial 
complex in 1994 and on the crisis in former Yugoslavia was 
placed on the agenda on a motion by Deputy A. N. Mikhaylov. 
Voting results: ayes--267 (60.1 percent), nays--25 (5.6 
percent), abstentions--24 (5.4 percent). 
  On a motion by Deputy A. P. Pochink, a decision was adopted 
to make an entry in the minutes regarding instruction of the 
Russian Federation General Procurator and the Russian Federation 
Minister of Internal Affairs to adopt the necessary measures to 
stop unlawful actions against deputies residing in the Rossiya 
and Mir hotels. Voting results: ayes--321 (72.3 percent), 
nays--15 (3.4 percent), abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  The issue of the basic principles of organizing state 
government and local self-government of subjects of the 
Federation was placed on the agenda on a motion by Deputy O. O. 
Mironov. Voting results: ayes--238 (53.6 percent), nays--42 (9.5 
percent), abstentions--39 (8.8 percent). 
  A decision was made on a motion by Deputy B. I. Zamay to 
hear 
a report from the State Duma Committee for Organization of the 
Work of the State Duma regarding fulfillment of the decree of 
the State Duma "On Approving the Interim Statute on Supporting 
the Activity of Deputies of the State Duma." Voting results: 
ayes--274 (61.7 percent), nays--20 (4.5 percent), 
abstentions--27 (6.1 percent). A decision was also made to 
examine the issue of defending the honor and merit of the State 
Duma. Voting results: ayes--305 (68.7 percent), nays--13 (2.9 
percent), abstentions--11 (2.5 percent). 
  A decision to hear a briefing from the State Duma Committee 
for Organization of the Work of the State Duma on accommodations 
was made on a motion by Deputy Ye. F. Lakhova. Voting results: 
ayes--281 (63.3 percent), nays--19 (4.3 percent), 
abstentions--24 (5.4 percent). 
  The issue of implementing the Law of the Russian Federation 
"On State Guarantees and Compensations for Persons Working and 
Residing in Regions of the Far North and Locales Comparable to 
Them" was placed on the agenda on a motion by Deputy V. V. 
Goman. Voting results: ayes--258 (58.1 percent), nays--16 (3.6 
percent), abstentions--32 (7.2 percent). 
  A decision to hear a briefing from the Chairman of the State 
Duma on the objectivity with which the mass media are 
illuminating the work of the State Duma was adopted on a motion 
by Deputy A. I. Voropayev. Voting results: ayes--235 (52.9 
percent), nays--52 (11.7 percent), abstentions--18 (4.1 percent). 
  The issue of the crisis in Russian science was placed on the 
agenda on a motion by Deputy V. S. Shevelukhi. Voting results: 
ayes--267 (60.1 percent), nays--17 (3.8 percent), 
abstentions--22 (5.0 percent). 
  The issue of elections to bodies of local self-government in 
St. Petersburg was placed on the agenda on motions from deputies 
V. A. Marychev and Yu. A. Rybakov. Voting results: ayes--249 
(56.1 percent), nays--40 (9 percent), abstentions--30 (6.8 
percent). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin briefed the deputies on 
issues examined at meetings of the Council of the State Duma on 
20 and 31 January and 1-3 February. 
  The State Duma adopted the decree "On Supporting the 
Activity 
of the State Duma." Voting results: ayes--233 (52.5 percent), 
nays--47 (10.6 percent), abstentions--19 (4.3 percent). 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy Chairman V. A. Kovalev Presiding </H5>
  A. M. Yakovlev, authorized representative of the President 
of 
the Russian Federation Federal Assembly, spoke to the deputies 
and answered their questions. 
  V. I. Sevastyanov, chairman of the State Duma Mandate 
Commission, gave a report on the third issue on the agenda. A 
decree of the State Duma "On Changes in the Composition of 
Deputies of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal 
Assembly" was adopted. Voting results: ayes--316 (71.2 percent), 
nays--6 (1.4 percent), abstentions--6 (1.4 percent). 
  V. B. Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform, gave a report on the 
fourth issue on the agenda. A draft law on the procedure for 
publishing and enacting federal constitutional laws, federal 
laws, and acts of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly was 
adopted in its first reading. Voting results: ayes--304 (68.5 
percent), nays--3 (0.7 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
The decree of the State Duma "On the Draft Federal Law 'On the 
Procedure for Publishing and Enacting Federal Constitutional 
Laws, Federal Laws, and Acts of Chambers of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly'" was adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--307 (69.1 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), abstentions--3 
(0.7 percent). 
  A decree of the State Duma "On Sending a Delegation From the 
State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly to the 
meeting of the Council of Interparliamentary Assemblies of 
Members of the Commonwealth of Independent States" was adopted. 
Voting results: ayes--230 (51.8 percent), nays--55 (12.4 
percent), abstentions--49 (11.0 percent). 
  V. B. Isakov spoke on the issue of one-time compensation to 
depositors of the Savings Bank of the Russian Federation. The 
corresponding decree was adopted. Voting results: ayes--261 
(58.8 percent), nays--21 (4.7 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 
percent). 
  V. S. Shevelukh, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Education, Culture and Science, gave a report on the crisis 
in Russian science. A decision was adopted to instruct the State 
Duma committees for science, education and culture, for economic 
policy, and for budget, taxes, banks and finances to finalize 
the submitted draft decree and to present it to the State Duma 
for examination. Voting results: ayes--287 (64.6 percent), 
nays--16 (3.6 percent), abstentions--9 (2 percent). 
  S. K. Dubinin, acting Russian Federation minister of 
finances, and V. V. Gerashchenko, chairman of the Central Bank 
of the Russian Federation, gave a briefing on resolving the 
crisis of nonpayment and answered questions from deputies. 
  Issues on the agenda that were not examined were postponed 
to 
the next meeting of the State Duma on a motion by Deputy V. A. 
Maryshev. 
<H8>  9 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the legal basis of 
elections to the bodies of state government of subjects of the 
Russian Federation and to bodies of local self-government, and 
on ensuring citizens' voting rights. 
  3. On the draft Regulations of the State Duma. 
  4. Political statements by factions, deputy groups and 
deputies. 
  The crisis that has evolved in northern regions of the 
Russian Federation, which was left unexamined in the 4 February 
meeting of the State Duma, was placed on the agenda. 
  The following issues were additionally placed on the agenda 
on motions by deputies: 
  O. O. Begov and N. M. Bezborodov--on supporting the activity 
of the State Duma. Voting results: ayes--301 (67.8 percent), 
nays--12 (2.7 percent), abstentions--9 (2 percent). 
  N. M. Kharitonov--a briefing on functions of the 
agroindustrial complex in 1994. Voting results: ayes--230 (51.8 
percent), nays--42 (9.5 percent), abstentions--29 (6.5 percent). 
  S. N. Baburin--on creating a parliamentary commission to 
investigate the causes and circumstances of the events of 
September-October 1993. Results of a roll-call vote: ayes--274 
(61.7 percent), nays--46 (10.4 percent), abstentions--20 (4.5 
percent). 
  V. L. Sheynis--on supporting the activity of the 
administrations of factions, deputy groups, committees and of 
aides to deputies of the State Duma. Voting results: ayes--313 
(70.5 percent), nays--5 (1.1 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 
percent); 
  V. I. E. Lukin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Security--on the legal regime of the activity of the 
Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation. Voting results: 
ayes--247 (55.6 percent), nays--53 (11.9 percent), 
abstentions--19 (4.3 percent); 
  V. A. Vasileva--on a briefing by the Chairman of the State 
Duma on coordination between the two chambers of the Federal 
Assembly--the Federation Council and the State Duma. Voting 
results: ayes--260 (58.6 percent), nays--8 (1.8 percent), 
abstentions--29 (6.5 percent); 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on the 7 
and 
8 February meetings of the Council of the State Duma. 
  S. A. Shapovalov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, gave a report on the 
second issue on the agenda. A. Ya. Sliva, chairman of the State 
Duma Committee for Local Self-Government Issues, gave a 
co-report. The State Duma also examined draft decrees submitted 
by the "Yavlinskiy - Boldyrev - Lukin" Bloc and Russian 
Liberal-Democratic Party factions. Participants of the 
discussion of the issue included Deputy Yu. N. Yakovlev; V. V. 
Zhirinovskiy, chairman of the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party 
faction; N. I. Travkin, leader of the Russian Democratic Party 
faction; V. B. Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform; deputies V. L. 
Sheynis (from the "Yavlinskiy - Boldyrev - Lukin" Bloc faction), 
L. N. Zavadskaya (from the "Women of Russia" Political Movement 
faction), V. A. Marychev and O. A. Shenkarev (from the Russian 
Communist Party faction), G. P. Tokareva (from the Russian 
Agrarian Party faction); V. I. Ustinov, chairman of the State 
Duma Committee for Geopolitical Issues. The draft decree on the 
legal basis of elections to bodies of state government of 
subjects of the Russian Federation and to bodies of 
self-government and on supporting citizens' voting rights was 
sent for revision to the committees for local self-government 
issues and for federation affairs and regional policy. 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy Chairman A. V. Fedulova Presiding </H5>
  State Duma First Deputy Chairman A. Mityukov gave a report 
on 
the third issue on the agenda, and G. S. Bondarev, member of the 
State Duma Committee for Organization of the Work of the State 
Duma, gave a co-report. A decree was adopted in which M. A. 
Mityukov's briefing on the draft "Regulations of the State Duma" 
was taken under advisement. The draft Regulations were forwarded 
for revision. Voting results: ayes--256 (57.7 percent), nays--14 
(3.2 percent), abstentions--21 (4.7 percent). 
  A. A. Chernyshev, deputy chairman of the State Duma 
Committee 
for Agrarian Issues, spoke on functions of the agroindustrial 
complex in 1994. The decree was not adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--195 (43.9 percent), nays--45 (10.1 percent), 
abstentions--34 (7.7 percent). 
  V. V. Goman, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, spoke on the crisis 
evolving in northern regions of the Russian Federation. 
Participants of the discussion included deputies I. L. Lukashev 
and A. A. Piskunov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Labor and Social Support S. V. Kalashnikov, and deputies A. M. 
Biryukov and N. V. Volkova. A draft decree was adopted as the 
basis. Voting results: ayes--239 (53.8 percent), nays--22 (5 
percent), abstentions--22 (5 percent). 
  The following deputies spoke in the agenda section 
"Political 
statements by factions, deputy groups and deputies": A. G. 
Nevzorov--regarding a letter from Patriarch Alexis II of Moscow 
and All Russia to State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin; V. V. 
Zhirinovskiy, leader of the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party 
faction--on the situation in Yugoslavia; A. N. Mikhaylov--with a 
statement from the Russian Communist Party faction on 
destruction of monuments of Russian and Soviet history and 
culture; T. V. Zlotnikova--with a request to the State Duma to 
support a deputy inquiry of the Government of the Russian 
Federation regarding immediate settlement of debts to the 
population; N. M. Kharitonov--with an appeal to preserve V. I. 
Lenin's museum-apartment in the Kremlin; N. N. Vorontsov--for 
consensus in resolving the Yugoslavian crisis; Deputy 
Volkov--with a statement from a deputy group on interference in 
the affairs of the Dnestr Moldovan Republic by General Lebed; K. 
F. Zatulin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Affairs of 
the Commonwealth of Independent States and Ties With 
Compatriots--with a request to raise the issue of changing the 
name of the committee under his charge at the next meeting of 
the State Duma; A. A. Akbayev--on the need for objective 
illumination of the situation in the Northern Caucasus; V. V. 
Vinogradov--on the suitability of improving the election system. 
  A briefing was heard from State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin 
on 
coordination between the two chambers of the Federal 
Assembly--the Federation Council and the State Duma. 
  Other issues on the agenda were not examined. 
<H8>  11 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft federal law of the Russian Federation on 
amending and supplementing the RSFSR Criminal Code and the RSFSR 
Code of Criminal Procedure. 
  3. On a draft decree of the State Duma on amnesty in 
connection with adoption of the Constitution of the Russian 
Federation. 
  4. "Government Hour": a briefing by Russian Federation 
Minister of Internal Affairs V. F. Yerin. 
  The following pending issues were also placed on the agenda: 
  1. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the legal basis of 
elections to bodies of state government of subjects of the 
Russian Federation and to bodies of local self-government, and 
on ensuring citizens' voting rights. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the crisis that 
has 
evolved in northern regions of the Russian Federation (second 
reading). 
  The issue of supporting the activity of the State Duma was 
placed on the agenda on a motion by Deputy S. N. Baburin. Voting 
results: ayes--285 (64.2 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). A decision was made on a motion by 
Deputy I. M. Bratishchev to hold a supplementary meeting of the 
State Duma on 17 February. Voting results: ayes--231 (52 
percent), nays--46 (10.4 percent), abstentions--16 (3.6 percent). 
  The issue of economic and political amnesty was placed on 
the 
agenda on a motion by deputies V. L. Sheynis, O. O. Mironov and 
Yu. A. Rybakov. Voting results: ayes--247 (55.6 percent), 
nays--39 (8.8 percent), abstentions--17 (3.8 percent). 
  A decision to hear a briefing on fulfillment of decrees 
adopted by the State Duma on functioning of the agroindustrial 
complex in 1994, on the crisis in former Yugoslavia and on 
construction of a complex of buildings for a parliamentary 
center was made on a motion by Deputy A. N. Mikhaylov. Voting 
results: ayes--226 (50.9 percent), nays--42 (9.5 percent), 
abstentions--15 (3.4 percent). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined by the Council of the State Duma at the 10 February 
meeting. 
  V. A. Bauer, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, reported on support 
of the activity of the State Duma. Participants of the 
discussion on the issue included deputies A. I. Lukyanov, A. N. 
Mikhaylov and I. V. Muravyev, Mandate Commission chairman V. I. 
Sevastyanov, V. A. Tikhonov, G. I. Churkin, A. S. Anichkin, K. 
A. Tsiku and Ye. F. Lakhova. A decree of the State Duma "On 
Supporting the Activity of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly" was adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--282 (63.5 percent), nays--9 (2 percent), abstentions--10 
(2.3 percent). 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy Chairman A. D. Vengerovskiy Presiding </H5>
  S. A. Shapovalov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, gave a report on the 
legal basis of elections to bodies of state government of 
subjects of the Russian Federation and to bodies of local 
self-government and on ensuring citizens' voting rights. A 
decree of the State Duma on this issue was adopted. Voting 
results: ayes--272 (61.3 percent), nays--17 (3.8 percent), 
abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  V. V. Goman, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, submitted a draft decree 
of the State Duma on the crisis that has evolved in northern 
regions of the Russian Federation to the deputies. The decree 
was adopted. Voting results: ayes--250 (56.3 percent), nays--7 
(1.6 percent), abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov presented a 
draft federal law of the Russian Federation on amending and 
supplementing the RSFSR Criminal Code and the RSFSR Code of 
Criminal Procedure. V. V. Pokhmelkin, member of the State Duma 
Committee for Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform, gave a 
co-report. Participants of the discussion included deputies V. 
V. Gritsan, State Duma Committee for Labor and Social Support 
chairman S. V. Kalashnikov, V. V. Semago, V. A. Nikonov, T. P. 
Tokareva and Ye. A. Ambartsumov. The corresponding decree was 
adopted. Voting results: ayes--241 (54.3 percent), nays--16 (3.6 
percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
  Russian Federation Minister of Internal Affairs V. F. Yerin 
spoke at the meeting. Deputies of the State Duma decided to take 
his briefing under advisement. 
<H8>  16 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on amnesty in 
connection with adoption of the Constitution of the Russian 
Federation. 
  3. On illumination of the work of the State Duma in the mass 
media. 
  4. On a draft decree of the State Duma on forming a deputy 
commission to investigate the conditions and causes of the 
tragic events of 21 September to 4 October 1993. 
  A briefing by the minister of foreign affairs on development 
of the situation in former Yugoslavia was additionally placed on 
the agenda. Voting results: ayes--225 (50.7 percent), nays--24 
(5.4 percent), abstentions--23 (5.2 percent). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined by the Council of the State Duma at the 14 February 
meeting. A motion by I. P. Rybkin on the procedure for the work 
of the State Duma in late February and early March 1994 was 
passed. 
  A. M. Yakovlev, authorized representative of the President 
of 
the Russian Federation to the State Duma, spoke on the second 
issue on the agenda. B. I. Zamay, member of the State Duma 
Committee for Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform, gave a 
co-report. Participants of the discussion on the issue included 
deputies S. V. Zapolskiy (from the Russian Democratic Party 
faction); V. B. Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform; V. V. Borshchev (from 
the "Yavlinskiy -Boldyrev - Lukin" Bloc faction); State Duma 
Deputy Chairman V. A. Kovalev; L. N. Zavadskaya (from the "Women 
of Russia" Political Movement faction), V. G. Vishnyakov (from 
the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party faction), S. S. Govorukhin 
and V. V. Pokhmelkin (from the "Russia's Choice" Bloc faction), 
and V. L. Talanov. 
  Lieutenant-General Yu. I. Kalinin, chief of the Main 
Directorate for Execution of Sentences of the Russian Ministry 
of Internal Affairs, reported on the situation that had evolved 
in the corrective labor system during the time of examination of 
the draft decree on amnesty, and he replied to questions posed 
to him. Then discussion on the issue was continued. Deputies Yu. 
P. Ivanov (from the Russian Communist Party faction), V. S. 
Lipitskiy, T. E. Chepasova, A. T. Nevzorov, I. G. Ustinov, State 
Duma Committee for Security chairman V. I. Ilyukhin and Yu. A. 
Rybakov spoke in the debates. 
  The State Duma Committee for Security and the State Duma 
Committee for Legislation and Judicial and Legal Reform were 
instructed to continue work on the text of the decree. 
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  Russian Federation Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs S. V. 
Lavrov gave a briefing on development of the situation in former 
Yugoslavia. 
  M. N. Poltoranin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Information Policy and Communications, gave a report on 
illumination of the work of the State Duma by the mass media. 
Participants of the debates included deputies V. V. Semago (from 
the Russian Communist Party faction), K. B. Ignatyev (from the 
"Russia's Choice" Bloc faction), N. M. Kharitonov (from the 
Russian Agrarian Party faction), V. A. Nikonov (from the Party 
of Russian Unity and Consensus faction), S. S. Govorukhin (from 
the Russian Democratic Party faction), A. G. Nevzorov and Yu. P. 
Kuznetsov (from the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party faction), 
and V. A. Marychev and O. O. Begov. A draft decree of the State 
Duma on illumination of the activity of the State Duma of the 
Russian Federation Federal Assembly by federal television and 
radio companies was adopted as the basis. Voting results: 
ayes--244 (55.0 percent), nays--56 (12.6 percent), 
abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
  V. I. Ilyukhin spoke on the fourth issue on the agenda. A 
decision was made to instruct the State Duma committees for 
security, for defense, and for legislation and judicial and 
legal reform to revise the draft decree forming a deputy 
commission to investigate the conditions and causes of the 
tragic events of 21 September to 4 October 1993. Voting results: 
ayes--240 (54.1 percent), nays--36 (8.1 percent), 
abstentions--10 (2.3 percent). 
<H8>  17 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the draft Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal 
Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on political and 
economic amnesty in connection with adoption of the Constitution 
of the Russian Federation. 
  3. On a draft decree of the State Duma on illumination of 
the 
activity of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly by federal 
television and radio companies. 
  4. On a draft decree of the State Duma on changes in the 
personnel of some committees of the State Duma and the State 
Duma Mandate Commission. 
  5. A briefing on parliamentary hearings on the issue of 
Russo-Georgian relations. 
  A decision not to place additional issues on the agenda was 
adopted on a motion by Deputy O. O. Begov. Voting results: 
ayes--226 (50.9 percent), nays--37 (8.3 percent), 
abstentions--11 (2.5 percent). 
  The first issue to be examined was the draft decree of the 
State Duma on political and economic amnesty in connection with 
adoption of the Constitution of the Russian Federation. V. G. 
Vishnyakov, a representative of the Liberal Democratic Party 
faction, gave a report. A draft of a decree on political and 
economic amnesty in connection with adoption of the Constitution 
of the Russian Federation prepared by the Russian 
Liberal-Democratic Party faction was not adopted as the basis. 
Voting results: ayes--200 (45 percent), nays--75 (16.9 percent), 
abstentions--12 (2.7 percent). A decision was made to send this 
draft together with others to the State Duma committees for 
security, for defense, and for legislation and judicial and 
legal reform for revision. Voting results: ayes--228 (51.4 
percent), nays--44 (9.9 percent), abstentions--9 (2 percent). 
  The issue of changes in the personnel of some State Duma 
committees and the State Duma Mandate Commission was the next to 
be examined. I. Ye. Novitskaya, member of the State Duma 
Committee for Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a 
report. A decree of the State Duma "On Changes in the Personnel 
of Some State Duma Committees" was adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--288 (64.9 percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), abstentions--1 
(0.2 percent). 
  The issue of a draft decree of the State Duma on 
illumination 
of the activity of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly by 
federal television and radio companies was the third to be 
examined. M. N. Poltoranin, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Information Policy and Communications, gave a report. The 
decree was adopted. Voting results: ayes--235 (52.9 percent), 
nays--42 (9.5 percent), abstentions--9 (2 percent). 
  G. S. Bondarev, member of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on the 
draft of the Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal 
Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation. Participants 
of the debate included deputies A. N. Mikhaylov and T. P. 
Tokareva, State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov, 
chairman of the State Duma Committee for Legislation and 
Judicial and Legal Reform V. B. Isakov, S. B. Stankevich (from 
the Party of Russian Unity and Accord faction), O. O. Mironov, 
G. A. Tomchin and V. A. Marychev. The corresponding decree was 
adopted. Voting results: ayes--255 (57.4 percent), nays--32 (7.2 
percent), abstentions--20 (4.5 percent). 
  K. F. Zatulin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Ties With 
Compatriots, gave a briefing on parliamentary hearings on the 
issue of Russo-Georgian relations. 
<H8>  18 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. "Government Hour." 
  3. On a draft federal law on the status of a deputy of the 
Federation Council and State Duma of the Federal Assembly and 
Parliament of the Russian Federation. 
  4. On a draft decree of the State Duma on amending the 
decree 
of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly "On 
Forming Committees of the State Duma." 
  5. Political statements by factions, deputy groups and 
deputies. 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined by the Council of the State Duma at the 17 February 
meeting. 
  The procedure for the work of the State Duma for the week 
was 
adopted. Voting results: ayes--237 (53.4 percent), nays--10 (2.3 
percent), abstentions--10 (2.3 percent). 
  The calendar plan for the work of the State Duma in the 
period from 15 February to 31 May 1994 was approved. Voting 
results: ayes--253 (57 percent), nays--7 (1.6 percent), 
abstentions--10 (2.3 percent). 
  In the "Government Hour" section, Russian Federation 
Minister 
for Nationality Affairs and Regional Policy S. M. Shakhray gave 
a briefing on conclusion of a treaty between the Russian 
Federation and the Republic of Tatarstan. 
  G. S. Bondarev, member of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on a 
draft federal law on the status of a deputy to the Federation 
Council and the State Duma of the Federal Assembly and 
Parliament of the Russian Federation. The draft law was adopted 
in its first reading. Voting results: ayes--245 (55.2 percent), 
nays--55 (12.4 percent), abstentions--15 (3.4 percent). 
  K. F. Zatulin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States and Ties With 
Compatriots, gave a report on the fourth issue on the agenda. 
The draft State Duma decree on amending the decree of the State 
Duma of the Federal Assembly "On Forming Committees of the State 
Duma" was not adopted. Voting results: ayes--139 (31.3 percent), 
nays--122 (27.5 percent), abstentions--29 (6.5 percent). 
  On a motion by the State Duma Committee for Issues of Local 
Self-Government a decision was made to conduct parliamentary 
hearings on the problems of local self-government. Voting 
results: ayes--298 (67.1 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  Statements were presented by deputies A. N. Mikhalylov, A. 
A. 
Piskunov, Russian Liberal Democratic Party faction leader V. V. 
Zhirinovskiy, I. S. Anichkin, S. A. Glotov, Yu. P. Kuznetsov, 
human rights representative S. A. Kovalev, State Duma Committee 
for Defense member M. K. Dobrovolskaya, Ye. A. Ambartsumov, 
State Duma Mandate Commission chairman V. I. Sevastyanov, V. V. 
Gritsan, A. M. Dorovskiy, I. V. Muravyev, I. D. Grachev, T. V. 
Zlotnikova, Ye. A. Fedorov, Ye. Yu. Loginov, N. A. Bikalova, S. 
B. Stankevich, and State Duma Committee for Nationality Affairs 
chairman B. B. Zhamsuyev. 
<H8>  23 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. On the order of the work of the State Duma on 23 February 
1994. 
  2. On the Memorandum of Consensus; on the draft decree of 
the 
State Duma on amnesty in connection with adoption of the 
Constitution of the Russian Federation; on a draft decree of the 
State Duma on amnesty for some crimes committed in the area of 
political and economic activity; on recision of the 18 February 
1994 decision of the State Duma regarding the composition of the 
commission to investigate the causes and conditions of the 
events of 21 September to 4 October 1993. 
  Deputy M. K. Dobrovolskaya congratulated all in attendance 
on 
Fatherland Defenders' Day. On a motion by State Duma Chairman I. 
V. Rybkin a decision was made during the recess to participate 
in laying wreaths at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. 
<H5>  State Duma Deputy Chairman A. V. Fedulova Presiding </H5>
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on some 
results of the work of the State Duma over the past month and a 
half, and on future activity, and presented a package of draft 
decrees to the deputies regarding the Memorandum of Consensus. 
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  Statements were made by Deputy N. M. Kharitonov from the 
Russian Agrarian Party faction, S. S. Govorukhin from the 
Russian Democratic Party faction, Ye. A. Ambartsumov from the 
"Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin" Bloc faction, V. V. Pokhmelkin from 
the "Russia's Choice" Bloc faction, faction leader G. A. 
Zyuganov from the Russian Communist Party faction, faction 
leader V. V. Zhirinovskiy from the Russian Liberal-Democratic 
Party faction, faction leader S. M. Shakhray from the Party of 
Russian Unity and Accord faction, faction leader Ye. F. Lakhova 
from the "Women of Russia" Political Movement faction, and group 
leader V. S. Medvedev from the "New Regional Policy" deputy 
group. 
  The State Duma decrees "On Adoption of the Memorandum of 
Consensus," "On Announcing Amnesty in Connection With Adoption 
of the Constitution of the Russian Federation," "On Announcing 
Political and Economic Amnesty," "On Recognition of the Decree 
of the State Duma 'On Approval of the Composition of the 
Commission to Investigate the Events of 21 September to 4 
October 1993' as Being Invalid" were adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--252 (56.8 percent), nays--67 (15.1 percent), 
abstentions--28 (6.3 percent). 
<H8>  25 February </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft Interim Statute on the Activity of an Aide to 
a 
Deputy of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal 
Assembly. 
  3. On a draft federal law on the status of a deputy of the 
first convocation of the Federation Council and on the status of 
a deputy of the first convocation of the State Duma of the 
Federal Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation 
(second reading). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined by the Council of the State Duma at the 23 February 
meeting. 
  I. A. Shichanin, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on 
the second issue. Following discussion of amendments, the State 
Duma decree "On Approval of the Interim Statute on Activity of 
an Aide to a Deputy of the State Duma of the Russian Federation 
Federal Assembly" was adopted. Voting results: ayes--300 (67.6 
percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
  S. A. Shapovalov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, gave a briefing on a 
pending issue--the draft address of the State Duma of the 
Russian Federation Federal Assembly on ensuring citizens' voting 
rights in elections to legislative (representative) bodies of 
state government of subjects of the Russian Federation and to 
bodies of local self-government. The corresponding decree was 
adopted. Voting results: ayes--303 (68.2 percent), nays--1 (0.2 
percent), abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  G. S. Bondarev, member of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a report on the 
third issue on the agenda. Following discussion of amendments 
the draft of the federal law on the status of a deputy of the 
first convocation of the Federation Council and on the status of 
a deputy of the first convocation of the State Duma of the 
Federal Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation was 
adopted in its second reading. Voting results: ayes--238 (53.6 
percent), nays--6 (1.4 percent), abstentions--8 (1.8 percent). 
<H8>  11 March </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issued examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On the Message from the President of the Russian 
Federation to the Federal Assembly "On Strengthening the Russian 
State"; on a tentative program of legislative work by committees 
of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly in 
the current session. 
  3. On representatives of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly to commissions and to the working 
group of the Interparliamentary Assembly of Members of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. 
  4. Statements by factions, deputy groups and committees, and 
individual statements by deputies. 
  On a motion by Deputy V. N. Lysenko the issue of temporary 
residence of the State Duma was placed on the agenda. Voting 
results: ayes--250 (56.3 percent), nays--12 (2.7 percent), 
abstentions--15 (3.4 percent). 
  On a motion by Deputy G. I. Churkin a decision was made to 
hear a briefing from the Chairman of the State Duma on 
supporting deputy activity. Voting results: ayes--259 (58.3 
percent), nays--6 (1.4 percent), abstentions--15 (3.4 percent). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined at meetings of the Council of the State Duma on 28 
February and on 3 and 10 March. 
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  I. P. Rybkin gave a report on the second issue on the 
agenda. 
Participants of the discussion on the issue included V. B. 
Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Legislation and 
Judicial and Legal Reform; A. G. Nazarchuk (from the Russian 
Agrarian Party faction), chairman of a State Duma committee; Ye. 
F. Lakhova, leader of the "Women of Russia" Political Movement 
faction; V. M. Lukin, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
International Affairs; K. F. Zatulin (from the Party of Russian 
Unity and Consensus faction), chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States 
and Ties With Compatriots; Deputy Ye. P. Zhirkov; V. I. 
Zorkaltsev, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Public 
Association and Religious Organization Affairs; S. N. Yushenkov, 
chairman of the State Duma Committee for Defense; S. Yu. Glazyev 
(from the Russian Democratic Party faction), chairman of the 
State Duma Committee for Economic Policy; V. K. Gusev, chairman 
of the State Duma Committee for Industry, Construction, 
Transportation and Power; Deputy Yu. K. Sevenard (from the 
Russian Communist Party faction); S. S. Boskholov, deputy 
chairman of the State Duma Committee for Security; G. I. 
Klimantova, chairman of the State Duma Committee for Women's, 
Family and Youth Affairs; V. I. Ustinov, chairman of the State 
Duma Committee for Geopolitical Issues; M. N. Poltoranin, 
chairman of the State Duma Committee for Information Policy and 
Communications; S. V. Burkov, chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Property, Privatization and Economic Activity; 
Deputy V. G. Vishnyakov; M. M. Zadornov, chairman of the State 
Duma Committee for Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances; Deputy M. 
M. Molostvov; O. O. Begov, deputy chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Nationality Affairs; V. V. Zhirinovskiy, leader of 
the Russian Liberal-Democratic Party faction; Deputy V. V. 
Borshchev; Ye. T. Gaydar, leader of the "Russia's Choice" Bloc 
faction; B. A. Denisenko, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Public Health; M. Ya. Lemeshev, chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Ecology; V. S. Medvedev, leader of the "New 
Regional Policy" deputy group; S. V. Kalashnikov, chairman of 
the State Duma Committee for Labor and Social Support. A 
decision was made by protocol to create a working group to draft 
a State Duma decree on the Message of the President of the 
Russian Federation to the Russian Federation Federal Assembly 
"On Strengthening the Russian State," to be headed by State Duma 
Deputy Chairman V. A. Kovalev. Discussion of the issue was 
postponed to the next meeting of the State Duma. 
  Yu. A. Brusnitsyn, deputy chairman of the State Duma 
Committee for Organization of the Work of the State Duma, gave a 
briefing to the deputies on problems of supporting deputy 
activity. 
<H8>  16 March </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a meeting of the Parliamentary Group of the Russian 
Federation. 
  3. On the Message from the President of the Russian 
Federation to the Federal Assembly "On Strengthening the Russian 
State." 
  4. On the tentative program of legislative work by 
committees 
of the State Duma of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly for 
the current session (decision making). 
  5. On progress in implementing the State Duma decree "On the 
Legal Basis of Elections to Bodies of State Government of 
Subjects of the Russian Federation and to Bodies of Local 
Self-Government and on Ensuring Citizens' Voting Rights." 
  6. On parliamentary hearings on documents of the program 
"Partnership for Peace" adopted at the 11 January 1994 session 
of the North Atlantic Council. 
  7. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "On Progress in 
Fulfilling the START-1 Treaty and on Problems of its 
Realization." 
  8. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "Analysis of the 
Status and Problems of the State Border of the Russian 
Federation." 
  9. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "Results of 
Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises in the Russian 
Federation in 1992-1993, and Examination of the State Program 
for Privatization of State and Municipal Enterprises in the 
Russian Federation Introduced by Edict No 2284, 24 December 
1993, of the President of the Russian Federation." 
  10. On parliamentary hearings on problems of structural, 
scientific and technical policy. 
  11. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "On Participation 
of the Russian Federation in International Agreements to 
Eliminate Chemical Weapons." 
  12. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "On the Concept 
of 
the Russian Federation's Transition to a Model of Stable 
Development." 
  13. On a draft federal law on the procedure for providing 
military and civilian personnel of the Russian Federation for 
participation in operations to support or restore international 
peace and security and in other forms of peacekeeping activity. 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on issues 
examined at the 11, 14 and 15 March Meetings of the Council of 
the State Duma. 
<H5>  State Duma First Deputy Chairman M. A. Mityukov Presiding </H5>
  State Duma Deputy Chairman V. A. Kovalev described what had 
been done by the working group regarding the Message from the 
President of the Russian Federation to the Federal Assembly "On 
Strengthening the Russian State" and on the tentative program of 
legislative work. Two draft decrees were brought up for 
examination by the deputies: One was presented by the Council of 
the State Duma, and the second was presented by a number of 
factions. Neither draft was adopted as the basis. Voting 
results: for the draft of the State Duma Council, ayes--161 
(36.3 percent), nays--37 (8.3 percent), abstentions--61 (13.7 
percent); for the draft submitted by the factions, ayes--172 
(38.7 percent), nays--83 (18.7 percent), abstentions--29 (6.5 
percent). Nor was the draft decree on the tentative program of 
legislative work by committees of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly for the current session adopted. 
Voting results: ayes--212 (47.7 percent), nays--27 (6.1 
percent), abstentions--30 (6.8 percent). The drafts were 
returned to the working commission for revision. 
  I. M. Bratishchev, deputy of the State Duma Committee for 
Federation Affairs and Regional Policy, spoke on progress in 
implementing the State Duma decree "On the Legal Basis of 
Elections to Bodies of State Government of Subjects of the 
Russian Federation and to Bodies of Local Self-Government and on 
Ensuring Citizens' Voting Rights." A briefing was given by I. V. 
Golushko, secretary of the Central Election Commission, S. N. 
Samoylov, deputy chief of the Administration for Work With 
Territories and Representatives of the President of the Russian 
Federation under the Administration of the Russian Federation, 
and A. M. Khvalin, administrative chief of the General 
Procuracy. The briefing was taken under advisement. 
  S. N. Yushenkov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Defense, spoke on the issue of parliamentary hearings on 
documents of the program "Partnership for Peace" adopted at the 
11 January 1994 session of the North Atlantic Council. A 
decision to prepare for and conduct these hearing was adopted by 
protocol. 
  A. A. Piskunov, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Defense, made a motion to conduct parliamentary hearings on 
progress in fulfilling the START-I Treaty and on problems of its 
realization. A decision to prepare for and conduct these 
hearings was adopted by protocol. 
  M. N. Sidorov, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Geopolitical Issues, spoke on parliamentary hearings on 
analysis of the status and problems of the state border of the 
Russian Federation. A decision to prepare for and conduct these 
hearings was adopted by protocol. 
  S. V. Burkov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Property, Privatization and Economic Activity, made a motion to 
conduct parliamentary hearings on the results of privatizing 
state and municipal enterprises in the Russian Federation in 
1992-1993 and examining the state program for privatization of 
state and municipal enterprises in the Russian Federation, 
introduced by Decree No 2284, 24 December 1993 of the President 
of the Russian Federation. A decision to prepare for and conduct 
these hearings was adopted by protocol. 
  S. Yu. Glazyev, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Economic Policy, made a motion to conduct parliamentary hearings 
on structural, scientific and technical policy. A decision to 
prepare and conduct such hearings was adopted by protocol. 
  V. A. Nikonov, chairman of the Subcommittee for 
International 
Aspects of Security and Disarmament Problems of the State Duma 
Committee for International Affairs, spoke on parliamentary 
hearings regarding the Russian Federation's participation in 
international agreements to eliminate chemical weapons. A 
decision to prepare and conduct these hearings was adopted by 
protocol. 
  M. Ya. Lemeshev, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Ecology, spoke on parliamentary hearings on the concept of the 
Russian Federation's transition to a model of stable 
development. A decision to prepare and conduct these hearings 
was adopted by protocol. 
  It was decided during the recess to convene for a 
constituent 
meeting devoted to establishing the Parliamentary Group of the 
Russian Federation. 
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  A. A. Piskunov, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Defense, gave a report on a draft federal law on providing 
military and civilian personnel of the Russian Federation for 
participation in operations to maintain or restore international 
peace and security, and in other forms of peacekeeping activity. 
Participants of the discussion of the draft law included Deputy 
Defense Minister G. G. Kondratyev, Russian Federation Deputy 
Minister for Matters of Civil Defense, Emergency Situations and 
Dealing With the Consequences of Natural Disasters V. A. 
Vladimirov, State Duma Defense Committee deputy chairman Ye. Yu. 
Loginov, Russian Federation Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
International Organizations Department director A. A. Gorelik, 
State Duma Committee for Affairs of the Commonwealth of 
Independent States and Ties with Compatriots chairman K. F. 
Zatulin, "Women of Russia" Political Movement faction leader Ye. 
F. Lakhova, and deputies G. G. Lukava (from the Russian 
Liberal-Democratic Party faction), Ye. A. Ambartsumov (from the 
"Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin" Bloc faction), V. A. Nikonov (from 
the Party of Russian Unity and Accord faction) and G. Yu. 
Karelin (from the Russian Democratic Party faction). The draft 
law was adopted in its first reading. Voting results: ayes--229 
(51.6 percent), nays--12 (2.7 percent), abstentions--36 (8.1 
percent). 
  Following final revision, the decree "On the Tentative 
Program of Legislative Work of Committees of the State Duma of 
the Russian Federation Federal Assembly for the Current Session" 
was adopted. Voting results: ayes--250 (56.3 percent), nays--5 
(1.1 percent), abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  Deputy T. V. Zlotnikova placed an inquiry regarding import 
of toxic wastes into Russia. 
<H8>  18 March </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On the draft Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal 
Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation (second 
reading). 
  3. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the crisis in 
Russian science. 
  4. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "Demographic 
Policy 
and Family Problems in the Russian Federation." 
  5. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "On Problems and 
Prospects of Russian-Belarusian Cooperation." 
  6. On parliamentary hearings on the issue "On Progress in 
Fulfilling the Law of the Russian Federation 'On State 
Guarantees and Compensations for Persons Working and Residing in 
Regions of the Far North and Locales Equivalent to Them'." 
  7. Statements by factions, deputy groups and committees, and 
individual statements by deputies. 
  On a motion by Deputy Yu. N. Yakovlev a decision was made to 
hear a briefing by representatives of the President of the 
Russian Federation on events associated with institution of 
criminal proceedings against certain officials of the 
Vladivostok city administration. Voting results: ayes--283 (68.7 
percent), nays--10 (2.3 percent), abstentions--11 (2.5 percent). 
A motion by State Duma Mandate Commission chairman V. I. 
Sevastyanov to include issues concerned with changing the 
composition of the Mandate Commission on the agenda was also 
passed. Voting results: ayes--286 (64.4 percent), nays--5 (1.1 
percent), abstentions--6 (1.4 percent). 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing to the 
deputies on issues examined at the 17 March meeting of the 
Council of the State Duma. 
  The deputies began an item-by-item discussion of the draft 
Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly and 
Parliament of the Russian Federation. The draft Regulations were 
presented in their second reading by State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma deputy chairman I. A. 
Shichanin. Articles 1-19, 21-23, 27-28 were adopted in their 
entirety as a result of the discussion. Further examination of 
the draft Regulations was postponed, since inconsistencies 
between the texts prepared for the first and second readings 
were revealed at a meeting held by the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma during the recess. 
The draft was transferred to the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma for revision. 
  The crisis in Russian science was discussed next. V. S. 
Shevelukha, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Education, Culture and Science, gave a report. Participants of 
the discussion of the issue included Academician V. N. 
Kudryavtsev, vice president of the Russian Academy of Sciences; 
V. V. Zhirinovskiy, leader of the Russian Liberal-Democratic 
Party faction; deputies G. P. Chubkova (from the "Women of 
Russia" Political Movement faction), A. S. Dzasokhov (from the 
"New Regional Policy" deputy group), V. A. Nikonov (from the 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord faction), O. G. Dmitriyeva 
(from the "Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin" Bloc faction), N. N. 
Vorontsev (from the "Russia's Choice" Bloc faction), R. G. 
Gostev (from the Russian Communist Party faction), and State 
Duma Committee for Education, Culture and Science chairman L. P. 
Rozhkova. A decision was made by protocol to forward, to the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Education, Deputy V. A. Nikonov's 
request for the Russian Federation Ministry of Education to 
examine the question of studying the history of the Russian 
state in the national education system. A decree of the State 
Duma on the crisis in Russian science was adopted as the basis 
and forwarded to the State Duma Committee for Education, Culture 
and Science for revision. Voting results: ayes--271 (61.0 
percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), abstentions--2 (0.5 percent). 
  The issue of changing the composition of the State Duma 
Mandate Commission was discussed by its chairman, V. I. 
Sevastyanov. The corresponding decree was adopted. Voting 
results: ayes--259 (58.3 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
  State Legal Advisor 1st Class V. I. Kravtsev, deputy General 
Procurator of the Russian Federation, gave a briefing on the 
events in Vladivostok. 
<H8>  23 March </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the procedure for 
examining the draft federal law on the federal budget for 1994 
and its adoption by the State Duma. 
  3. On a draft federal law on financing expenditures from the 
federal budget in the second quarter of 1994. 
  4. On draft Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal 
Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation (continuation 
of the discussion in the second reading). 
  On a motion by Deputy K. A. Tsiku the issue of financing a 
federal program to provide equipment to disabled persons was 
included on the agenda. Voting results: ayes--254 (57.2 
percent), nays--16 (3.6 percent), abstentions--21 (4.7 percent). 
The State Duma Committee for Labor and Social Support was 
instructed to prepare in detail the issue of including 
expenditures in the budget to finance a specific-purpose program 
to develop, produce and supply rehabilitation equipment to 
disabled persons. 
  In consideration of a motion by Deputy Yu. A. Rybakov, the 
State Duma Committee for Federation Affairs and Regional Policy 
was instructed to prepare for the issue of the progress of 
elections to bodies of local self-government in the city of St. 
Petersburg. 
  On a motion by Deputy V. I. Ilyukhin the State Duma 
Committee 
for Defense and the State Duma Committee for International 
Affairs were instructed to prepare for a Friday briefing on 
Order No 53-pr allegedly published by the President of the 
Russian Federation regarding gradual transfer of the Kuril 
Islands to Japan. 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing on the work 
of the Council of the State Duma on 21 and 22 March. 
  O. G. Dmitriyeva, chairman of the Subcommittee on the Budget 
System and Nonbudgetary Funds of the State Duma Committee for 
Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances, gave a report and answered 
questions from deputies regarding a draft decree of the State 
Duma on the procedure for examining the draft federal law on the 
federal budget for 1994 and its adoption by the State Duma. 
Voting results: ayes--310 (69.8 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--4 (0.9 percent). 
  The deputies then began examination, postponed earlier, of 
the draft Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly 
and Parliament of the Russian Federation. The document and 
corrections to it were presented by I. A. Shichanin, deputy 
chairman of the State Duma Committee for Organization of the 
Work of the State Duma. Articles 29-31, 37-41, 43, 45, 49, 
51-53, 55, 56, 60, 76, 77, 81, 88, 90 and 104 were adopted in 
their entirety. 
  Following a recess acting Russian Federation Finance 
Minister 
S. K. Dubinin gave a report and answered questions from deputies 
regarding the draft federal law on financing expenditures from 
the federal budget in the second quarter of 1994. A report was 
given by M. M. Zadornov, chairman of the State Duma Committee 
for Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances. The law was adopted in 
its entirety. Voting results: ayes--228 (5.14 percent), nays--21 
(4.7 percent), abstentions--19 (4.3 percent). 
  Then the deputies once again resumed their discussion of the 
draft Regulations of the State Duma. Articles 118, 119, 122, 
147, 157, 158, 160, 177-182, 184, 192, 195 and 198 were adopted 
in their entirety. Further discussion was postponed to the next 
meeting of the State Duma. 
<H8>  25 March </H8>
<H5>  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin Presiding </H5>
  The following issues were brought up for examination: 
  1. A briefing on issues examined by the Council of the State 
Duma. 
  2. On a draft decree of the State Duma on political 
settlement of relations of federal bodies of state government 
with government bodies of the Chechen Republic. 
  3. On a draft federal law on the procedure for publishing 
and 
enacting federal constitutional laws, federal laws, and acts of 
the chambers of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly (third 
reading). 
  4. On a draft decree of the State Duma on some problems of 
applying decrees of the State Duma of the Russian Federation 
Federal Assembly "On Announcing Amnesty in Connection with 
Adoption of the Constitution of the Russian Federation" and "On 
Announcing Political and Economic Amnesty." 
  5. On a draft decree of the State Duma on the crisis in 
Russian science (adoption of a decision). 
  6. On a draft federal law on supplementing the Law of the 
Russian Federation "On Employment in the Russian Federation" 
(supplementing Item 1, Article 22). 
  7. On a draft federal law on amending and supplementing the 
Law of the Russian Federation "On Employment in the Russian 
Federation" (a legislative initiative of the President of the 
Russian Federation). 
  8. On the draft Regulations of the State Duma of the Federal 
Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation (continuation 
of the discussion in the second reading). 
  9. On a draft decree of the State Duma on creating a 
television and radio service of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly. 
  10. A briefing on the results of parliamentary hearings on 
the program "Partnership for Peace." 
  11. Statements by factions, deputy groups and committees, 
and 
individual statements by deputies. 
  Deputy V. A. Marychev made a motion to include the issue of 
the fate of the Baykonur Cosmodrome on the agenda. A decision 
was made to record the proceedings and instruct the Chairman of 
the State Duma to brief deputies on this following the return of 
the President of the Russian Federation from leave. 
  Deputy A. V. Mitrofanov made a motion to return to the issue 
of unifying the monetary systems of Russia and Belarus. The 
decision was adopted. Voting results: ayes--241 (54.3 percent), 
nays--30 (6.8 percent), abstentions--17 (3.8 percent). The State 
Duma Committee for Budget, Taxes, Banks and Finances was 
instructed to prepare the issue for examination. 
  Deputy Yu. S. Gusman expressed concern that the threat of 
fascism was hanging over Russia, and proposed establishing a 
commission consisting of faction and committee representatives 
in order to study this issue and prepare a parliamentary hearing 
on the topic "The Threat of Fascism in Russia." He was supported 
by Deputy A. N. Mikhaylov. The decision was adopted. Roll-call 
voting results: ayes--300 (67.6 percent), nays--4 (0.9 percent), 
abstentions--13 (2.9 percent). 
  Deputy N. A. Bikalova made a request to include the issue of 
the woeful state of impoverished strata of the population on the 
agenda. The decision was adopted. Roll-call voting results: 
ayes--304 (68.5 percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), abstentions--5 
(1.1 percent). 
  On a motion by Deputy V. P. Mironov a record was made of 
instructions to the State Duma Committee for Security to prepare 
for examining the issue of creating a deputy commission to check 
the facts behind torture of prisoners in interrogation rooms and 
prisons. 
  Motions from Deputy V. V. Zelenkin--to hear a briefing on 
the 
results of a trip by a group of deputies from the State Duma to 
the city of Vladivostok (voting results: ayes--290 (65.3 
percent), nays--9 (2.0 percent), abstentions--5 (1.1 percent), 
and from Deputy Ye. S. Krasnitskiy--to obtain information from 
representatives of the General Procurator on the situation in 
the State Russian Television and Radio Company "St. 
Petersburg--Channel 5" (voting results: ayes--223 (50.2 
percent), nays--42 (9.5 percent), abstentions--24 (5.4 
percent)--were adopted. 
  State Duma Chairman I. P. Rybkin gave a briefing to the 
deputies on issues examined at the 24 March meeting of the 
Council of the State Duma. 
  S. M. Shakhray, Russian Federation minister for nationality 
affairs and regional policy and the leader of the Party of 
Russian Unity and Accord faction, spoke on political settlement 
of relations of federal bodies of state government with 
government bodies of the Chechen Republic. The corresponding 
decree was adopted. Voting results: ayes--279 (62.8 percent), 
nays--17 (3.8 percent), abstentions--5 (1.1 percent). 
  V. B. Isakov, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Legislation and Judicial and Legal reform, gave a report on a 
draft federal law on the procedure for enacting federal 
constitutional laws, federal laws, and acts of the chambers of 
the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation. The federal law 
was adopted in its entirety following the second reading, 
together with amendments by the President of the Russian 
Federation. Voting results: ayes--303 (68.2 percent), nays--0, 
abstentions--0. The decree of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly "On Departments of the Russian 
Federation Federal Assembly" was adopted in its entirety. Voting 
results: ayes--296 (66.7 percent), nays--0, abstentions--0. 
  State Duma Deputy Chairman A. V. Kovalev gave a report on 
some problems regarding application of decrees of the State Duma 
of the Russian Federation Federal Assembly "On Announcing 
Amnesty in Connection with Adoption of the Constitution of the 
Russian Federation" and "On Announcing Political and Economic 
Amnesty." The corresponding decree was adopted. Voting results: 
ayes--266 (59.9 percent), nays--9 (2.0 percent), abstentions--4 
(0.9 percent). 
  V. S. Shevelukha, deputy chairman of the State Duma 
Committee 
for Education, Culture and Science, spoke on the crisis in 
Russian science. Following amendments, the decree was adopted. 
Voting results: ayes--271 (61.0 percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), 
abstentions--1 (0.2 percent). 
  The deputies then went on to discuss a draft federal law on 
amending and supplementing the Russian Federation Law "On 
Employment in the Russian Federation." Two drafts were 
submitted--one by the State Duma Committee for Labor and Social 
Support, and one from the Government of the Russian Federation. 
Reports were given by State Duma Committee for Labor and Social 
Problems chairman S. V. Kalashnikov and by F. T. Prokopov, 
official representative of the Government of the Russian 
Federation and director of the Russian Federal Employment 
Service. The draft of the law submitted by the Government was 
adopted in the first reading. Voting results: ayes--283 (63.7 
percent), nays--1 (0.2 percent), abstentions--0. 
  Then discussion of the draft Regulations of the State Duma 
of 
the Federal Assembly and Parliament of the Russian Federation, 
interrupted in the previous meeting, was resumed. I. A. 
Shichanin, deputy chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Organization of the Work of the State Duma, acquainted the 
deputies with the document. The regulations were adopted in 
their entirety. Roll-call voting results: ayes--224, nays--35 
(7.9 percent), abstentions--18 (4.1 percent). 
  The deputies heard a briefing by S. N. Yushenkov, chairman 
of 
the State Duma Committee for Defense, on the results of 
parliamentary hearings on the program "Partnership for Peace." 
Questions from deputies were answered by Russian Federation 
First Deputy Defense Ministry A. A. Kokoshin, Russian Federation 
Deputy Foreign Affairs Minister V. I. Churkin, and Russian 
Federation Security Council Deputy Secretary V. L. Manilov. 
  General Procurator S. G. Kekhlerov gave a briefing on the 
situation that had evolved in the State Russian Television and 
Radio Company "St. Petersburg--Channel 5," and particularly on 
the fate of B. A. Kurkova. 
  Deputy V. V. Zelenkin gave a briefing on the results of a 
trip by a group of deputies to the city of Vladivostok. 
  G. I. Klimantova, chairman of the State Duma Committee for 
Women's, Family and Youth Affairs, acquainted the deputies with 
the draft of a decree on supporting socially vulnerable strata 
of the population. The decree was adopted in its entirety. 
Voting results: ayes--234 (52.7 percent), nays--2 (0.5 percent), 
abstentions--1 (0.2 percent). 

