CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhan Wu (6124 2976) of the State Commission for </F>
Restructuring the Economic System: "Under the Socialist Market 
Economic System, All-Out Efforts Should Be Made To Solve the 
Problem of Difficulty in Buying and Selling' Farm Products"] 
  [Text] I. Understanding the Nature of the Big Waves 
of "Difficulty in Buying and Selling" Farm Products 
  The past decade has witnessed two rounds of "difficulty in 
selling" farm products: one in 1982-1984; the other in 
1989-1992. From 1985 to 1988, there also appeared a wave of 
"difficulty in buying" farm products accompanied by "big battles 
for commodities." By analyzing the "difficulty in selling and 
buying" farm products, we have arrived at the following five 
conclusions about the nature of the issue: 
  1) "Difficulty in selling" and "difficulty in buying" 
are both extensive problems As far as the variety of farm 
products is concerned, 13 products were involved in the first 
round of "difficulty in selling," 17 in the "difficulty in 
buying" and the "big battles for commodities," and 10 in the 
second round of "difficulty in selling." In terms of the 
purchase and sales systems, some of the products involved were 
originally under the state-monopolized purchase system but later 
switched to the contracted purchase system. These were staple 
farm products such as grain, cotton, and oilseeds. Others were 
essential farm products originally belonging to the quota 
purchase category and later either liberalized from quota 
purchase or remaining in that category. Examples were silkworm 
cocoons, wool, hogs, tea, and ramie. Still others, which took up 
the largest share, were items whose prices and transactions had 
long been decontrolled. They included eggs, fish, kelp, apples, 
haws, citrus fruits, sugar canes, chestnuts, rabbit hair, wood 
rosin, dried pepper, dairy products, garlic, and other 
perishable, native, and special indigenous products. 
  Why was it "difficult to sell" those farm products that had 
already been decontrolled? The reasons are diverse. If a farm 
product was "difficult to sell" because of monopoly by the 
state's supply and marketing cooperatives or the old 
price-control system, it could sell well once monopoly was 
removed and price control was lifted. However, if, after this 
was done, new negative factors appeared, such as declined 
product quality, difficulty in transportation, or poor 
management in marketing the product, then "difficulty in 
selling" would come up again. 
  Why was it "difficult to buy" already-decontrolled farm 
products, resulting in "big battles for commodities"? There were 
also a number of reasons. Examples were failure to gear up 
management in the wake of the decontrol, commodity circulation 
being out of order, and artificially jacked-up prices triggering 
buying sprees. All these could lead to a "big battle for 
commodities." 
  2. The two rounds of "difficulty in selling" farm 
products had common features as well as specific 
characteristics Their common features were: A) The 
commodities involved were essentially the same. Both involved 
the following three broad categories: Farm products originally 
under the state-monopolized purchase system and later switched 
to the contracted purchase system; essential farm products 
originally belonging to the quota purchase category and later 
either liberalized from quota purchase or remaining in that 
category; and perishable, native, and special indigenous 
products that had been completely decontrolled. B) Both followed 
the same course of development, i.e. from farmers' "difficulty 
in selling" to "difficulty in storing" and "difficulty in 
transporting and selling" experienced by the state's supply and 
marketing cooperatives. C) Their basic reasons were the same. 
For example, both rounds of "difficulty in selling grain" 
stemmed, in essence, from an imbalance between supply and 
demand, which was either temporary or local in nature or due to 
improper product mix. The imbalance was caused by a series of 
complicated factors: our people's low consumption level at the 
present stage, the incompatibility between the variety of grain 
produced and the consumers' requirements, inadequate 
infrastructure with respect to commodity circulation, 
processing, storage, transportation, and information, as well as 
unsound macro-regulatory and control mechanisms. The problem was 
not an absolute surplus of grain. As for other farm products, 
the basic causes for two rounds of "difficulty in selling" were 
more or less the same as the "difficulty in selling" grain. 
  With respect to the characteristics of the two rounds of 
"difficulty in selling" farm products, let us still take grain 
as an example. The two rounds of "difficulty in selling grain" 
showed the following characteristics: A) The scope increased. 
The first round of "difficulty in selling grain" involved 
essentially rice in the main rice-producing provinces in the 
south and corn in Jilin Province. The second round of 
"difficulty in selling grain" spread to Henan and other main 
wheat-producing provinces and even to some grain production 
bases (such as Fujian's Jianyang and Jianou counties). B) The 
total stockpile increased. For instance, during the first round 
of "difficulty in selling grain," Hunan, a main rice-producing 
province, had 1.5 billion kilograms of rice in stock. During the 
second round, the stockpile was four times as large as this 
amount. C) State grain departments' difficulties also increased. 
During the first round of farmers' "difficulty in selling 
grain," the state grain departments' macro-financial situation 
was not so tight; therefore, they issued no IOU's to farmers. 
During the second round, their financial situation became 
relatively strained, and they had to issue many IOU's, resulting 
in a total debt of some 30 billion yuan. If you buy more, you 
will do more business but you will also lose more money--this 
was one of the major subjective factors that hindered the grain 
departments from attempting to ease farmers' "difficulty in 
selling grain." 
  3. For many farm products, "difficulty in selling" 
and "difficulty in buying" transformed into each other and 
succeeded each other. In the case of grain, oilseeds, 
cotton, hogs and other staple farm products, "difficulty in 
selling" was closely followed by "difficulty in buying," which 
then transformed into a new round of "difficulty in selling." 
"Difficulty in selling" and "difficulty in buying" also recurred 
frequently one after the other for silkworm cocoons, wool, 
rabbit hair, ramie, jute, and ambary, forming a big vicious 
cycle. 
  For grain, cotton, oilseeds, and other staple farm 
products, the chief reasons that "difficulty in selling" 
transformed into "difficulty in buying" were as follows: a) 
There was a lack of clear understanding of the true nature of 
"difficulty in selling." The temporary or local imbalance 
between supply and demand or the imbalance with respect to 
product mix was mistaken for an absolute surplus of supply. 
Accordingly, protective and preferential treatments for 
agriculture were discontinued. This dampened the farmers' 
enthusiasm about increasing production and led to the four 
years' zero-growth in the output of grain, cotton, and oilseeds. 
b) Macro-regulation and control were not effective. c) During 
the period of "difficulty in selling" those farm products that 
were industrial raw materials, such as cotton, wool, and 
silkworm cocoons, factory production capacities were 
unreasonably expanded. This resulted in the subsequent problem 
that the supply of these farm products could not meet the 
factories' demands. d) Some farm products were affected by 
fluctuations in the international market. 
  The transformation of "difficulty in buying" these 
products into "difficulty in selling" them was attributable 
mainly to the following factors: (1) Attention was devoted 
merely to agricultural production. No corresponding measures 
were taken to gear up the circulation of goods, processing of 
produce, and infrastructure construction. This did not meet the 
needs after a new bumper harvest. (2) Due to eagerness to solve 
the "difficulty in buying," some measures taken were aimed at 
tackling current and local problems rather than long-term and 
overall issues, sowing seeds for "difficulty in selling." (3) 
During the period of "difficulty in buying" and the "big battles 
for commodities," the problem of selling fake and shoddy 
products and passing off low-grade goods as high-grade goods 
became severe. This greatly affected the overall product 
quality, providing an optimum condition for a new round of 
"difficulty in selling." 
  (4) Deep-rooted causes for the recurrence of 
"difficulty in selling and buying" farm products As far as 
the total quantity is concerned, at the time of "difficulty in 
selling" farm products, supply was not necessarily excessive. 
Similarly, when it was "difficult to buy" farm products and when 
the "big battles for commodities" occurred, supply was not 
necessarily insufficient. Instead, there were deep-rooted causes 
for the occurrence of serious "difficulty in selling," 
"difficulty in buying," and the "big battles for commodities." 
  1. Various mechanisms existed that amplified fluctuations: 
There were two mechanisms amplifying fluctuations in production, 
one caused by farmers, the other by local governments. As 
farmers were engaged in separate productive activities and 
lacked timely information on supply and demand, they generally 
chose this year's most profitable crop as the main crop they 
planned to grow next year. This was the case for most farmers, 
though plans made in this way were often outdated. Since China 
has 200 million farming households, a slight change in each 
one's plan would result in a sizable increase or decrease in the 
total. So a craze in growing or not growing a certain crop would 
have a great impact on the up and down of the output of that 
crop. County governments also tended to act in such a way. 
Sometimes, they arbitrarily called on farmers to grow a certain 
crop or even forced farmers to fulfill certain cropping quotas. 
Such actions helped amplify the ups and downs in production. 
  With regard to the marketing of farm products, there were 
three mechanisms adding to fluctuations, caused by farmers, 
enterprises, and local governments respectively. When the 
harvest was good and farm products were in abundant supply, 
farmers were afraid of a decline in prices. They vied to keep 
less harvest in their hands and sell more. Conversely, when the 
harvest was poor, they expected a rise in prices and vied to 
keep more and sell less. When the 200 million farm households 
were increasing or slashing the quantity of a product they put 
on the market, the impact on market fluctuations was 
considerable. When a decline in prices was expected, the state's 
supply and marketing cooperatives often took in less, refused to 
buy, or even purchase at purposely reduced prices. Sometimes, 
they even vied to dump their own stocks on the market. All these 
aggravated the farmers' "difficulty in selling" their products 
and caused the prices to drop further. When the market was good, 
they offered higher prices in order to buy more, thus triggering 
a "big battle for commodities." Moreover, some non-agricultural 
departments as well as enterprises and institutions that had 
nothing to do with agriculture and even self-employed 
businessmen remained still when farmers were experiencing 
"difficulty in selling" farm products, but when it was 
"difficult to buy" such products on the market, they rushed to 
purchase by offering high prices. Another problem was that some 
local governments' actions were aimed at short-term targets and 
local interests only. For instance, when the harvest was good, 
many grain-producing provinces wanted to increase the amount 
transferred to other provinces, while the other provinces wanted 
to take in less or postpone such in-bound transfer. When the 
harvest was poor, many grain-producing provinces wanted to 
reduce the amount transferred to other provinces. They even put 
up blockade to guard against the outflow of their grain. In many 
grain-selling provinces [provinces to which grain-producing 
provinces used to sell their grain], purchasing agents were 
overactive. They drove up the prices and started a buying spree. 
Some local governments even used administrative measures to 
close the free grain market and forced farmers to sell grain as 
they directed, thereby artificially creating a tense atmosphere 
and making farmers all the more reluctant to sell their harvest. 
  2. Conflicts existed between the interests of producing 
and selling regions [regions producing farm products and regions 
to which farm products were sold]: One of the chief reasons for 
the above-mentioned activity carried out by local governments 
was that conflicts existed between the interests of producing 
and selling regions and nothing had been done to solve such 
conflicts either by macro adjustment or through coordinated 
efforts of the regions concerned. On the one hand, under the 
responsibility systems for finances, foreign trade, and grain 
and oilseed production, all staple farm products contained the 
producing region's investment plus the local government's 
subsidies. To producing regions, the outflow of these products 
to selling regions without an appropriate compensation would 
mean "an outflow of interests"; to selling regions, this would 
mean an extra profit. This forced some producing regions to 
block the outflow of their harvest or to increase the prices of 
their farm products as a way to protect their own interests. On 
the other hand, the state's preferential-treatment polices 
created disparities between different localities. For instance, 
after the power of doing foreign trade business had been 
delegated to the local level, the system of "eating from the big 
common pot" with regard to financial subsidies created a 
situation where whoever had a greater export volume received a 
greater amount of subsidy from the central government. As a 
result, the big commodity battles directly related to exports 
became more and more acute. Examples were the "big battle for 
rabbit hair," "big battle for ramie," "big battle for silkworm 
cocoons," and "big battle for prawns." In 1988, following the 
implementation of the financial responsibility system for 
foreign trade, the government set a fixed amount of the basic 
subsidy for all localities. But due to the varying amounts of 
foreign exchange retention and the price-differential subsidy 
from place to place plus the serious unreasonableness of foreign 
exchange rates, the various "big battles" still existed. 
  3. Price adjustment was improper: "Difficulty in selling 
and buying" farm products, big dips and peaks in production, and 
sharp rise and fall in prices are closely related and mutually 
affecting. Price adjustment plays a dynamic role in this regard 
because it can regulate supply and demand as well as affect 
production. The improper work on price adjustments we did in the 
past produced the following effects on the "difficulty in 
buying" farm products and on the "big battles for commodities": 
a) Prices were decontrolled, but no effort was made to 
strengthen management. As a result, commodity circulation was in 
a disorderly state, and prices were pushed up in various ways, 
bringing about the "big battles for commodities." b) Prices in 
adjacent areas differed immensely and nothing was done to 
equalize them. This resulted in an abnormal flow of farm 
products between adjacent areas, which also contributed to the 
breakout of the "big battles for commodities." c) While all 
retail prices were going up and the government's purchase prices 
for farm products remained comparatively low, the government 
further reduced the purchase prices for certain staple farm 
products. This caused production to decline and, accordingly, 
created the "difficulty in buying" these products. Our previous 
price adjustments also had numerous effects on farmers' 
"difficulty in selling" their farm products. The most striking 
aspect of our improper price adjustments was failure to maintain 
a proper price gap between products of different quality and 
between products sold in different seasons. In southern 
provinces, "difficulty in selling grain" was actually difficulty 
in selling early long-grained rice. As for late-ripening 
non-glutinous rice and other species of fine-quality rice, 
supply often fell short of demand. One of the chief reasons for 
such a situation was our failure to maintain a proper price gap 
between rice of different qualities. This encouraged farmers to 
grow more early long-grain rice and less fine-quality rice. 
Another problem was that all farmers rushed to sell their rice 
right after the harvest, thus adding to the "difficulty in 
selling." And one of the main reasons for this problem was the 
lack of price differential for different seasons. So farmers 
were not enthusiastic about keeping their harvest to be sold at 
a later date. 
  5. The big waves of "difficulty in buying and 
selling" farm products differed from the normal, inevitable 
market fluctuations that appeared in the planned economy, and 
were more harmful than the latter Their conspicuous 
differences were: a) Quantitative difference. In general, normal 
fluctuations on the farm products market are small ups and downs 
caused by the situation of supply versus demand or by price 
differences due to seasonal reasons or other temporary or local 
factors. In contrast, the big waves of "difficulty in buying and 
selling" and the "big battles for commodities" represented big 
dips and peaks in supply and demand, sharp rise and fall in 
prices, and immense increase and decrease in production. Their 
magnitude of changes could be from several times to more than a 
dozen times. b) Qualitative difference. Normal fluctuations on 
the farm products market follow the law of supply and demand and 
the law of value and serve to regulate commodity circulation and 
production. So they are basically benign. The big waves of 
"difficulty in buying and selling" and the "big battles for 
commodities" were caused by artificial amplification mechanisms. 
They reflected neither the situation of supply versus demand nor 
the change in value, and were destructive in nature. 
  Their destructive effects were as follows: (1) As far as 
farmers and agricultural production are concerned, first, they 
made farmers feel ill at ease and unaware of what to do. Second, 
they posed difficulties for reproduction and for farmers' 
livelihood. Farmers' interests were thus hurt to a serious 
extent. Even though high prices of farm products might give 
farmers some benefits, such gains were rather meager, and what 
is more, they were offset by the rise in prices for means of 
agricultural production. Third, the reasonable price ratio 
between different products were disrupted. This not only made it 
impossible to coordinate the production of various farm products 
and the development of different rural undertakings, but 
resulted in a situation of lopsided development and caused 
various rural undertakings to elbow out each other. (2) As far 
as industrial and commercial enterprises are concerned, first, 
processing enterprises could not have a guaranteed stable supply 
of raw materials. Especially during the period of "difficulty in 
buying" and the "big battles for commodities," shortage of raw 
materials, decline in product quality, and skyrocketing prices 
forced these enterprises to totally or partially suspend their 
production and lose money. Second, "difficulty in buying" and 
especially "difficulty in selling" farm products forced the 
state's supply and marketing cooperatives to carry large 
stockpiles of goods. Their losses and debts shot up quickly. (3) 
Negative effects on urban consumers: During the period of 
"difficulty in buying" and the "big battles for commodities," 
the sharp rise in the prices of grain, pork, poultry, eggs, and 
other nonstaple foods impacted on the normal daily life of 
residents and employees. During the period of "difficulty in 
selling," urban residents sometimes had to eat old rice or stale 
meat. (4) The effects on government finances and the national 
economy were: First, the sharp increase in losses and debts on 
the part of industrial and commercial enterprises reduced their 
profit and tax contributions to the state and made it necessary 
for the government to give them more subsidies. Second, negative 
effects appeared on the export of certain farm products in terms 
of quantity, quality, and credibility, thus reducing foreign 
exchange earnings. Moreover, some "big battles for commodities" 
started at home and later extended abroad, resulting in an 
"outflow of benefits." Third, "difficulty in selling" farm 
products tied up large amounts of funds in major producing 
regions, thus affecting the development of other undertakings. 
"Difficulty in buying" and "big battles for commodities," on the 
other hand, caused producing and selling regions to blockade 
each other and put up barriers between each other. This not only 
marred the growth of a unified market, but also hindered the 
exploitation of the advantages of both producing and selling 
regions, the rational layout of productive forces, and the 
all-round development of the national economy. 
  As someone puts it, every big wave of "difficulty in buying" 
and "difficulty in selling" farm products and every "big battle 
for commodities" was a disaster to production. It produced 
negative effects on producers, dealers, and consumers--all 
suffered from it. The only one who profited was the speculator. 
<H5>  II. Proposed Measures To Solve "Difficulty in Selling and </H5>
Buying" Farm Products 
  Although the "difficulty in selling and buying" farm 
products 
and the "big battles for commodities" were phenomena appearing 
in the course of commodity circulation, the reasons for their 
occurrence involved production, circulation, distribution, and 
macro-regulation and control. That is, they were caused by 
production being out of step with sales, impeded commodity 
circulation, inharmonious interests, and ineffective regulation 
and control. Accordingly, our strategy to correct these 
phenomena is to implement the policies of balanced supply and 
demand (or coordination between production and sales), smooth 
commodity circulation, harmonized interests, and effective 
regulation and control. In other words, we should make 
systematic, coordinated, and comprehensive efforts to solve the 
"difficulty in buying and selling" farm products. 
  1) Balanced supply and demand (coordination between 
production and sales) To eliminate before the production 
process the potential factors creating "difficulty in selling 
and buying," we should adopt four measures to coordinate 
production and sales and strike a balance between supply and 
demand: a) Macroeconomically, we should decide on an appropriate 
equilibrium point between the supply and demand of staple farm 
products for the short and medium periods as a basis for our 
national strategy. b) Microeconomically, we should let farmers 
base their production on sales and arrange sales before 
production. In recent years there are two effective ways for 
farmers to arrange sales before production: One, they can sign 
sales (purchase) contracts with the state's supply and marketing 
cooperatives or other enterprises. Two, they can join those 
organizations that integrate trade, industry, and agriculture or 
agriculture, industry, and commerce or production, supply and 
marketing. This way farmers and enterprises form an entity based 
on their common economic interests. Farmers not only have a 
guaranteed market for their products, but can also obtain 
various services before and during the course of production and 
increase the value of their products. The contractual 
arrangement for sales before production provides a radical 
solution to the problem that farmers are at a loss about what to 
do under the new market economic system. It can also effectively 
correct the problem caused by the two fluctuation-amplifying 
mechanisms in connection with production. c) Efforts should be 
made to adjust the farm production mix in terms of product 
variety and quality so as to meet the consumers' demands. To do 
this, an overall plan is necessary and that plan should be 
reflected in the two kinds of production and sales contracts as 
mentioned above. Adjustment of farm production should be based 
on the principle of overall stability and minor changes, and 
every precaution should be exercised against creating a new 
imbalance between total supply and demand. From this viewpoint, 
we suggest that the following basic requirements be met: 110 
million hectares of grain crops and 5.669 million hectares of 
cotton. With regard to grain crops, the appropriate ranges of 
adjustment of acreage sown to different grain crops are: about 1 
percent for rice, 2 percent for wheat, 3 percent for corn, and 4 
percent for soybean. d) We should develop processing of farm 
products to meet market demands. Through processing, for 
example, some primary products can be transformed into animal 
feed or prepared foods required by the market. 
  2. Smooth circulation of commodities There are 
five major factors pertinent to commodity circulation that led 
to the difficulty in selling and buying farm products, namely, 
rigid control and sales monopoly, undeveloped market, backward 
infrastructure, inter-regional barriers and blockade, and the 
three fluctuation-amplifying mechanisms. Because of this, we 
have proposed the following five measures: a) We should reform 
our commodity circulation system. First, in a step-by-step and 
planned way, we should completely liberalize the five or six 
kinds of farm products that have yet to be fully decontrolled. 
Second, we should institute a multifaceted, multiform, and 
multichanneled system for the circulation of commodity. In 
particular, farmers should be encouraged to get organized and do 
their own marketing. b) We should form and make perfect a 
developed market system centering on spot wholesale markets. In 
view of the weaknesses in the present market system, we have 
proposed seven measures in order to give full play to the role 
of markets. c) We should speed up infrastructure construction in 
the fields of warehousing, transportation, communications, and 
information. d) We should rationalize the relationship of 
interests between producing and selling regions and remove 
inter-regional blockade and barriers mainly by economic means. 
e) We should establish and make perfect a reserve system for 
farm products and an emergency fund against risks to eliminate 
the influence of the three fluctuation-amplifying mechanisms in 
connection with commodity circulation. 
  3. Harmonized interests Four coordinated measures 
have been proposed to correct the irrational relationship of 
interests between different regions: a) producing and selling 
regions should form economic alliances or engage in joint 
operations. One of the methods is that adjacent areas of 
different provinces may jointly build a border market, set up a 
border trade belt, or establish a common market. Another method 
is the formation of joint farm products companies by producing 
and selling regions. b) Adjacent provinces and regions should 
coordinate their policies, management, and prices for farm 
products and supervise each other in this respect. c) The state 
should adjust the relationship of interests between producing 
and selling regions. In 1992, for example, the state required 
cotton-selling regions to pay 25 yuan to cotton-producing 
regions for each ton of cotton supplied by the latter as a fee 
for supporting cotton production. That was a significant initial 
step taken by the central government to adjust the unbalanced 
interests between producing and selling regions. d) We should 
organize and popularize well-organized economic alliances that 
integrate production, supply, and marketing and cover trade, 
industry, and agriculture. Such alliances may involve different 
departments, regions, and ownership systems. 
  To protect farmers against losses in selling their products 
due to "difficulty in selling" or "the negative effect of the 
low grain price," three measures have been proposed: a) We 
should have a protective price for government procurement of 
staple farm products and a ceiling price for means of 
agricultural production. b) We should have more farmers join 
economic organizations based on their common interests, such as 
those integrating production, supply, and marketing or trade, 
industry, and agriculture. (3) We should popularize agriculture 
insurance under appropriate conditions. 
  4. Effective regulation and control We should 
form an effective macro-regulatory and control system mainly by 
the following measures: a) Special reserve systems for staple 
farm products like grain, oilseeds, and cotton should be set up 
and made perfect at the central and provincial levels. 
Government procurement of these products from farmers should be 
at the protective prices. Local governments may store some 
essential staple farm products as reserves if they are 
financially capable of doing so. b) Imports and exports of farm 
products should be regulated in line with domestic market 
demands. Since imports and exports are usually in large amounts, 
they have a significant effect on solving the shortage or 
stockpile of farm products. In this regard, what is most needed 
is our understanding and foresight about changes in the 
international market. For example, when signs appear on the 
domestic market showing it will be "difficult to buy grain," we 
should promptly import some grain to cover the shortage. When 
signs of "difficulty in selling grain" appear on the domestic 
market, we should export our overstocks as early as possible. It 
is imperative to truly correct the abnormal state of affairs -- 
known as "negative assistance" -- as experienced in the recent 
past. That is, large amounts of grain and oilseeds were imported 
when domestic products were overstocked, while large amount of 
these items were exported when "big battles" to buy them broke 
out at home. c) We should make arrangements for producing and 
selling regions to benefit and help each other. When we 
encourage producing and selling regions to consult, cooperate, 
and coordinate with each other on their own initiative, we do 
not mean that the state should be indifferent and take a 
laissez-faire attitude about them. Actually when the numerous 
"big battles for commodities" broke out, the state authorities 
concerned did issue repeated orders to stop the panic purchase 
of silkworm cocoons and certain other products. However, more 
important is for the state authorities to make systematic and 
in-depth investigations and studies of the relationship of 
interests between producing and selling regions, make the best 
use of the conditions available, and guide them to benefit and 
help each other. In addition, the state authorities should 
encourage and popularize the application of those methods that 
have proved effective through practice in promoting mutual 
benefit and assistance between producing and selling regions. 
This will bring the state's macro-guidance role into full play. 
d) Under the new circumstance of multichanneled competition, the 
state's supply and marketing cooperatives should play the role 
of the main channel. First, they should expand their business 
volumes and boost their buying, selling, and market-adjustment 
abilities. Second, they should successfully carry out the tasks 
assigned by the state in keeping appropriate reserves of farm 
products. 
  As far as easing the waves of "difficulty in selling and 
buying" farm products is concerned, coordination between 
production and sales is the fundamental task, smooth circulation 
of commodities plays the key role, harmonization of interests is 
the work at the core, and effective regulation and control may 
be considered as a leading job. We must do these four things at 
the same time in a systematic and well-coordinated way so as to 
make comprehensive efforts to solve the problem. As long as all 
concerned -- from the top down and in all localities -- have the 
same understanding, make concerted efforts with one mind, take 
serious and effective measures to guide and carry out this work, 
and continue to do so with perseverance, we believe that it is 
possible to cure the stubborn disease of "difficulty in selling 
and buying," which appeared from time to time during the past 
decade, causing serious harm to our agriculture and national 
economy. We also believe that our agriculture and rural economy 
are bound to embark on a course of steadier, faster, healthier, 
and more harmonious development. 

