Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Jing Jianming (0002 1017 6900)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 25 Feb (XINHUA) -- A spokesman for the 
China Securities Supervision and Administration Committee 
[CSSAC] today told the press that the CSSAC does not rule out 
the possibility of having a portion or a considerable portion of 
new shares to be issued this year instead carried forward to 
next year because of changes in the market. 
  The CSSAC spokesman said: The preliminary plan for the 
allotment of the 5.5 billion yuan worth of shares to be issued 
in 1994 has been determined by the CSSAC and the State Planning 
Commission after they held consultations. Based on the 
consideration of whether an enterprise which has transformed its 
operating mechanism meets the qualifications of a listed 
company, and based on the consideration of the capacity of and 
changes in the stock market, the CSSAC will bring the tempo of 
new shares' issue under the appropriate control and will choose 
different times to officially announce the plan for the 
allotment, to process the reexamination of the documents 
submitted by enterprises for issuing shares to the public, and 
to approve the issuing of shares to the public by enterprises, 
as well as their transactions at securities exchanges. The 
spokesman said that after a portion of new shares is carried 
forward to the next year to be issued, the remaining portion of 
shares allotted to all areas for issuance shall remain valid. 
  A person in charge of a relevant department of the CSSAC 
today also issued a statement on a plan by the Board of 
Directors of the Shanghai Dazhong Taxi Co., Ltd. [SDTCL] to 
change the shares that the company has issued and that are held 
by legal persons to B shares. He pointed out: Because the plan 
involves macroeconomic policies on the stock market such as the 
selling of state-owned property to investors outside Chinese 
territory, the combination of the A-share market with the 
B-share market, and the amendment of the law and regulations on 
the control of the A-share and B-share markets, it needs further 
study. The person in charge stressed: According to a relevant 
law, the state has a specific regulation governing the release 
of information by listed companies. However, the SDTCL Board of 
Directors released a piece of unauthorized information, which 
may mislead the public, before the state has decided on a 
definite macroeconomic policy on the B-share market, before the 
company has received its allotment for issuing B shares, and 
after the CSSAC has clearly expressed its opinion on temporarily 
not making an announcement of the information. The SDTCL's 
practice is wrong. He pointed out: At present, the CSSAC is 
working with the relevant departments of Shanghai and Shenzhen 
to carry out a survey and study of how to improve the B-share 
market. Measures for improvements will be proposed soon. 
  Meanwhile, the person in charge also expressed his opinion 
on 
a decision by the Board of Directors of Jiangsu's Kunshan 
Susanshan Industrial Co., Ltd. [KSICL] to allot share 
subscription certificates. He said: The KSICL Board of 
Directors recently decided on a plan to distribute the dividends 
for fiscal year 1993, including two shares to be allotted in 
1995 as dividends for every shareholder who owns 10 shares. He 
pointed out: Share subscription certificates are a kind of 
securities derived from shares owned. Their issue and 
transactions of them as a new kind of securities after a unified 
national stock market has taken its initial shape will require 
us to not only formulate appropriate laws, regulations, and 
operating rules, but also to draw up appropriate provisions for 
the accounting system. In this connection, further work need to 
be done. Meanwhile, the broad masses of investors must undergo 
a process of continuously deepening their understanding of 
various negotiable securities. Therefore, the current objective 
conditions for the issue of share-subscription certificates and 
their transactions on the market do not exist. The relevant 
department cannot approve such a resolution adopted by the KSICL 
Board of Directors. He stated his requirement that all the 
parties concerned comply with the "Interim Regulations on the 
Control of Shares Issues and Transactions." Before specific and 
relevant implementation measures are promulgated, listed 
companies should not make unauthorized plans on issuing and 
allotting securities derived from shares. Relevant department 
of governments in all areas should not handle such cases, 
either. If it is, indeed, necessary to implement such cases on 
a trial basis, the parties concerned should consult the relevant 
department of their local governments beforehand and, after 
that, should report the matter to the CSSAC for examination and 
approval. 

