BFN 

<F P=106> ["Qinghai Regulations for Inspection of and Management Over </F>
Import and Export Commodities -- Adopted by the Standing 
Committee of the Eighth Qinghai Provincial People's Congress on 
2 April 1994"] 
  [Text] Qinghai People's Congress Standing Committee 
Notice No. 8 
  "Qinghai Regulations for Inspection and Management of Import 
and Export Commodities," adopted by the Ninth Session of the 
Eighth Qinghai People's Congress Standing Committee on 2 April, 
are now promulgated. The regulations come into effect on 1 
August 1994. 
<H8>  2 April 1994 </H8>
<H5>  Chapter One Preamble </H5>
  Article 1 To guarantee the quality of Qinghai's import and 
export commodities and safeguard the legitimate rights and 
interests of the foreign trade parties, these regulations are 
formulated in light of the "PRC Law on Inspection of Import and 
Export Commodities," "Regulations for Implementing PRC Law on 
Inspection of Import and Export Commodities," and relevant state 
regulations and in accordance with Qinghai's reality. 
  Article 2 The PRC Qinghai Import and Export Commodity 
Inspection Bureau (hereinafter Qinghai Commodity Inspection 
Bureau) is responsible for the inspection of Qinghai's import 
and export commodities. Its branches are responsible for import 
and export commodity inspection in the areas under their 
jurisdiction. 
  The duties of the Qinghai Commodity Inspection Bureau and 
its 
branches (hereinafter Qinghai commodity inspection organs) 
include: Inspecting import and export commodities according to 
law, handling appraisals of import and export commodities, and 
exercising supervision and management over inspection and 
quality of import and export commodities. 
  Article 3 In light of the needs of foreign trade, the 
Qinghai Commodity Inspection Bureau will formulate the 
"Catalogue of Import and Export Commodities Inspected by the 
Qinghai Commodity Inspection Organs." With the approval of the 
provincial government, the catalogue will be promulgated by the 
Qinghai Commodity Inspection Bureau for implementation and will 
be submitted to the the State Commodity Inspection Bureau for 
the record. 
  Article 4 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs and the 
legally assigned inspection organs will inspect the import and 
export commodities within the state's statutory scope and listed 
in the "Catalogue of Import and Export Commodities Inspected by 
the Qinghai Commodity Inspection Organs." The Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs will exercise supervision over and make sample 
inspection of the import and export commodities which are not 
within the statutory scope. 
  Article 5 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs will 
inspect the import and export commodities in light of the 
contents and standards for inspection stipulated by the state 
laws and regulations. 
  The sale or use of import commodities which are not 
inspected 
or which have not passed the inspection, will not be allowed. 
No shipping order will be issued to export commodities which 
are not inspected or which have not passed the inspection. 
  Article 6 Import and export commodities within the scope of 
statutory inspection may be exempted from inspection with 
applications submitted by the consignor or consignee, appraisal 
made by the Qinghai commodity inspection organs in light of 
relevant provisions, and with the examination and approval of 
the State Commodity Inspection Bureau. 
  Import and export samples, gifts, not-for-sale exhibits, and 
other non-trade articles may be exempted from inspection and 
customs clearance may be granted to the units and individuals 
holding relevant certificates which have been verified by the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs and endorsed in light of the 
stipulations. 
  Article 7 Units and individuals engaged in import and export 
trade and related businesses in Qinghai must observe these 
regulations. 
  No unit or individual may illegally meddle in the duties 
performed by the inspectors of the Qinghai commodity inspection 
organs. 
<H5>  Chapter Two Inspection of Import Commodities </H5>
  Article 8 While signing import commodity trade contracts, 
the items to be inspected, inspection ground and location, and 
terms of compensation should be clearly stated. Apart from the 
large bulk cargoes, perishable foods, and commodities damaged 
while unloading or which are short in weight and amount, which 
will be inspected at the port of unloading, other commodities 
should be inspected at the location of the consignee. 
  While signing contracts for the import of large sets of 
equipment and major import commodities related to the national 
economy and people's livelihood, which are technologically 
complicated and are of high value, the terms of pre-inspection 
before loading by the exporter and supervision over manufacture 
and assembly should be included, with the right to final 
inspection after the delivery of goods and damage claim 
reserved. In light of the circumstances, the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs may send personnel to participate in or 
organize pre-inspection and supervision over manufacture and 
assembly before loading. 
  Article 9 Within 3 days of the delivery of import 
commodities which are within the scope of statutory inspection, 
the consignee, in possession of the contract, invoice, packing 
list, bill of lading, and other papers, should accurately fill 
in the commodity inspection form and submit it to the Qinghai 
commodity inspection organs for inspection. 
  If the import commodities have already been inspected at the 
port or by other commodity inspection organs, the consignee 
should, within 30 days of delivery of the goods, take the 
commodity inspection certificates to the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs to undergo the formalities of cancelling the 
inspection and keeping the record. 
  Article one of these regulations will apply and a 
certificate 
of inspection will be issued for the import commodities which 
are inspected by the Qinghai commodity inspection organs in 
light of the foreign trade contracts. 
  Article 10 A consignee should apply to the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs for inspection of the import commodities not 
within the statutory inspection within 3 days of the delivery of 
the goods. If the commodities are to be inspected by the 
consignee, the inspection should be carried out in light of the 
provisions of the contract and an inspection result for the 
import commodities should be submitted immediately to the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs. When approved after 
examination, a notice of approval of sales and use of the import 
commodities will be issued. If the inspection proves that the 
goods are not up to standard and a compensation claim is 
required, an application for reexamination should be made 20 
days before the expiry of the claim date. 
  Article 11 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs should 
complete inspection of the import commodities submitted before 
the expiry of the claim. If the commodities are not up to 
standard, technical treatment should be given under the 
supervision of the commodity inspection organs. The commodities 
may not be sold, assembled, or used until they have passed the 
reinspection test. If the commodities are still not up to 
standard after reinspection and technical treatment, the 
commodity inspection organs should urge the consignee and 
relevant departments to return the goods or destroy them. 
  Article 12 After the delivery of the full set of equipment 
and materials, the Qinghai commodity inspection organs may send 
inspectors or supervisors to the factories to check the 
inspection. The equipment may be assembled and used only when it 
has passed the inspection test. 
  Article 13 After the delivery of import vehicles, the 
consignee must submit an application for inspection to the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs. The vehicle management 
organs will issue the license with the inspection notice for 
import vehicles issued by the Qinghai commodity inspection 
organs. The owner of the vehicle should report the situation of 
quality to the Qinghai commodity inspection organs 30 days 
before the expiry of the quality guarantee period. 
  Article 14 The foreign trade and economy offices should 
immediately handle claims for import commodities filed by the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs and submit the result to the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs within 15 days of the case 
being wound up. 
  The import commodities which must be changed or returned to 
the foreign party should be appropriately stored. They should 
remain intact before the claim case is wound up. The 
commodities which are to be used and which need not be changed 
or returned to the foreign party may be used with the approval 
of the foreign trade office and the commodity inspection organs. 
A certain amount of commodities or samples must be retained. 
  When foreign businessmen have sent personnel to examine the 
commodities and handle the claims, the relevant departments or 
units must immediately notify the Qinghai commodity inspection 
organs. 
<H5>  Chapter Three Inspection of Export Commodities </H5>
  Article 15 The producer and operator of export commodities 
should clearly state in the export trade contract the quality, 
specification, quantity, weight, and package of the 
commmodities; safety and hygiene requirements; and inspection 
standards and organize production, processing, and inspection in 
light of the contract (including the transaction sample or 
design), letter of credit, or relevant standards and 
stipulations. 
  Article 16 The consignor should declare to the Qinghai 
commodity inspection organs 15 days before shipping export 
commodities which are within the scope of statutory inspection, 
except when there are other provisions for the declaration 
deadline. While submitting the declaration, the contract 
(including transaction sample or design), letter of credit, and 
factory inspection certificate should also be presented. An 
application form for inspection of export commodities should 
also be accurately filled. 
  If the Qinghai commodity inspection organs are authorized by 
the foreign trade contract to assign inspection organs to 
inspect the commodities and issue certificates, the consignor 
should apply for inspection in accordance with the terms of the 
contract. 
  Article 17 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs and the 
assigned inspection organs should immediately inspect the export 
commodities and issue certificates. No delay of loading and 
shipping will be allowed. The consignor should submit a 
declaration for shipping within the prescribed time. When the 
deadline expires, the consignor must submit another declaration. 
  Article 18 Packing materials for dangerous export 
commodities may be used only by obtaining legally a certificate 
of inspection for packing materials issued by the Qinghai 
commodity inspection organs. 
  To use packing materials for dangerous export commodities 
purchased from other provinces, the party concerned, with the 
relevant commodity inspection certificates, should undergo 
inspection procedures at the Qinghai commodity inspection 
organs. The materials may be used only after passing the 
inspection test. 
  Article 19 Before loading perishable and frozen export goods 
for shipping, the consignor or his agent must apply to the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs for inspection of 
cleanliness, hygiene, cold storage, and sealing of the carriers. 
The carriers may be used only after passing the inspection test. 
  Article 20 When a foreign party asks for claims for the 
export commodities inspected with a certificate issued by the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs, the consignor must promptly 
report to the Qinghai commodity inspection organs. 
<H5>  Chapter Four Appraisal of Import and Export Commodities </H5>
  Article 21 With the application submitted by persons 
involved in foreign trade and authorized by relevant units at 
home and abroad or foreign inspection organs, the Qinghai 
commodity inspection organs and inspection organs assigned will 
offer appraisal services for import and export commodities and 
issue appraisal certificates. 
  Article 22 Import and export commodity appraisal business 
includes: 
  1. Appraisal of the quality, quantity, weight, and packing 
of import and export commodities and measurement of cargo. 
  2. Exercising supervision over loading and unloading of 
cargo. 
  3. Appraisal of stowage and damage. 
  4. Appraisal of vehicles, aircraft, containers, and other 
transport means for export commodities. 
  5. Appraisal of containers and other cargo. 
  6. Drawing out and sealing all sorts of samples. 
  7. Appraisal services for other import and export 
commodities. 
  Article 23 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs will be 
responsible for the appraisal of the value of property invested 
by foreign businessmen; handle applications submitted by foreign 
trade units; and issue according to law certificates of (general 
preferential treatment) place of origin, ordinary certificates 
of place of origin, certificates of value, and other appraisal 
certificates. 
<H5>  Chapter Five Supervision and Management </H5>
  Article 24 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs exercise 
supervision and management over the consignee of import 
commodities, the consignor of export commodities, units involved 
in the production and storage of export commodities, and the 
inspection units and inspectors assigned and confirmed by the 
State Commodity Inspection Bureau and the Qinghai Commodity 
Inspection Bureau. The supervision and management include: 
  1. Supervision over and inspection of the quality, weight, 
quantity, specifications, packing, safety, and hygiene of the 
import and export commodities. 
  2. Supervision over and inspection of the export commodity 
processing enterprises and the testing means, inspection and 
quality management, acceptance system, and inspection standards 
and methods of the endorsed inspection organs as well as the 
technological level of the inspectors, production techniques and 
equipment, production and hygiene, and the raw materials and 
parts used. 
  3. Supervision over and inspection of the purchase and 
inspection system and inspection ground of the export units and 
the relevant inspection clauses in the trade contracts. 
  4. Supervision over and inspection of the storage, 
transportation, and loading and unloading of the relevant units 
engaged in storage and transportation of import and export 
commodities. 
  5. In light of the applications filed by export commodity 
production enterprises or the requests from units involved in 
foreign trade, appraise the quality system of the export 
commodity production enterprises in accordance with relevant 
state regulations. 
  6. Assess the quality standard of the enterprises applying 
for decisionmaking rights in import and export operations and 
present an assessment report. With the assessment report, the 
enterprises should apply to the competent department for the 
right to engage in import and export operation. 
  7. Other work involving inspection of import and export 
commodities. 
  Article 25 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs may 
regularly or irregularly conduct sample inspection, exercise 
supervision over and organize acceptance, send personnel to the 
factories to exercise supervision over inspection, attach 
commodity inspection and attestation labels and seal, carry out 
batch management, and exercise supervision and management 
through joint inspection and other means in coordination with 
the competent departments. 
  Article 26 Foreign trade units should promptly provide the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs with their export commodity 
plans, contracts, agreements, delivery of import goods, and flow 
of commodities. 
  Article 27 Enterprises (including foreign-funded 
enterprises) producing or processing export commodities should 
register at the Qinghai commodity inspection organs and put on 
record the inspection organs, inspectors, inspection means, 
inspection system and standards, inspection methods, commodity 
quality, and management over quality. 
  Article 28 Enterprises producing export commodities should 
undergo the registration formalities at the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs. Enterprises concerned should obtain relevant 
certificates to engage in trading of the commodities which 
practice an import safety and quality license system, export 
quality license system, and hygiene registration system. 
  Article 29 In light of the needs, the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs may ratify the inspection organs within the 
province which meet the required conditions, entrust them with 
the task of inspecting import and export commodities, inspection 
of appointed quality license and attestation commodities, and 
appraisal of enterprises. The Qinghai commodity inspection 
organs may also ratify the inspection and appraisal work 
undertaken by the inspectors or technical experts of relevant 
units. 
  Article 30 To establish import and export commodity 
inspection and appraisal organs or conduct inspection and 
appraisal work in Qinghai, foreign countries should undergo the 
ratification and registration formalities according to law, 
obtain authorization within the designated scope, handle import 
and export commodity inspection and appraisal business, and 
accept the supervision and management of the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs. 
  Article 31 If there is an objection to the inspection 
results, an application for reinspection must be submitted to 
the unit responsible for the inspection or the higher level 
commodity inspection organs within 15 days of receiving the 
inspection report. The commodity inspection organs responsible 
for reinspection should conclude the reinspection within 45 days 
of receiving the application for reinspection. 
  If there is still an objection, an application must be 
submitted to the State Commodity Inspection Bureau within 15 
days of receiving the reinspection conclusion. 
  Article 32 The units concerned should offer necessary 
working conditions to personnel from the Qinghai commodity 
inspection organs who are assigned to production enterprises, 
construction sites, airports, railway stations, and warehouses 
or vehicles to carry out inspection, appraisal, supervision, and 
management according to law. 
<H5>  Chapter Six Legal Responsibility </H5>
  Article 33 The provisions in state laws and regulations on 
punishments apply to violation of these regulations. 
  Article 34 In light of the seriousness of the cases, the 
Qinghai commodity inspection organs will mete out the punishment 
of circulating a notice of criticism, warning, and revoking 
relevant licenses against violation of these regulations, 
related to any of the following: 
  1. A fine of 1 to 5 percent of the total value of the 
commodities if the party concerned refuses to apply for 
inspection, cancel the inspection, and place on record; 
  2. A fine of 200 to 2,000 yuan will be imposed on violations 
of articles 14, 20, 26, 27, and 28 of these regulations. 
  All the fines will go to the treasury. 
  Article 35 If the export commodities subject to inspection 
are found to be fake and inferior commodities, the commodity 
inspection organs or the relevant competent departments will 
join the commodity inspection organs to order the enterprise to 
stop the production and export of the fake and inferior 
commodities. A fine of a maximum of 500 percent or a minimum of 
50 percent of the total value of the products will be imposed on 
the party concerned. If a serious case constitutes a crime, the 
case will be handed to the judicial organs for investigation and 
prosecution according to law. 
  Article 36 If the party concerned remains unconvinced by the 
punishment meted out by the Qinghai commodity inspection organs, 
an application for reexamination may to submitted to the 
commodity inspection organs which issue the punishment decision, 
or the commodity inspection organs at a higher level, within 30 
days of receiving the punishment notice. 
  If the party concerned remains unconvinced by the 
reexamination, an appeal may be filed at the people's court 
within 30 days of receiving the reexamination report. If the 
party concerned has not applied for reexamination and has not 
made an appeal, and yet refuse to implement the punishment 
decision, the commodity inspection organs which has made the 
decision will apply to the people's court to enforce the 
decision. 
  Article 37 The import and export commodity inspectors who 
abuse powers, practice fraud, forge inspection reports, or 
neglect their duties, resulting in a delay in presentation of 
the inspection reports, will be punished by their work units or 
the higher level organs. If a serious case constitutes a crime, 
they will be handed over to the judicial organs for 
investigation and prosecution. 
<H5>  Chapter Seven Supplementary Articles </H5>
  Article 38 The Qinghai commodity inspection organs, the 
State Inspection Bureau, and the inspection organs appointed by 
the Qinghai Commodity Inspection Bureau will carry out 
inspection according to law, exercise supervision over and 
handle the appraisal business, and collect charges according to 
relevant provisions of the state and province. 
  Article 39 The PRC Qinghai Import and Export Commodity 
Inspection Bureau will be responsible for interpreting the 
application of these regulations. 
  Article 40 These regulations come into force on 1 August 
1994. 

