Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Circular of Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic </F>
Cooperation (MOFTEC) and the Finance Ministry on Issues Related 
to Further Strengthening Management Over the International 
Economic Cooperation Fund -- promulgated by MOFTEC on 5 October 
1993"] 
  [Text] To further strengthen management of the 
International Economic Cooperation Fund [IECF] and expedite its 
circulation, an announcement resulting from due deliberations on 
some relevant issues is hereby issued, as follows: 
  1. All borrowings from the IECF must be used for the 
purposes specified. Those that have been transferred to other 
projects or appropriated for other purposes without the prior 
consent of MOFTEC are to be recovered forthwith. 
  2. To expedite its circulation and enhance the 
efficiency of its utilization, from now on the IECF is to focus 
supporting cost- effective foreign projects undertaken by those 
companies that implement foreign transaction policies and obey 
coordination. Under normal circumstances, it will not extend 
loans to investments made by solely foreign-funded or 
joint-venture overseas enterprises. The IECF will channel its 
credit primarily to the circulation of short- term funds during 
the peak period of project funding. 
  3. To support the development of such undertakings as 
contracted foreign projects and cooperation in labor services, 
the annual interest rate for borrowings from the IECF will 
remain as they are, i.e., the annual interest rate for Renminbi 
loans is 4 percent and that for U.S. dollar loans is 5 percent. 
Should a need arise, from special circumstances, for a renewal 
of the loan, the debtor is to file an application one month in 
advance, after which the renewal may be approved by MOFTEC. In 
this case, however, the annual interest rate for Renminbi loans 
is to conform to the interest rate on revolving-fund credit for 
enterprises undertaking foreign contracts set by the General 
Office of the People's Construction Bank of China, while the 
annual interest rate for U.S. dollar loans is to conform to the 
interest rate on revolving-fund credit set by the General Office 
of the Bank of China. Should the renewal need to be repeated, 
at the discretion of the authorities, the management fee is to 
be calculated by the bank credit interest rate, plus 10 percent. 
The renewal may not be repeated more than once. Failure to 
repay the loan on maturity or extending the length of maturity 
without securing prior consent is subject to a penalty of 20 
percent, in addition to the bank credit interest rate. 
  4. A file is to be established for each debtor, into 
which its borrowings from, and repayments to, the IECF are to be 
entered. In future credit management, priority is to be given 
to debtors that have repaid their loans on time and are in good 
standing. Debtors that have failed to repay their loans on time 
and are not in good standing will not be entitled to further 
credit. 
  5. In June and December of each year, each debtor is 
to tabulate the progress in utilization of the IECF borrowings, 
in conformity with the attached sample format, and furnish 
detailed written data describing the returns, experience, and 
issues in relation to the IECF borrowings. Both of these are to 
be submitted to MOFTEC (the Financial Accounting Department and 
the Department of Foreign Economic Cooperation), with a copy 
forwarded to the Finance Ministry (the Finance Department of 
Foreign Currency and Affairs). 
  Attachment: Utilization of Borrowings From the IECF 
  [Signed] The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Cooperation 
  The Finance Ministry 
  5 May 1990 
Attachment: 
  Utilization of Borrowings From the IECF 
Debtor: (with official seal) Name of project: Date of 
tabulation: 
Date of borrowing from the IECF: Amount (in U.S. dollars or 
Renminbi): Length of maturity approved: Progress in utilization 
on project: Project revenue: Project expenditure: Efficiency 
analysis: Payment of fund management fee: Date: Amount (in U.S. 
dollars or Renminbi): Date: Amount (in U.S. dollars or Renminbi): 
  Note: This table is to be completed by the IECF debtor for 
each project, and is to be completed and submitted in June and 
December of each year. 

