Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Fanny Wong and Chris Yeung] </F>
  [Text] Sino-British negotiators have reached an agreement 
in principle for construction of a naval base for the People's 
Liberation Army (PLA), despite the political rift over Governor 
Chris Patten's reforms. 
  China yesterday reaffirmed that co-operation on 
non-constitution fronts would suffer because Mr Patten had 
revealed contents of the 17 rounds of secret talks and yesterday 
tabled the remaining parts of his 1992 electoral package. The 
sharp attack from Beijing during the day included allegations 
that the Government was "lying to the public and misleading the 
media". Despite this, experts from both sides at the Join 
Liaison Group (JLG) succeeded in bridging their differences in 
key issues relating to the naval base, paving the way to draft a 
final accord on the disposal of military land. 
  It is understood that the Chinese JLG team is also prepared 
to hold expert talks on the airport projects as early as next 
week. Another positive sign that Beijing was prepared to get 
back to business came from Guangdong's provincial police head, 
Chen Shaoji. He issued a strong assurance that under no 
circumstances would long-time cooperation with Hong Kong 
counterparts be adversely affected by the Sino-British political 
row. He said that cross-border co-operation on law and order 
would be strengthened to maintain social stability. "Without 
social stability there will be no preservation of prosperity and 
stability of Hong Kong," said the Public Security Bureau 
director. 
  But stability and prosperity might be harmed by the failure 
to complete the new Chek Lap Kok airport on time, British 
Ambassador to China, Sir Robin McLaren, said in Beijing. Sir 
Robin said a deal could still be struck on the financing package 
of the new airport and its rail links. 
  But the newly-appointed deputy director to the State 
Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office, Wang Fengchao, 
warned that the row over the release of the White Paper would 
inevitably affect other issues. "Since Britain has disrupted 
the co-operative atmosphere over the transition of the sovereign 
power, it is hard to say that other matters would not be 
affected," Mr Wang said. "We don't want to see that. The 
British side should bear the entire responsibility." 
  Yesterday's last day of talks on defence facilities was said 
to have been held in a normal atmosphere. Chinese expert team 
leader Luo Jiahuan said the two sides would be devoting further 
effort to strike a full deal. His British counterpart. Alan 
Paul, said there was some progress made in the meetings and the 
two sides would continue to meet. It is understood that while 
they reached a consensus on matters of principle, much 
fine-tuning needed to be done before a final accord could be 
struck. Sources said the work would still involve some tough 
bargaining. The two sides are expected to meet again on the 
subject in the next few weeks to follow up the discussions. 
  A key obstacle barring a full Sino-British accord on defence 
matters is the construction of the new naval base on the south 
side of Stonecutters Island. The Chinese side agreed to 
slightly cutting the size of the naval basin it sought and the 
British side agreed to build a basin bigger than it originally 
proposed. Under the Chinese proposal, the size of the naval 
basin should be 480 metres by 480 metres while the British 
proposal only envisages a 250-metre by 250- metre basin. The 
compromise is expected to cut the construction costs of $700 
million that the Chinese side has estimated under its original 
blueprint. Chinese sources said Beijing was willing to accept a 
"slightly smaller" naval base, but stressed that it should be 
enough for the anchorage of aircraft carriers. 
  Meanwhile, the expenditure part of the 1994/95 Budget 
released yesterday reveals that spending on defence would drop 
from the revised estimates of $1.72 billion for 1993/94 to an 
estimated $1.48 billion next year. Secretary for the Treasury, 
Donald Tsang Yam-kuen, attributed the reduction to the phased 
withdrawal of the British Garrison beginning this autumn. Mr 
Tsang said the actual reduction in defence costs arising from 
the withdrawal of British forces for the next financial year was 
about 20 per cent but the withdrawal would also involve some 
expenditure and therefore the net reduction in payments was 
about 14 per cent. 

