Detailed 

<F P=102>   PA0306042694 Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 1 Jun 
94 pp 1A, 8A </F>

<F P=103> PA0306042694 </F>
<F P=104>  Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

  [Text] Approximately 30 days after the Constitutional Court 
[CC] legalized personal drug use, the government yesterday 
issued a decree aimed at strengthening essential prevention 
programs and restricting drug consumption and possession in the 
country. 
  Workers will immediately be fired upon proof of drug 
consumption, and professionals will lose their practicing 
licenses. Likewise, the government yesterday banned minors and 
pregnant and breast-feeding women from consuming and possessing 
drugs. It also forbad the use of psychotropic substances at 
elementary and high schools, malls, restaurants, bars, night 
clubs, taverns, recreation centers, and all public places in 
general. 
  All education centers nationwide were granted a 30-day 
period 
to adopt the necessary measures to curb drug consumption in any 
of its forms as part of their internal statutes. The government 
also banned drug consumption in all sports activities in the 
country. The same measure applies to prisons, businesses, and 
other workplaces. 
  According to the decree, those who violate restrictions on 
drug consumption could be admonished, fined, and even expelled 
from where they are, whether a school or a public place. In 
addition, the government decided those who are caught driving a 
vehicle while under the influence of drugs could be detained by 
authorities for a period of up to 24 hours and sentenced to pay 
a minimum of up to 20 salaries. In addition, their driver 
licenses could even be suspended. 
  Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez said last night: "Drug 
consumption is not a basic right, but we are warning the 
objective of the decree is merely to establish certain 
restrictions to the CC ruling rather than challenging it." Those 
laws that penalize drug sales, trafficking, production, and 
distribution within the country are in effect, and the 
government will not hesitate to enforce them on those who 
violate them. 
  Meanwhile, Drug Director Gabriel de Vega Pinzon has said 
strategies of integral production against drug addiction will be 
reinforced to protect the people's basic rights, which could be 
affected by drug problems. He added that within the framework 
of antidrug strategies, we are progressing in tangible 
prevention and rehabilitation programs in Medellin, Atlantico, 
Caldas, Cali, Huila, and Santander. 
<H5>  Restrictions </H5>
  The decree prohibits drug possession, trafficking, and 
consumption in the country's public and private schools. School 
officials will be in charge of reporting cases of drug 
possession and consumption. In case minors are caught with 
drugs, school officials will notify their parents. Student 
penalties could range from admonition to expulsion, including 
suspension. Moreover, all schools will include drug prevention 
subjects in their curriculum. 
  Governors and mayors, with the coordination of the Education 
Ministry, will verify the development of prevention programs at 
schools and impose pertinent disciplinary measures. 
  Drug use and consumption were banned from public places, 
including theaters and stadiums, as well as ships, planes, 
government offices, restaurants, bars, night clubs, hotels, and 
parks. Managers and directors of public places will be able to 
expel drug consumers. Those public places that allow drug 
consumption will be temporarily closed for up to 30 days. 
  Drugs whose effects enhance athletic performance, reduce 
anxiety, and artificially diminish exhaustion cannot be used in 
any sport activities. Doctors who prescribe these type of 
substances to athletes will no longer be able to practice in the 
country. 
  Those who drive under the influence of drugs will be 
sentenced to pay up to 20 minimum monthly salaries, and their 
driver licenses will be suspended for up to a year. They will 
also be detained for 24 hours. 
  No public or private employee will be able to go to his 
workplace under the influence of drugs or to consume them while 
working. Violating this regulation will lead employers to breach 
his contract. 
  The decree also stipulates prison inmates are forbidden from 
possessing or consuming drugs and psychotropic substances, as 
stipulated by Law No. 65 of 1993, the Penitentiary Code. 
  After medical, psychological, and psychiatric evaluations 
are 
made, prison medical services will include rehabilitation 
treatment for inmates who are consuming psychotropic substances 
in order to help them recover. This regulation does not exempt 
them, however, from being penalized, as stipulated by the law. 
  Penitentiary and surveillance guard members who are caught 
consuming or possessing drugs or who bring drugs to prisons will 
be fired. Disciplinary measures will be taken as well. 
  From now on, those who request gun licenses will be given a 
psychological and physical aptitude test. In case they are 
found to be drug or psychotropic substance addicts, their 
licenses will be revoked. Furthermore, those who bear arms, 
explosives, or ammunition under the influence of these 
substances will be sentenced to pay up to the minimum of one 
monthly salary, although this does not mean they are exempt from 
disciplinary measures. 
  Gun licenses will be permanently revoked from second 
offenders, as stipulated by Decree 2535 of 1993. 
  The Minors Protection Code stipulates minors, pregnant or 
breast-feeding women, and those who are considered unstable 
according to the Civil Code are forbidden from consuming drugs. 
The regulation indicates women in either one of these two 
conditions or minors who consume drugs will be sent to a family 
counselor who will be able to reprimand the dependent minors' 
parents, to grant custody to a close relative, to place them in 
a foster home or a special protection center, or even to begin 
procedures to adopt neglected minors. 
  These measures are aimed at guaranteeing personal care and 
abating the perils that may threaten minors' health and morale. 
  Those who are caught driving under the influence of drugs or 
other substances will be sentenced to pay the minimum of 20 
equivalent salaries, and their driver licenses will be suspended 
for up to a year. They will even be arrested for 24 hours, and 
their vehicles will be impounded. 
  Likewise, those who, through a medical examination, are 
found 
addicted to any psychotropic substance will not get their 
licenses renewed, and those who, after obtaining their licenses, 
become addicts or second offenders in illegal possession of 
ammunition, arms, or explosives will get their licenses revoked. 
  Heads of public offices are authorized to unilaterally 
breach 
work contracts when public employees go to their workplaces 
under the influence of any substance or when they consume or 
incite others to consume drugs in the workplace. 
  Furthermore, all public employees of sound mind are 
forbidden 
from using and consuming drugs and psychotropic substances. 
They will be penalized as stipulated by Decree-Law 2400 of 1968 
and by other regulations that supervise public posts. 
  The consumption of psychotropic substances and drugs is also 
forbidden to those who, due to the nature of their jobs or 
professions, impose risks to others. 
  The Decree includes in this category drivers of any type of 
vehicle, pilots, ship captains, aviation students, flight 
instructors, machinists and operators, doctors, dentists, and 
other health professionals who deal with or tend combustible or 
flammable materials and substances, including explosives, toxic, 
poisonous, corrosive, or radioactive substances, as well as 
those who bear or ship arms, air traffic controllers and 
operators, and all ground plane maintenance and support 
technicians. 
  The violation of these regulations by these professionals 
will lead to the suspension, disqualification, or revocation of 
the license or permit to practice their professions. 
  The family, community, society, and state will be 
responsible 
for promoting or implementing policies geared toward avoiding 
and undermining the causes and consequences of drug consumption. 
  This is why the National Drug Council will have to evaluate 
the scope of the problem and coordinate with other governmental 
institutions projects of prevention and programs that will be 
implemented locally, regionally, and nationally. 
  The country's radio and television stations will also have 
to 
air campaigns aimed at fighting drug trafficking and consumption 
as often and as long as the National Drug Council deems 
convenient. 
  To that effect, the government ordered the council to issue, 
within 30 days, pertinent regulations and asked the 
Communications Ministry to continue to promote and develop 
communication strategies to overcome this problem; besides, the 
Health Ministry, secretariats, and departmental services will 
embark on rehabilitation campaigns and programs at the level of 
their treatment facilities. 
  Finally, public and private employers must conduct permanent 
prevention campaigns to make preventive measures effective, and 
they must let authorities inspect and investigate as needed. 

