Years 

<F P=102>   947Q0128A Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian 12 May 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> 947Q0128A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Semiryaga: "The Sacramental Question of </F>
Life on Mars Remains Timely. Possibly It Has Gone Underground"] 
  [Text] The situation in world cosmonautics in general and 
for its recognized leaders especially -- Russia and the United 
States -- is developing in such a way that in the very near 
future the planet Mars will be at the center of attention of 
scientists. 
  In 1976 the United States sent to the Red Planet two of its 
Vikings, whose landing modules made a landing on the Martian 
surface at a distance of 6400 km from one another. Mars proved 
to be an exceedingly interesting planet. 
  No traces of life or other biological activity were 
discovered on the Martian surface as a result of the Viking 
experiments, which does not preclude its presence either in 
other places or in depth. 
  The determination of the characteristics, which can be 
determined only by penetrating into the depths of the celestial 
body, makes necessary a changeover to new methods and new 
instruments. One of such promising tools is so-called 
penetrators, which will be used in the "Mars-94" project for 
studying the internal structure of the surface and atmosphere of 
this planet. 
  The penetrator is an object up to 2.5 m in length outfitted 
with systems and devices ensuring its motion after separation 
from an orbital vehicle, introduction into the rock to a depth 
4-6 m, there making scientific determinations and transmitting 
scientific data to the orbital vehicle for its relaying to the 
Earth. 
  That part of it which remains above the surface after 
contact 
with the planet includes: a television camera for panoramic 
imaging of the surface and rock structure and a determination of 
its mineralogical composition, a detector of the meteorological 
complex and a magnetometer. 
  In the cylindrical part, situated directly beneath the 
surface layer of rock, there is a thermosonde detector for 
studying the thermophysical properties of the subsurface ground 
layer, a gamma spectrometer for determining the elemental 
composition of the surface rocks and the electronic units of 
scientific instruments. 
  In the part of the penetrator introduced into the surface 
there is a seismometer, an accelerometer and X-ray, neutron and 
alpha-r spectrometers. 
  The penetrator probes are introduced into the Martian 
atmosphere from a working orbit into which a space station is 
launched. When the probe withdraws from the space station for a 
safe distance solid-propellant engines are fired, which ensures 
its braking and falling in a preselected region. The region for 
the introduction of the penetrator is made with allowance for a 
number of technical limitations: local relief, nature of the 
ground and possibility of ensuring radio communication between 
the penetrator and the space station. 
  After entry into the planetary atmosphere an inflatable 
braking unit is activated which ensures impact of the probe on 
the surface at the necessary speed. Upon impact a 
shock-absorbing system is triggered which guarantees that the 
rated load on the unit will not be exceeded. At the time of 
penetration two parts of the penetrator separate: the introduced 
part, which penetrates to a depth of 4-6 m, and a tail part, 
remaining in the surface ground layer. After landing a 
transmitting antenna is extended with a TV camera and the 
sensors of the scientific instruments. 
  The space vehicle is being constructed by the NPO imeni S. 
A. 
Lavochkin and the scientific instrumentation is being developed 
by the Institute of Geochemistry and Analytic Chemistry imeni V. 
I. Vernadskiy (GEOKHIM) in cooperation with other academic and 
branch institutes of Russia. The "Mars-94" program is a national 
project with international participation: scientific instruments 
also are being supplied by research centers in the United 
States, Great Britain, West Germany, Finland and Bulgaria. 
  The "Mars-94" project is part of a broad-scale program for 
the exploration of Mars which Russia intends to carry out during 
the current decade and consists of two stages. The first 
provides for the launch of an automatic interplanetary station 
which lowers two penetrators onto Mars. In the second stage a 
balloon probe and Martian rover will be delivered to Mars and 
both space stations will become Martian artificial satellites. 
  One of the developers of the penetrators, Professor Yuriy 
Surkov, who heads the planetary research laboratory of GEOKHIM, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, feels that penetrators are an 
example of how the results of fundamental research can be used 
quite rapidly in practical branches. The penetrators can be used 
successfully for studying the environment in inaccessible, 
radioactive, seismically active and other regions which it is 
difficult for man to reach. The probes can be used both as 
navigation beacons and in observing meteorological conditions in 
remote regions. 
  Yuriy Surkov also stated that under the project plans call 
for establishing on Mars an international network of stations 
which will return to the Earth fundamentally new information 
concerning that planet. 
  Scientists see no serious objections to establishing the 
same 
network on the moon. And the idea of dropping penetrators onto 
the asteroids and cometary nuclei for making prolonged (up to 1 
year) observations of them no longer seems completely fantastic. 
Indeed, minor space bodies are the only keepers of information 
on the early period of existence of the solar system. In short, 
the use of penetrators will make it possible to save enormous 
sums in space programs, sharply increasing the quality and 
quantity of the collected scientific information. 
  Science requires a great amount of money, but it can repay 
for itself and then some, which in itself is now a quality 
meriting every kind of respect and support. 
  As SEGODNYA has learned from sources close to the leadership 
of the Russian Space Agency, implementation of the "Mars-94" 
project has been postponed for at least two years. The reason is 
traditional: a shortage of funding. The sum which is proposed be 
allocated is no more than 20% of the real cost of the 
project. 

