CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by corresponding member of the Ukrainian Academy of </F>
Sciences M. Ivanov (Donetsk): "Mutual Economic Relations Among 
the CIS Countries"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  1. The Development of Integrated Economic Processes </H5>
  The contemporary period in the development of the world 
economic expanse is characterized by two trends--a deepening and 
expansion of the international division of labor, on the one 
hand, and the development of integration processes on a 
worldwide scale, on the other. These trends, by interacting, 
make it necessary to develop measures for the management of 
economic ties, the conclusion of international agreements for 
the creation, to a certain extent, of open and closed market 
spheres. This is leading in practice to the creation of various 
types of regional unions that regulate the trade and economic 
relations of countries that are in those unions, as well as 
affecting the formation of trade relations with other countries. 
The following stages, without going deeply into the history of 
world economic integration, must be singled out in its 
development. 
  The first is through the end of World War I. It is 
characterized by the fact that there was, by and large, little 
world economic integration, and what there was was essentially 
of a colonial nature. The economic ties were predominantly 
structured between the developed countries and colonies, where 
the former sold finished products and the latter raw materials. 
Russia belonged to a certain extent to the latter, and was 
considered a "raw-materials appendage" of Europe. 
  The second stage was the period between World War I and 
World 
War II. Three trends can be delineated therein in the 
development of economic ties: a scenario as in the first stage, 
since the world colonial system was preserved; a new scenario, 
with mutual relations between economically equal partners of the 
industrially developed countries of Europe and America. The 
first signs of integrative economic processes between the United 
States and Europe, the United States and Canada etc., appeared 
during this time; and, the scenario of the USSR, which for a 
number of decades remained in virtual economic isolation from 
most of the developed countries of the world. 
  The third stage begins after the end of World War II. Its 
principal features consist of the fact that the colonial system 
had collapsed, the socialist camp was created and former 
colonies attained the status of independent nations, many of 
them so-called underdeveloped countries. The most pronounced 
world integrative economic trends were manifested in the second 
half of the 20th century. They achieved their greatest 
development in a number of regions--continental Western European 
integration (European Economic Community), the North American 
integration that encompassed the economic relations of the 
United States and Canada, and Atlantic integration between the 
United States and Europe. One typical feature of these processes 
is the tendency for them to deepen and expand. 
  The integrative economic process between the United States 
and Canada led to mutual dependence and the intertwining of the 
national economies of those countries. The mutual economic ties 
took the form of free trade, with the abolition of all customs 
restrictions. 
  The process of development of Western European integration 
passed through a series of stages, each of which consistently 
deepened the economic, legal and political mechanisms of 
interaction of the participating countries with the aim of 
providing a basis for intelligent compromise solutions that make 
it possible to harmonize national interests, coordinate the 
actions of governments and the like. The unified trade policy of 
the Commonwealth was formulated in the 1950s and 1960s, in the 
so-called Common Market with the "four freedoms" of movement--of 
goods, capital, manpower and services. The 1970s passed under 
the banner of the formation of the unified European Currency 
System and the mechanism for utilizing it in monetary 
circulation among the member countries, as well as the European 
Currency Cooperation Fund. The task was posed in 1987 of 
creating an entirely integrated Western European market that 
would complete the process of evolution of the unified economic 
expanse from lower forms of customs union to currency-economic 
and political integration. The Masstricht accords, which 
envisage the creation of currency-economic and 
military-political alliances of the 12 European nations by the 
year 2000, entered into force in November of 1993. The 
transition to a unified unit of currency--the ECU--will be 
implemented before the end of the 20th century. The name of the 
European Community will also be changed to the European 
Union.[.sup]1[/] 
  The immediate reason for the creation of economic 
communities 
in the Western European countries and America is the obvious 
advantages of expanding the economic expanse that is based on 
principles of the freedom of movement of goods, capital and 
manpower, a unified banking and monetary system and uniform 
"rules of the game." Customs-free trade within the framework of 
a single market allows enterprises to increase the amounts of 
profits by reducing expenditures for turnover. The increased 
scale of the market has a positive impact on the development of 
competition, and sets limits for regional monopolistic 
structures. The deepening of competition moreover provides a 
powerful impetus for modernizing production and increasing its 
efficiency. Another effect of integration is the fact that 
communities devise a unified mechanism for the regulation and 
coordination of economic policy, which makes it possible to tie 
national plans with the strategic aims of the community. A 
uniform market strategy envisages the development of a set of 
agreements (on price levels, optimal production quotas, the 
division of sales markets and the sources of raw materials etc.) 
that take into account the economic interests of the partners to 
the maximum extent. This permits the enterprises to halt 
spending that is connected with declines in prices as a result 
of overproduction, as well as with the impossibility of 
providing for the normal course of the production process with 
regard to deliveries of raw materials and product sales owing to 
tough competition. 
  The socialist-oriented countries created their own 
organization--the Council for Economic Mutual Assistance 
(CEMA)--that fostered the formation and development of 
established ties in important sectors of economics, science and 
technology, the expansion and strengthening of the international 
market of the CEMA member countries, and improvements in trade 
and monetary relations. The republics that made up the USSR 
developed for many decades primarily under conditions of the 
economic integration of the CEMA member countries, as a result 
of which a deep division of labor was created among those 
countries. A commonality of economic life was created that was 
founded on many similar national-economic proportions, which 
were the result of the use in practice of a uniform approach to 
the placement of productive forces and the creation of joint 
enterprises and scientific organizations. 
  This lasted for decades under the conditions of the Cold 
War, 
and the confrontation of the western and eastern integrative 
economic unions restricted international processes of exchange. 
  Processes that slowed the development of economic ties, and 
later led to their destabilization, arose for a number of 
reasons within the market expanse of the CEMA member nations. 
This pertains first and foremost to shortcomings in the practice 
of planned management. Negative trends conditioned by violations 
of the proportionality of intersector ties were manifested for 
many years, despite the objective necessity and conceptual 
possibility of the proportional and harmonious development of 
production potential and the availability of scientific and 
technical support, and the management of this process (the 
balances method, its software support, powerful computers). This 
led to the appearance and development of a negative 
phenomenon--scarcity in various forms and manifestations. The 
excessive rigidity and detail of approved sector plan targets 
led to a reduction in flexibility in the management of 
production resources, and limitations in opportunities for 
maneuvering them and stabilizing destroyed production ties in 
timely fashion. 
  The practice of centralized administrative management of 
business ties that has existed for decades has engendered 
inertia and an inability of economic managers to resolve 
independently the question of seeking out production partners. 
This has led to an unreadiness of enterprise and association 
executives for conditions where the necessity has arisen of 
establishing direct contractual relations with suppliers of raw 
materials and consumers of the products. 
  Many enterprises and organizations that obtained freedom in 
the choice of suppliers of raw materials and consumers of their 
products began to destroy business ties with their production 
counterparts that had been established for years, and began to 
seek out more profitable partners, including abroad, in order to 
obtain greater profits. This strengthened the instability of the 
mutual relations among levels of the national economy. The 
powerlessness of executive authority with regard to halting the 
collapse of economic ties was reflected here. The attempts at 
administrative state regulation of production on the basis of 
state orders, in the face of shortages of raw materials and 
financial resources, did not lead to the stabilization of the 
economic situation, insofar as those orders did not guarantee 
producers the uninterrupted and complete supply of materials and 
constituent items, the receipt of which was expected to be 
accomplished on the basis of direct contracts. 
  The fourth stage in world economic integration has ensued 
with the curtailment of the activity of CEMA and the collapse of 
the USSR. The destabilization of economic ties brought general 
expansion from the beginning of depression to the development of 
market relations among the Eastern European countries and the 
USSR, of an especially rapid nature after the halt to the 
activity of CEMA and the collapse of the USSR into sovereign 
states. The liberalization of prices made the break-up of 
economic ties even stronger. An increasing decline in production 
is occurring, as a consequence of this, in all of the CIS 
countries. Disproportions are increasing to considerable 
dimensions. The structural transformations have become 
unmanaged. The reproduction of the production apparatus has 
effectively halted. The construction industry is suffering a 
depression. The socio-economic standard of living of the 
population is dropping. 
<H5>  2. Seeking Directions for Economic Integration </H5>
  The political proclamations of sovereignty and national 
independence have signified an attempt by many republics to 
achieve complete economic independence at any price. The actual 
incarnation of that political orientation has been the very 
rapid growth in centrifugal tendencies and disintegrative 
processes. Economic integration has been displaced by an 
economic sovereignty that borders on autarky. The rigid 
separation of the economy from politics has led to the break-up 
of economic ties, the establishment of barriers and increasing 
in-kind exchange. 
  Models for the development of sovereign nations began 
appearing that are oriented toward their own raw-material 
resources or toward the expansion of economic ties with Western 
countries, replacing such ties with the CIS nations. A model for 
the development of production potential was proposed that was 
aimed at a radical structural restructuring of the economies of 
the republics, with a dedicated orientation toward the maximum 
reduction of the requirements for resources to the level of 
balance with their intrinsic raw-materials base. If that path is 
taken, however, losses of fixed capital inevitably result. The 
CIS countries will each hardly be able to accomplish a 
structural restructuring of the economy separately in the face 
of a lack of advanced technologies and raw-material and 
financial resources. The complete collapse of economic ties that 
has occurred does not meet the criterion of economic expediency. 
  This in no way signifies, at the same time, a need to 
maintain inefficient ties or not to cut back types of production 
whose products do not enjoy widespread demand. The discussion 
concerns the establishment of efficient and mutually 
advantageous market ties. 
  In raising the question of the advantage of an accelerated 
search for new economic partners outside the boundaries of the 
CIS, it must be pointed out that hopes for the rapid replacement 
of ties among the republics with international ones have no real 
economic foundation. The experience of a number of countries of 
Eastern Europe speaks to this. A re-orientation toward the 
procurement from Western countries of resources and goods that 
are in short supply requires a corresponding amount of currency. 
None of the CIS countries has any real opportunities for 
obtaining a sufficient quantity of hard currency funds today, 
insofar as they are selling just one percent of the products 
they produce on the world market, and even that at dumping 
prices. No less than 10-15 years will be required, in the 
estimation of specialists, before the republics will be able to 
find their "niche" in the structure of the international 
division of labor. 
  It must also be kept in mind that the interests of Western 
firms, as a rule, are limited to attempts to make use of the 
ties with us for the purpose of obtaining valuable and cheap raw 
materials, leaving us a raw-materials appendage of the developed 
countries of Europe. The collaboration of Western firms is not 
structured for benevolent purposes. The Western countries regard 
the re-organization of our economy first and foremost as the 
winning of an economic market share where harsh competition 
between our and foreign partners is in effect. 
  The experience of Hungary, a country that is one of the 
initiators of the collapse of the market expanse of the CEMA 
countries, testifies vividly to this. A disadvantageous economic 
situation has taken shape for that country today. Hungary, owing 
to the collapse of partnership ties with the CIS countries (with 
an orientation toward a market with the countries of Western 
Europe), finds itself in a difficult position with the sale of 
agricultural products--the principal line item in its export 
income. Western countries, instead of opening their markets to 
cheap Hungarian products, are giving preference to the use of 
those ties for the penetration of their products into the 
Hungarian market. Hungarian stores, as a result, are stuffed 
with products from Germany, Austria and France, while Germany 
procured from Hungary only one sixth of some of the goods 
promised in 1993. 
  Enterprises, under conditions of a very rapid 
destabilization 
of economic ties, have been forced to seek out new forms of 
mutual relations among their production counterparts, and to 
resort to intermediaries--the commodities exchanges. Experience 
shows, however, that the latter are not yet facilitating a 
strengthening of economic ties, but are rather only "fanning" 
prices for the goods that are being sold with their assistance. 
Under the conditions of a sharp decline in production and acute 
shortages of goods, the exchange boom, caused by the attempt of 
so-called entrepreneurs to obtain easy profits with 
insufficiently qualified personnel at the enterprises who 
support the commodities exchanges, has led to the creation of so 
many of them in the CIS countries that there are four times as 
many of them as in the whole rest of the world. It is thus no 
accident that regular auctions are conducted by no more than 1/5 
of the number of registered commodities exchanges, and the 
volume of sales in them has been declining appreciably of late. 
The volume of trades at operating exchanges will be reduced in 
the future, in the estimation of specialists, since those 
exchanges are exchange-bazaars, where agreements are made for 
the sale of actual goods, in the substance of their activity 
today. That type of exchange was supplanted in Europe in the 
17th century, and in the United States and Japan in the 19th 
century, by exchanges that make forward and futures 
contracts--that is, contracts under which the delivery of goods 
will be made in the future. 
  The forward contract on a trading exchange, as is well 
known, 
envisages the delivery of a good in advance of a stipulated time 
(3--6 months), and its quantity and price are defined by 
agreement of the buyer and seller at the moment the contract is 
made. This provides an opportunity for the seller to sell a good 
that has not yet been manufactured at a price that covers the 
spending to produce it, and the buyer to provide his own 
production with raw materials and constituent items in advance 
at a price that suits him. The mass conclusion of forward 
contracts opens up an opportunity to predict prices for these or 
those goods, which under market conditions makes it possible for 
buyers and sellers to be oriented in the long run toward the 
profitability of their enterprises. This is perhaps the sole 
opportunity under market conditions to plan production for the 
future. 
  If an exchange, along with an intermediary in contracts, 
also 
guarantees the fulfillment the contracts reached for the 
purchase and sale of homogeneous raw materials that are united 
into large lots without the loss of consumer traits that are 
called "standard" (grain, meat, sugar, butter, cotton, metals, 
oil, gas, coal, wood etc.), then the forward contract becomes a 
futures contract. Futures contracts that are reached on a broad 
scale level out the effects of the actions of random factors in 
the level of prices, which creates confidence in tomorrow among 
the counterparts of production. These agreements facilitate 
stimulation of the development of production under conditions of 
an unstable economic situation. The amount of futures contracts 
on exchanges in the United States reaches trillions of dollars a 
year, which fosters the stabilization of market relations to a 
certain extent. 
  The development of exchange support for market relations in 
the CIS countries has thus taken the path of primitive forms and 
rudimentary intermediary relations, and has had virtually no 
effect on the stabilization of economic ties both within the 
economic expanse of the CIS countries and its separate states, 
including Ukraine. The creation of a small quantity of so-called 
civilized exchanges able to conclude forward, as well as 
futures, contracts on a broad scale across the economic expanse 
of all of the CIS countries, at the same time, could be an 
important condition for improving the economic situation in the 
republics during the period of transition to market relations. 
The development of futures operations in the long term under our 
conditions, with indices of business activity that are defined 
by the exchanges, the accumulation of a base of information on 
price changes, and analysis of factors that affect the 
competitive market for commodities, could become the foundation 
for various types of calculations and predictions at both the 
macro- and micro-economic levels. Calculations performed by 
state administrative bodies to evaluate the competitive market 
conditions of goods in particular could become, on the one hand, 
a sound basis for the making of decisions on imports and exports 
of goods, tax concessions to the producers of goods etc. and, on 
the other hand, a point of reference for the managers of 
enterprises and associations in planning the development of 
production and conducting routine economic activity. 
  Integration methods are developing in the world economy that 
are promoting a strengthening of the mutual relations among 
sovereign states and the development of economic and cultural 
ties, while sovereignty is not opposed to integration. The use 
of cumulative world experience in economic integration is thus 
expedient, in our opinion, to resolve the problem of stabilizing 
economic ties in the CIS countries. 
  The necessity of forming a well-developed system of mutually 
advantageous international ties is dictated by the entire logic 
of the development of market relations. The winning of true 
independence around the world is sought not on the path to 
autarky, but rather on the basis of active participation in the 
international division of labor and economic, scientific and 
technical exchange. In the estimation of Western economists, 
roughly 5--10 percent growth in the national product as a whole 
in the countries that are part of the EC can be assured only 
through the organization of a unified European market. 
  The experience in creating the EC undoubtedly has its own 
specific nature, but many of its traits could be utilized as 
reliable and well-tested measures for the formation of new 
relations among the independent CIS states. The true foundation 
for this is the high degree of international cooperative ties 
among all of the participants in economic activity. The 
republics of the former USSR have better conditions with regard 
to international ties than the EC: inter-republic exchange was 
20.5 percent of the gross national product, and in the EC 16 
percent. 
  The CIS countries must put a model of economic collaboration 
consisting of further mutual economic integration, with the 
preservation of political independence of the countries and 
without the interference of politics into economics, at the 
foundation of the development of mutual economic relations. The 
realization of this basic model would serve the improvement of 
mutual economic relations of the CIS countries. A system of 
collective and coordinated measures within the framework of the 
entire CIS, founded on the principles of mutual relations among 
sovereign states--equal rights, mutual advantage and mutual 
vested interest in joint emergence from economic crisis--is 
required for this. There must be mutually coordinated standards 
that define trade and economic relations, most-favored status, a 
procedure for the functioning of monetary, currency and credit 
systems etc. within this system of measures. 
  The process of legal support for the new mutual economic 
relations among sovereign economic nations, it must be thought, 
will be prolonged. It would be expedient, in our opinion, to 
make use of the experience of integrated economic unions that 
defines the legal norms for the mutual economic relations of 
sovereign nations. 
  New trends appeared in the middle of 1993 that were directed 
at strengthening economic ties among partners of the 
independence states. They are founded on the joint development 
of production and the necessary quantity of sovereign nations. 
It is thus expected that Russian investors will be enlisted in 
the reconstruction of metallurgical plants in Ukraine that 
supply products to Russia and other nations, while Ukrainian 
investors will invest in the development of the oil-and-gas 
complex in West Siberia, including the creation of joint 
ventures that ensure the delivery of oil and gas resources to 
Ukraine. 
<H5>  The Mechanism for Settlements in the Process of Trade and </H5>
Economic Relations 
  The creation of a mechanism for settlements in the process 
of 
mutual economic exchange is a difficult problem in the mutual 
relations among the CIS states. The experience of CEMA should be 
kept in mind here, where under conditions of an effectively 
balanced economic expanse of the countries participating in that 
organization, and with the availability of a settlement unit 
accessible to all--the conversion ruble--they were not able for 
many years to devise an effective mechanism for mutual 
settlements. The conditions are much more complex today, while 
the theoretical preconditions for the solution of the problem 
are insufficiently grounded or realistic. Two trends are 
actually in effect under the conditions of the dynamic process 
of the emergence of the economic and political independence of 
the CIS countries: first, the attempt by the independent states 
to have national currencies and monetary systems, and second, 
the search for ways of creating a currency that has free 
circulation in those states as a means of settlement in the 
process of economic exchange. These trends are contradictory 
today. The as yet unsuccessful attempts to create a ruble zone 
of a so-called new type are testimony to that. 
  Real economic difficulties have arisen on the path of 
creating a mechanism for mutual settlements among the CIS 
countries. They consist of the great variability of the 
resource-export and economic potentials of the countries that 
make up the commonwealth; the necessity of the strict and 
dynamic balancing of export and import exchange among the 
countries that would provide for non-credit transactions; the 
need for the maintenance of a structure for the goods being 
exchanged that would correspond to the capabilities for payment 
in hard currency; the rigid independence of value indicators of 
exchange from the dynamic of world prices; the chronic shortages 
of goods to make up the balance-of-payments deficit under the 
effects of destabilizing factors, which unbalance the volumes of 
trade deliveries; the price whims and economic pressure of the 
monopoly suppliers of raw and other materials etc. 
  The solution of the problem being considered is complicated 
by the fact that a process of the introduction of national 
monetary systems is taking place in those countries. It must be 
thought that the process of nationalization of monetary systems 
will continue; it could be asserted that the ruble expanse has 
effectively disintegrated. 
  In the socio-economic and political climate that has 
resulted, it must be thought that settlements in the process of 
mutual exchange among the CIS countries will be improved in the 
future, oriented in the long run toward the norms that are in 
effect in the practice of international economic relations. 
However, the process of transition to economic relations among 
the CIS countries, as has been done in the EC, for example, will 
take much time and will be of an evolutionary nature in 
development, passing sequentially through such forms of mutual 
relations and their combination as bilateral payment agreements, 
various forms of clearings, settlements in VKV [freely 
convertible currency], and settlements on the basis of 
convertibility of the currencies of the CIS nations. 
  Bilateral payments agreements, without which the CIS 
countries cannot get by in contemporary trade and economic 
relations, could have a marked effect on the development of 
trade, and serve as good practice for the transition to the 
convertibility of national currencies. An important role in the 
development of those relations is relegated directly to the 
trading partners that take part, on an equal footing, in 
coordinating mutual demands and obligations and in settlements 
for current operations. The national state banks provide for the 
sale of foreign currency to importers in order to pay for 
imports and the exchange of export receipts for their national 
currency. The difficult problem of the exchange rate among 
national currencies arises in these relations, and without the 
resolution of which bilateral agreements will not be able to 
develop actively. The solution of this problem envisages the 
achievement of coordination in the currency policies of the 
countries that have bilateral trade and economic relations. The 
granting of freedom of action to trading partners and the 
removal of restrictions on export/import operations in effect in 
the CIS countries would facilitate the successful development of 
bilateral payment agreements. 
  Currency clearings could also be used in mutual trade and 
economic relations between two or several CIS countries. The 
settlements among the partner countries are made via the 
cashless offset of reciprocal demands and obligations, while 
payments in cash or gold are made only for the amount of the 
difference in deliveries of goods or services rendered. Under 
this system direct mutual currency relations among the trading 
counterparts do not exist, with an absence of interaction among 
national currencies as well. All settlements must be made in 
centralized fashion at the international level. This envisages 
the active role of an International Bank, and the existence of 
mutually coordinated trade and economic relations among the CIS 
countries. A mutually coordinated balance of import and export 
quotas, exchanged raw materials and finished products is am 
important condition for the effectiveness of clearing 
settlements for the partner countries, signifying the static 
nature of the trade structure. The trading partners will 
otherwise prove not to have a vested interest in expanding 
exports, since payments for products above and beyond the quotas 
that come to the clearing accumulator could go to pay off the 
indebtedness of other partners, while the former are left 
without currency from the receipts for the additional product. 
  The use of VKV within the economic expanse of the CIS member 
countries is problematical. The introduction of the conversion 
ruble into mutual settlements among the CEMA countries, on the 
one hand, is considered to be one of the reasons for the 
reduction in the volume of trade turnover among the countries; 
on the other hand, the EC countries have been working on the 
problem of creating a system of mutual settlements based on the 
use of a unified monetary unit (ECU) that, in accordance with 
the Masstricht agreement, will be introduced into circulation 
before the end of the 20th century. The creation of an economic 
union, within the framework of which equal trade and economic 
collaboration would take place on a multilateral basis with the 
use of an internal VKV, is possible and expedient in the long 
term, provided good will on the part of all (or some) of the CIS 
countries exists. Another variation--joining the European Union 
on a voluntary basis, within the framework of which the problem 
could be resolved automatically--is also possible. 
  In order to attain the highest level of mutual 
settlements--on the basis of the convertibility of national 
currencies--it is essential to provide, in each of the partner 
countries, a well-developed internal market that satisfies the 
demand of consumers for various goods and services at 
competitive prices, highly diversified and efficient national 
production, market-competitive exports that provide stability in 
the balance of payments, a sufficient level of currency 
reserves, relative stability of prices and the rate of currency 
exchange, and a highly developed currency market. 
<H5>  4. Opportunities for Making Foreign Economic Activity More </H5>
Vigorous 
  It must be kept in mind, when developing the strategy and 
methods for the expansion of foreign economic ties with the 
countries of the far abroad, that the economies of the CIS 
countries are still not ready for vigorous activity with regard 
to winning new markets. The unstable social and political 
climate in those countries does not promote the activation of 
foreign economic activity. The low technical level of production 
potential is not able to provide for the output of products that 
are competitive on world markets. Only products of types of 
production highly developed in a technical and technological 
regard (certain types of space hardware, weapons, high 
technologies) and natural raw materials are attractive to 
Western partners. 
  The activation of foreign economic activity cannot be 
considered apart from the solution of the overall problems of 
raising the technical level of production. The attempts of 
Ukraine and the other CIS countries in the area of the 
accelerated re-orientation of foreign trade from the near to the 
far abroad have had virtually no positive results, since no 
qualitative changes were made in the products exported. The 
access of the CIS countries to trade relations in the world 
economic expanse from the export of a broad range of finished 
items and products requires the development of a whole set of 
measures to study the market competitiveness of the products 
manufactured by the CIS countries, the determination of the 
priorities in exported goods with regard for their demand, the 
time frames for raising quality to world standards and economic 
capabilities for the technical refitting of production. 
  It is advisable, in the first stage of the development of 
the 
economies of the sovereign nations, to study the export 
capabilities of those sectors of the national economy whose 
potential for the output of finished products surpasses the 
demand on the internal market. This situation, for example, has 
taken shape in Ukraine in the metallurgical industry, where 
production capacity for the extraction of iron and manganese 
ore, the production of cast iron and the rolling of ferrous 
metals exceed the requirements of the national economy of the 
republic. That is one sector that could be transformed into a 
reliable channel for the receipt of foreign currency in the 
future. Government bodies have begun to study the conditions and 
develop the appropriate organizational measures with regard to 
expanding the export of products of ferrous metallurgy to the 
countries of Eastern Europe and the southwest (Turkey, Iran 
etc.). 
  The military-industrial complex, based on the volume and 
production-technical data of the products produced, under 
certain conditions could also be a great exporter of hardware 
and weapons to many countries of the world in return for hard 
currency, which would serve as a source of funds for the 
conversion of production. The capacity of the world market is 
virtually unlimited, especially in the countries of Africa and 
the Near and Middle East, even for firearms, in our opinion. The 
difficulties in resolving this issue consist of the fact that 
exports of military products are restricted and regulated by 
international agreements. Notwithstanding those restrictions, 
however, certain countries--for example, the United States and 
Germany, among others--are growing rich from the sale of 
military hardware and weaponry, even though international 
agreements exist that must be fulfilled equally by all of the 
nations of the world. There is perhaps some inertia in the CIS 
countries in the delivery of arms for free or on credit (which 
is then, as a rule, not paid back) to the underdeveloped 
countries and to developing countries that are in the sphere of 
influence of the socialist camp. The world political problems 
pertaining to the winning of spheres of influence today, 
however, cannot be resolved in this way by any of the CIS 
countries. There is no need of it anyway. The export of military 
products should this be developed more actively within the 
framework of the upholding of international agreements. 
  The possibility and expediency of returning Ukraine among 
the 
nations that export grain and agricultural products in the near 
future can be discerned. A further increase in the stable 
harvest of grain crops, in an amount that would meet entirely 
the needs of the country for foodstuffs and rule out imports, is 
essential as a first step in this regard. The annual production 
of grain crops must be brought to a level that exceeds one tonne 
per capita for this to happen. Attention must be paid in the 
agro-industrial complex, first and foremost, to the safekeeping 
and processing of cultivated crops, and reductions in the 
spending for the products produced, especially fruits and 
vegetables, the spending for which reaches 50 percent. The 
creation of an industry for the gathering, processing and 
safekeeping of products and improvements in their quality and 
outward appearance is a paramount task in raising the market 
competitiveness of products from the agro-industrial complex. 
  The vacuum that has been created in the trade of the Eastern 
European countries with the Russian Federation must be taken 
advantage of. Markets must be won and strongly held not only in 
the Western countries, but in the CIS countries as well. If the 
Russian Federation has the intention of moving to hard 
(international) currency in the sale of power resources, then 
Ukraine must do the same thing. Rolled ferrous metals, iron and 
manganese ore, foodstuffs and other goods must be considered 
export goods to the CIS countries under those conditions. 
  We must not be limited to today and tomorrow in considering 
the prospects for foreign economic ties. We must seek out, even 
today, promising directions in international collaboration, so 
as to achieve a stable situation in world markets and the 
position of priority partner in the competitive battle. 
Proceeding from the level of development of scientific, 
technical and production potential, it may be asserted that 
Ukraine can compete successfully in foreign economic activity if 
it supplies to the world market hardware, items, materials and 
consumer goods and foodstuffs whose production is based on the 
results of basic scientific research and non-traditional 
technologies. One may cite as an example the scientific and 
technical areas that could become the basis for the manufacture 
of market-competitive products: the production of new synthetic 
materials that have their properties designated in advance; new 
alloys that are resistant to corrosion, high and low 
temperatures and wear and tear; composite and powdered 
materials; the creation of biotechnologies, a broad spectrum of 
information systems etc. 
  It must be pointed out that the possibility and expediency 
of 
utilizing foreign technologies, in combination with domestic or 
separately, should not be ruled out in the resolution of the 
question of the prospects for foreign economic activity. This 
approach would facilitate the development of new domestic 
technologies and sectors of industry, as well as the 
modernization of existing types of production. Its tasks are 
both the expansion of export goods, and the replacement of 
imported items in the country with high-quality domestic ones 
that are produced on the basis of assimilated foreign 
technologies. There is great experience in Japan in adopting the 
latest scientific and technical achievements in this regard by 
means of the mass procurement of patents and licenses, which are 
utilized by many foreign countries, including the nations of 
Eastern Europe. 
  The participation of foreign firms in the realization of 
large and small projects in the development of the sovereign 
republic, as well as the joint implementation of scientific and 
technical programs of the EC and other international unions, is 
an aspect of no small importance in the further long-term 
development of foreign economic production and trade relations. 
The sovereign state, by enlisting foreign investors for the 
creation of its own scientific, technical and production 
facilities, resolves not only the issue of the development of 
production potential, but also draws foreign partners into trade 
and economic relations, thereby making an entry into the world 
economic expanse. One concrete example of the realization of 
large projects by foreign firms is the erection of the 
high-capacity terminal on the Black Sea coast for the receipt of 
petroleum products that are coming to Ukraine from the far 
abroad. 
  The creation of free economic zones in border areas is a new 
direction in the development of foreign economic ties that has 
still not become widespread in Ukraine. Groups of scientific and 
practical workers from Donetsk and Odessa oblasts and other 
regions of the republic have been working on plans for the 
creation of such zones for a long time. The Supreme Soviet of 
Ukraine, however, is delaying the realization of these programs 
through its prolonged consideration of the issue. 
  Advertising and information activity, which could be 
launched 
in all countries with a market economy, is an important 
condition for the activation of foreign economic ties. It has 
been introduced in the CIS countries in the form of printed 
materials and advertisements on radio and television. Foreign 
information on commercial activity in the CIS countries, 
however, is effectively lacking. 
  The creation of a national commercial-technical information 
service must play a large role in the development and successful 
functioning of the foreign economic activity of Ukraine. 
Analogous systems should be created in all of the CIS countries. 
They must all be combined into a unified commercial-information 
system of the CIS countries, and linked with the corresponding 
world information centers. Such a far-flung network of foreign 
economic information would facilitate the activation of foreign 
economic activity, the search for mutually advantageous partners 
and an increase in the quantity of contacts among them. 
Experience shows that the absence of full-fledged information 
support reduces the effectiveness of foreign economic activity 
and international collaboration. 
  The participation of Ukraine and the other sovereign nations 
in international exhibitions, fairs and other analogous 
functions also has considerable significance in an advertising 
and informational regard. The numerous examples of the showing 
of models of aviation, military and other types of hardware 
abroad testify to this. Collaboration in the creation of new 
hardware is expanded as a result of such demonstrations, and 
contracts are reached for their supply. The necessity of 
organizing similar functions within the framework of the CIS as 
well is arising. 
Footnote 
  1. See IZVESTIYA, 2 November 1993. 

