CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with A.N. Lyulko, chairman of the Novosibirsk </F>
Fatherland movement, by A. Zharinov; place and date not given: 
"To Carry the Highest Truth"] 
  [Text] Allow me to introduce Aleksandr Nikolayevich 
Lyulko, a leader of the opposition and chairman of the 
Novosibirsk Fatherland movement. He graduated from School No. 73 
in Leninskiy Rayon and Novosibirsk University and is a candidate 
of physico-mathematical sciences. He is at the present time 
lecturing in mathematics at Novosibirsk State University. He is 
raising two children. 
  "My great grandfather Lyulko was exiled to Siberia from 
Ukraine back in the times of the tsars," Aleksandr Nikolayevich 
said. "He was a Zaporozhye Cossack by birth. My folk on my 
mother's side moved to Siberia, in accordance with Stolypin's 
reform, from Ryazan Province and founded the village of 
Semenovka, which is in Kochenevskiy Rayon. There were among my 
kinsfolk both insurgents and red partisans, and one of my 
relatives commanded a mounted reconnaissance party under 
Rokossovskiy." 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, why "Fatherland"? We have 
become accustomed to using this word either in a poetical 
context or at moments of serious ordeals which have befallen our 
country.... 
  [Lyulko] We really believe that serious ordeals have 
befallen 
our country and the Russian people. I would say even that we are 
in fact living in an occupied country, where we ourselves are 
not deciding our fate. I recently read in NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA 
GAZETA the article "There Is All of Russia in This Pawnshop," 
which adduces information to the effect that the countries of 
the Seven are demanding of us payment of an enormous amount of 
debt. And inasmuch as we are not in a position to make this 
payment at this time, the question of the loss of Russia's 
sovereignty is posed, that is, all decisions will be made for us 
overseas. We can see that this is already happening. And we 
members of Fatherland advocate the revival of a strong, 
independent Russian state, the Russian power. Whence the name 
fatherland. 
  [Zharinov] As far as I know, there are a number of other 
organizations that set approximately the same tasks. How does 
Fatherland differ from them? 
  [Lyulko] We are not democrats and we are not communists. We 
are a Russian Orthodox patriotic movement. We are a third force. 
Our main principle is this: "Constitutional development should 
be based on moral Orthodox values." And the revival of the great 
Russian state is possible only on an Orthodox ideological basis." 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, are you not exaggerating 
this subjective factor, this substance called the Russian 
Orthodox spirit, saying that "only this will help us, and this 
is the sole thing that can now revive Russia"? There are, after 
all, more tangible things, without which we can hardly resolve 
anything, strictly speaking. 
  [Lyulko] Each state is built, develops, and is based on some 
idea, on traditions. Insofar as the leaders have no moral 
principles, they have turned constitutional development into 
their own feeding-trough. Public office is for them a means of 
lining their pockets. And it is no accident, therefore, that, 
according to information published in a German magazine and 
reprinted in SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA, we now have 586 billionaires 
and that this list includes M.S. Gorbachev, who is building a 
summer home in Florida, and the present prime minister V.S. 
Chernomyrdin. A person participating in constitutional 
development must be first and foremost ethical. 
  But we do not deny the material aspect. Because unless we 
work and produce, we will simply die out. It is written in the 
Bible: You will earn bread by the sweat of your brow. But it is 
written there also that "man does not live by bread alone...." 
That is, we should not confine ourselves merely to material 
values. This way we become animals, for whom it is important 
merely to eat palatable food and sleep soundly and, in addition, 
display concern for perpetuation of the race. 
  [Zharinov] So all who are in power, in your opinion, are 
immoral and, if not mafiosi, then, at least, seducers, 
bribe-takers, and so forth? 
  [Lyulko] I do not believe so, but moral principles in the 
ruling clique are manifestly lacking. Otherwise how are we to 
explain the shooting up of the Supreme Soviet, the constitution, 
the planned unemployment, when millions of people have been left 
without means of subsistence, and the inflation which has led to 
the devaluation of cash deposits, primarily of retirees? 
Finally, permit me to ask who has in a matter of years plundered 
the country piece by piece or with whose consent has this been 
done? We now have St. Govorukhin's book "Great Criminal 
Revolution," in which he proves.... 
  [Zharinov] He proves nothing, he has adduced a number of 
facts, which confirm that, yes, the orgy of corruption and the 
mafia in Russia has assumed... I do not know what proportions. 
  [Lyulko] He adduced facts which indicate that the mafia and 
the authorities in Russia have coalesced. And it was no accident 
that protection boys--St. Govorukhin's book describes 
this--supported the authorities and stormed the White House in 
October 1993. It is no accident that at a government house in 
Yekaterinburg, where the president's grandsons live, a memorial 
plate in honor of the deceased head of the mafia, who lived in 
this very house, has been put up. 
  [Zharinov] How do you conceive of the new Russia? What does 
this represent as you understand it? 
  [Lyulko] First, as I have already said: The state should be 
developed on moral values. Otherwise we will continue to live 
according to the logic of whoever brings more tanks to the White 
House writes the laws. There must be a higher, divine truth. 
Further, we believe that Russia needs to be restored within the 
borders of the USSR, at least. Peacefully. And there are masses 
of ways of doing this. 
  [Zharinov] Economic sanctions, for example? 
  [Lyulko] Yes. More than half the world's natural resources 
are concentrated here. Gas, oil.... We could pursue a price 
policy such that the former republics would very quickly, 
believe me, align themselves with Russia. Remember history, how 
the proud Georgian tsars implored on their knees that Georgia be 
made a part of the Russian Empire. 
  [Zharinov] Understandably.... 
  [Lyulko] Believe me, if we raise the living standard of our 
people, and we can, all the other republics will come to us, 
their own people would demand this. 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, an election campaign is 
under way. What are Fatherland's basic slogans? What do you 
offer? 
  [Lyulko] We see and undertake to resolve the problems of 
unemployment, an improvement in food supply, the construction of 
housing, and the fight against crime. 
  It is no secret that "military" constitutes 80 percent of 
the 
oblast's entire industry. It has now declined sharply. The 
plants are standing idle. I visited the Tochmash Plant, the 
Novosibirsk Electric Locomotive Plant.... I know that the plants 
have practically ceased to exist. In a shop at the Tochmash, 
where 1,200 persons used to work, there are now 10. And even 
they have not received their pay for August. Yet just recently 
our plants were manufacturing weapons that were being sold 
abroad, to Iraq particularly. S. Husayn declared officially that 
were the arms trade to continue, he would pay his debt to Russia 
of $10 billion. 
  At our invitation a visit was paid to Novosibirsk a year ago 
by a group of deputies of the Supreme Soviet, who, speaking at a 
session of the oblast soviet, declared that they had had an 
official offer from Arab countries for an interest-free loan to 
Russia of $40-50 billion, provided that we pursued a policy 
independent of America and Israel. 
  [Zharinov] You are for the arms market, consequently? 
  [Lyulko] Yes, we support the sale of weapons if this is in 
our national interests. 
  [Zharinov] And how is this tied in with Orthodoxy and the 
precepts of Christianity? 
  [Lyulko] We frequently understand by Orthodoxy Tolstoyism, 
which has nothing in common with the Orthodox idea. It is 
sufficient to recall that the Battle of Kulikovo was begun by 
two monks, who were blessed for this by the Orthodox saint 
Sergey Radonezhskiy. It should not be forgotten that Suvorov and 
Kutuzov were Orthodox people of profound faith. And Suvorov 
would reverently seek the blessing of any rural priest, and if 
you read his "Science of Victory" in full, two-thirds of it is 
about Orthodoxy. The sign of the cross--and forward, for the 
motherland! 
  [Zharinov] This is not an entirely successful example. 
  [Lyulko] For the fatherland.... 
  [Zharinov] It was not for the fatherland. The enemy had come 
with fire and sword.... And now?... 
  [Lyulko] Now the motherland is being destroyed. It should be 
clearly understood that without arms manufacturing Novosibirsk, 
as a city that was created in the war years as a military forge, 
will cease to exist.... 
  [Zharinov] I fear that we have strayed from the subject. 
Remind me of Fatherland's other tasks. 
  [Lyulko] Resolution of the food problem. Here is just one 
suggestion. G.P. Izotov, a zoological engineer, is a member of 
Fatherland. He developed the USSR's first plant for commercial 
fish production. Five to 10 plants can operate on the basis of 
one heat and electric power plant. The productivity of one is 80 
tonnes of fish a year. Consequently, on the basis of one heat 
and electric power plant it is possible to cultivate 400-800 
tonnes of fish a year. Some 800-1,600 tonnes of valuable food 
could be obtained on the basis of Heat and Electric Power 
Plant-2 and Heat and Electric Power Plant-3 in Leninskiy Rayon, 
say. This would be an appreciable addition to the table of our 
inhabitants. Such a plant has been operating successfully in 
Tashkent, incidentally. 
  Or another example. It is no secret that there are currently 
between the commodity producer and the customer many middlemen, 
who are jacking up by a factor of two or three the prices of 
basic foods. We need to get by without them. This would be done 
this way. A group of activists, retirees, in the main, would be 
formed, and we would negotiate directly with the kolkhozes and 
sovkhozes on the purchase of food: butter, meat, and so forth. 
We have close contacts with the Agrarian Party. Agreement could 
be reached with transport also. Then these activists would draw 
up orders among their neighbors--inhabitants of the 
neighborhood--and drive to the village. The food would be 
purchased, brought back, and sold at prices lower by a factor of 
1.5-2 than in the stores. 
  [Zharinov] Very well, let us assume that the tight food 
situation is alleviated. What about housing? 
  [Lyulko] There are several construction worker candidates 
for 
deputy in Fatherland--N.K. Tsyupka, I.V. Kolodenko, and V.P. 
Radustov, whom you all know as the creators of the circus, the 
new Young Spectator Theater, and other facilities. They have a 
program for resolving the housing problem. They have experience 
of how, relying on their own resources, to increase the 
construction of apartments. Construction workers of the 
Mostootryad appealed to me, as a deputy. Their capacity was 
standing idle, and they were not being allocated space for the 
construction of housing in the city. I managed to get land 
allocated. 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, what you have said was 
done in the past. Now the range of issues being tackled by the 
soviet has been narrowed down to the limit. Are you not 
harboring illusions on this score? 
  [Lyulko] I do not believe so. The main issue--formation of 
the oblast budget--remains with the soviet. First, the soviets 
now, according to the constitution, are to draw up and adopt the 
charter of the oblast. What kind of charter we adopt, how much 
authority we take, that much will we have. Fatherland is on its 
own initiative drawing up its draft charter of the oblast. We 
have specialists of various schools. All are professionals: 
Questions of culture are being handled by G.F. Karpunin, chief 
editor of SIBIRSKIYE OGNI, and S.M. Dubrovin, director of the 
Art Gallery, military matters, by Major General V.A. Bagryanets, 
who has 16 government decorations, for Afghanistan and 
elimination of the accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power 
Station included. A very strong economic group from 
Akademgorodok, the National Economy Institute, and the 
Commercial Institute is working in our party. These are 
patriotic economists. They are working on alternative proposals 
and projects. 
  [Zharinov] And how is the new oblast soviet "written out" in 
your charter? 
  [Lyulko] It will all depend on who becomes a member of the 
oblast soviet. If the heads of administration become members, it 
will be a toothless appendage of the administration of the 
oblast, if deputies of Fatherland are members, I promise that it 
will be a militant, totally independent soviet pursuing an 
independent policy. Whoever has observed our Rossiya faction of 
deputies at work in the oblast soviet knows that we have never 
groveled before anyone, have pursued an independent policy in 
defense of the interests of the working people, displayed 
concern for the interests of the oblast.... 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, do you allow of 
cooperation and interaction with other factions of deputies? 
  [Lyulko] We will cooperate not in the abstract but on 
specific matters. But there will undoubtedly be full interaction 
and cooperation between us and the Agrarian Party of Russia. An 
arrangement whereby we will support its candidates for deputy, 
and they, ours, has been arrived at. Generally, however, we are 
prepared to cooperate with all constructive parties and 
movements. 
  [Zharinov] Have you succeeded in resolving anything in point 
of substance as a deputy of the oblast soviet? 
  [Lyulko] Practically everything that I promised the 
electorate--and I promised only practicable things--I have done. 
For example, I promised to fight the plunder of Novosibirsk 
Oblast and exports overseas of natural resources and raw 
material. And I can say that at each session I raised the 
question of an end to the plan to export to Germany valuable 
natural raw material and peat from Chulymskiy Rayon's Guskovskiy 
Ryam. I ensured that a scandal was raised and that material 
indicating the illegality of this deal was publicized, and the 
exports of the raw material were terminated. 
  [Zharinov] You are opposed to exports of any raw material? 
  [Lyulko] I am opposed to exports of raw material. We need to 
export products. Were Guskovskiy Ryam to be destroyed, this 
would signify ecological catastrophe in the oblast. 
  [Zharinov] What else has been done? 
  [Lyulko] Restoration of the A. Nevskiy Cathedral, 
organization of the first volunteer Saturday work days. The 
Nikolskaya Chapel--the center of the Russian Empire--the Shrine 
of the Shroud in the city center--this is all our doing. We were 
the first to raise the question of a ban on pornography. Why 
should our children, the children of normal parents, watch 
pornography spread by sick people? 
  And we are not confining ourselves to prohibitions, what is 
more. I together with my friends have organized the publication 
and distribution of Orthodox literature of high artistic merit. 
I am proud that it was we who published the first works in the 
Soviet Union of the Russian thinker I.A. Ilin and then books of 
Ioann Kronshtadtskiy, S. Nilus, and others which had not 
previously been published anywhere. 
  We organized in the oblast soviet a struggle for the 
safeguarding of monuments. We have in our city, after all, many 
unique monuments of wooden architecture, which have been 
destroyed. We have at the present time begun to restore them 
with the Cossack Association. 
  Or take the fight against crime. Our faction, specifically 
S.A. Kovalev and myself, sought the appropriation of funds to 
purchase equipment, build a garage, and allocate housing for a 
special MVD subdivision. I participated in the creation of a 
Cossack security subdivision, which is now guarding certain 
plants. In addition, we have proposed to the administration the 
organization of patrols in the city on the basis of Cossack 
subdivisions. There were the volunteer public order squads and 
operational Communist Youth League detachments. These no longer 
exist. But I believe that our Cossacks (there are approximately 
500 men in the association) could combat hooliganism on the 
streets no less efficiently. After all, many of the Cossacks are 
former officers, and many of them distinguished themselves in 
the Dniester region and at the time of the last defense of the 
White House. 
  I was a member of the board of the Zavodskaya neighborhood, 
where I undertook the resolution of specific tasks in the 
district. Such as the renovation of apartments for the elderly, 
the asphalting of roads, and so forth. 
  Perestroyka has now hit the needy strata--retirees and large 
families--hard. In conjunction with the Russian Orthodox Church 
and Bishop Tikhon we organized Christmas and Easter festivities 
with the free distribution of gifts for large and needy 
families. Credit where credit is due, we were helped by the 
administration here. I.I. Indinok helped us purchase candy for 
the children and miscellaneous items. 
  [Zharinov] Aleksandr Nikolayevich, you and your family are 
believers? 
  [Lyulko] Yes. I myself initially understood that faith is 
essential. I began to go to church. Then my children and, 
together with them, my mother were baptized. Then my wife was 
baptized. And last summer we underwent a marriage ceremony at 
the Mogochinskiy Monastery.... 
  For more information concerning Fatherland please call 
23-62-33 (9, Oktyabrskaya). 

