BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish on 10 June 
94, pages 19 through 21, carries a 1,800-word report by 
Francisco Mattos who says that sources close to Peruvian unions 
have reported that in the next few days they will raise further 
charges of labor rights violations by the Peruvian Government 
before the International Labor Organization, ILO. The article 
states that these charges will be added to the 16 charges that 
labor unions submitted to the Peruvian Government last year. 
  The report quotes Teodulo Hernandez Valle, secretary general 
of the General Confederation of Peruvian Workers, CGTP, as 
saying: "It is the policy of this administration to ignore our 
rights instead of respecting us as a labor force. This is the 
reason behind our complaints, which will be submitted not only 
by Peruvian unions but by foreign unions as well." 
  The article states that in the last few hours, Labor 
Minister 
Augusto Antonioli and two close advisers left for Geneva where 
this coming weekend Antonioli will try to justify the Peruvian 
Government position regarding the charges. It states, however, 
that like last May, he will fail because of the Peruvian 
Government's refusal to make its labor policy more flexible. 
  The report says labor leader Juan Luna Rojas, from the CGTP, 
will be the main union delegate attending the ILO conference. It 
has yet to be confirmed if Hernandez Valle will attend the ILO 
conference because, unlike on previous occasions, the government 
has refused to cover the expenses of the trip. Hernandez Valle 
adds: "This is only one of many examples of the government's 
true intention, that is, to crush the rights the workers have 
achieved through struggle." 
  After stating that several unions have tried to obtain the 
necessary funds to finance his trip, Hernandez Valle adds: "In 
view of this, we have decided to sponsor a national strike on 21 
July. Either the government improves its labor policy or the 
labor movement will adopt more radical measures." 
  The article quotes CGTP as saying that Hernandez Valle will 
travel to Geneva to support Luna Rojas's case and exercise the 
right of rebuttal. If he is unable to attend, Luna Rojas will 
explain the position of all Peruvian labor unions. Hernandez 
Valle says: "This time around, it will not be a single voice but 
the voice of all Peruvian unions." He adds: "If this government 
abuses the workers, where can we go for help? We will simply 
resort to all those who may help us change the attitude of 
dictatorship towards labor." 
  The article states that labor expert Mario Pasco Cosmopolis 
believes the ILO is not the proper forum to discuss 
disagreements between the government and labor because it is not 
empowered to impose sanctions, it can only make recommendations. 
  The article adds that Mario Pasco does not believe the U.S. 
House of Representatives will exclude Peru from its preferential 
tariff list in view of the labor violation charges raised last 
year before the AFL-CIO. Pasco then explains that before making 
this decision, "the U.S. Trade Department must prove any 
violations." He adds that these charges were submitted before 
the ILO, which falls under the jurisdiction of the United 
Nations. 
  The article explains that ILO is the forum where workers, 
employers, and government officials gather to outline labor 
policies while the Union Freedom Committee, which is a 
tripartite forum, is responsible for raising these charges. In 
view of this, Hernandez del Valle says the Peruvian unions did 
not request sanctions. He says: "On the contrary, a couple of 
months ago we requested the nonenforcement of sanctions hoping 
the government will change its antilabor policy." 
  The report states that 16 charges have been raised against 
Peru which government officials believe are unjustified. It adds 
that very little is known about the new labor violation charges 
to be submitted this week in Geneva. 
  The article quotes government sources saying that there is 
willingness to resolve these problems, but it requires more 
understanding from workers. 
  The article provides a brief example of the charges raised 
by 
the workers last year, among which are violations of the right 
to join unions, collective bargaining agreements, and the right 
to strike. It adds that the detractors of the AFL-CIO are 
surprised that this U.S. organization has been chosen to defend 
Peruvian labor demands: Peruvian Government officials have 
stated that while Peru recognizes 66 ILO agreements, the U.S. 
Government recognizes only 11. 
  Peruvian Government officials believe the AFL-CIO proposal 
will not prosper, that the issue will be resolved in two months, 
and that no sanctions will be enforced against Peru. The article 
concludes with a quote by Union Leader Teodulo Hernandez who 
states: "There are more injustices against workers than against 
anyone else in this country. The government is the main 
perpetrator of these offenses and the one which abuses its 
powers to curtail our rights. We will no longer tolerate this. 
The time to fight has come because threats against us and other 
union leaders continue." 

