Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ignacio Gutierrez A.] </F>
  [Excerpts] Diego Valades, head of the Office of the 
Attorney General of the Republic [PGR], declared yesterday that, 
in the PGR's investigations to uncover operations involving the 
"laundering" of money from the drug traffic, "banking secrecy" 
will remain intact. He added that joint efforts are being made 
in this respect with the Secretariat of Finance and Public 
Credit. 
  Commenting on the Mexican state's battle against those 
activities on the part of drug traffickers, he noted that 
meetings are currently being held with officials from Central 
American countries, as well as the United States and Canada. 
Calling this issue one of the main international concerns, he 
remarked that, consequently, the problem will be examined at a 
meeting due to take place in Costa Rica. 
  At a press conference, the third granted by him this week, 
the attorney general of the republic reported that, during 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's administration, over 
90,000 persons have been remanded for crimes against health. He 
added that some are still being held, and others have now been 
released; explaining that this is contingent on the court 
proceedings. 
  He also revealed that, as a result of the recent penal 
reforms, it is possible that a considerable number of those 
detained for crimes against health may receive releases. He 
identified them, primarily, as the so-called "first offenders," 
as well as the sick and the addicted: persons remanded for 
possessing small amounts of drugs for their individual 
consumption. He commented: "Each case has to be studied 
individually." 
  The nation's attorney general stressed that drug use has not 
been legalized in Mexico, "nor will it be legalized." Adding 
that there is no public opinion nor decision by the Mexican 
state in favor of this, he claimed that no attempt will be made 
to achieve it either. 
  He declared vehemently that the country's sovereignty is not 
in jeopardy because of the drug trafficking problem, citing the 
cooperation existing with other countries to battle the common 
enemy. He admitted that the necessary level of communication has 
not yet been achieved, but observed: "We are gradually 
approaching that point, without in any way endangering our 
sovereignty or the respect for it." [passage omitted] 
  He went on to say that what is of concern now is not only 
the 
status of the PJF [Federal Judicial Police] personnel, but also 
the training for agents of the Federal Public Prosecutor's 
Office. He claimed: "We must place emphasis on the training and 
qualifications of its personnel, to reinforce our capacity for 
working with the courts." 
  Noting that, for the present, as a general policy, there has 
been no reinstatement of the personnel discharged for any reason 
during recent months, he concluded by saying: "This will 
continue so long as I am heading the Office of the Attorney 
General of the Republic." 

