CSO 

<F P=106> [Unsigned article: "Germany To Participate in 500 Space </F>
Projects in 1994"] 
  [Text] Bonn--Germany plans to participate in 500 
space research projects throughout 1994 in a context of 
international cooperation along with its financial contribution 
to the ESA mission, the German Space Agency 
(DARA) announced on 16 February. 
  "These various projects have one point in common and 
that is that they are very interesting in terms of the 
development of high technologies," emphasized Mr. 
Jan-Baldem Mennicken, DARA director-general, during a press 
conference in Bonn. 
  According to Mr. Mennicken, out of the budget of DM1.6 
billion allocated by the German Research Ministry, about 1.1 
billion will be devoted to ESA projects, while the rest, about 
500 million, will go to national programs and German research 
institutes. 
  In 1994, German space research will emphasize mobility 
(through the Ariane and Express programs), 
communications (TUBSAT-B), health 
(MIR-92E), safety, energy, and high-tech procedures, 
on the one hand, and observation of the Earth, the water, the 
climate, the atmosphere, and the planets (Galileo, 
Ulysses, Mars-94), on the other hand. 
  The two main projects to be launched will be the 
X-SAR Earth observation program, carried out together 
with Italy and the United States, and the Crista Spas 
climatological research mission endowed with DM40 million. The 
X-SAR ultra-sensitive radar "will not confine itself to 
observing the surface but will also measure the degree of 
humidity in the air," Mr. Heinz Stoewer, project manager, 
said in briefing the press. X-SAR will be tested on 7 April, and 
for a second time, on 18 August on board a shuttle. 
  The Crista Spas mission is intended to collect data on 
climate changes as well as on gases that are dangerous to the 
ozone layer over a period of 10 days ("as against 6 months 
for a conventional satellite"). It will be launched in 
October 1994 in connection with the flight of the American 
shuttle STS-66. 
  Here is another important project in which the Germans will 
participate: the Russian Mars-94 operation whose 
takeoff is scheduled for October from Baikonur; its purpose is 
to take soil samples on the red planet in cooperation with the 
French, the Americans, and the Russians. Germany will make as 
important a contribution as will France with 14 experiments. 
  Furthermore, the ISAN mission, intended to put the 
finishing touches on integrated aerial navigation systems with 
satellite surveillance during all flight phases, 
"describes the joint effort by the enterprises and the 
universities," Mr. Stoewer noted. 
  Germany, he pointed out furthermore, will conduct 
discussions 
with the Americans, particularly to have German astronauts 
included in future shuttle missions. Besides, an ESA cosmonaut, 
undoubtedly the German Ulf Merbold, should participate in the 
sixth Russian-European Euro-Mir mission which will 
take off from Baikonur in September; it will include major 
German participation with 11 experiments in human physiology. 

