Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute [JAERI] 
together with the National Space Development Agency [NASDA] shed 
light on the phenomenon that is the main cause for major 
breakdowns in semiconductors used in space in a strong radiation 
environment--the ``single event effect.'' This elucidation is 
based on recent results obtained at the ion radiation research 
facility built by JAERI at its Takasaki laboratory in 1991. The 
joint research confirmed the onset of the single event effect 
when heavy ions with a LET [linear energy transfer] punch power 
of 2.8 were shot into the core of integrated circuit memory 
chips to be used on the space station. According to the 
Department of Material Development, Takasaki Radiation Chemistry 
Department, JAERI, it ``would like to have these results 
reflected in countermeasures for electronic equipment aboard 
artificial satellites and such.'' As for the long term plan, the 
goal is the development of a cubic crystalline silicon carbide 
(3C-SiC) semiconductor--a new material that can resist radiation 
in order to deal with the increased necessity to use 
semiconductor elements in a radiation environment such as that 
of cosmic space and nuclear power facilities. 
  Moreover, in the space radiation environment, cosmic rays 
contain heavy ions with very high energy--especially cosmic rays 
coming from the Milky Way Galaxy. Here, when merely one heavy 
ion penetrates a semiconductor element, the large electric 
charge produced along the trajectory causes a malfunction. This 
phenomenon is called the single event effect and it is a large 
cause of the breakdown of artificial satellites and such. 
  In an irradiation experiment conducted on an integrated 
circuit memory chip (256 kilobit SRAM) in the core of the 
Japanese experimental module for the space station whose 
development is being jointly promoted by the United States, 
Japan, and Europe, it was found that a sudden increase in the 
frequency of breakdowns (memory reversal error) occurred when 
the heavy ion penetration exceeded LET 2.8. Moreover, the 
incorporation of these results into the space radiation 
environment module made it possible to predict directly the 
occurrence of the breakdowns. 
  In addition, JAERI succeeded in directly measuring the speed 
of the single event phenomenon--a feat, which, until then, had 
been considered to be impossible. JAERI was able to do this by 
using a device that can compress a heavy ion microbeam to a 
width of one micron. JAERI determined that the speed was in 
hundreds of picoseconds, which is an ultra-high speed transition 
current. 

