BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, leader of the "Yabloko" </F>
parliamentary faction, by Ilya Smirnov; date and place of 
interview not stated: "Grigoriy Yavlinskiy: Not Walking 
Backward"] 
  [Text] State Duma Deputy Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, leader of the 
"Yabloko" parliamentary faction, advocates serious amendments to 
the reforms which are being carried out in the country, 
including the alteration of a social policy which has led to the 
impoverishment of millions of Russians. But he resolutely 
opposes attempts to return to the pre-perestroyka totalitarian 
past with its ineffective antimarket economy. That was the 
subject of my talk with Grigoriy Yavlinskiy. 
  [Smirnov] In this connection what is your attitude toward 
the program recently put forward by Academicians Abalkin and 
Shatalin? 
  [Yavlinskiy] In my view the main provisions of their program 
connected with the freezing of prices and wages are unrealistic 
and erroneous. It looks as though the reformists' blunders have 
seriously frightened the academicians. They are calling for a 
turning back. But I, on the contrary, advocate advancing toward 
the market. Naturally on condition that the necessary 
amendments are made to the erroneous course. 
  [Smirnov] Where do you see the main blunders of the reforms' 
organizers? 
  [Yavlinskiy] The strategic error of the first stage of the 
reform was the attempt instantly to replace state regulation of 
the economy with monetarist instruments for managing it, 
designed for market systems which have already taken shape and 
which have a competitive environment. As a result we acquired 
an extremely monopolized pseudomarket. And today, in an attempt 
to "dash inflation," we are essentially struggling not against 
the causes of the disease but against its consequences. 
  [Smirnov] Has Russia nonetheless any possibility left of 
emerging from the quagmire of the economic crisis and again 
occupying a fitting place in the world community? 
  [Yavlinskiy] Of course it has. And during the recent 
Federal Assembly election campaign the "Yabloko" centrist 
parties' election bloc published its program for the country's 
emergence from the crisis. In it we suggested, first, 
introducing order regarding the state's control of those spheres 
of the economy which remain in its hands. Second, STRUCTURAL 
POLICY must be oriented toward the expansion of the domestic 
market, the increase of the export of highly processed output, 
support for science-intensive sectors which ensure 
"breakthrough" technologies, support for driving sectors (for 
instance aircraft building and space, oil extraction and 
refining, the construction materials industry, and housing 
construction). Third, we must ensure the formation of a 
competitive environment and the restriction of monopolies. 
Fourth, we must review financial and monetary and credit policy 
in the interests of creating predictable macroeconomic 
conditions for enterprises and the population and also for 
reducing tax pressure on enterprises in the production sphere. 
And so forth. 
  [Smirnov] Has the government taken note of the "Yabloko" 
bloc's program? 
  [Yavlinskiy] Not so far. I judge by the draft budget which 
was recently submitted for examination by the State Duma. 
  I have the feeling that the authors of the draft were 
concerned with just one thing -- the process of extracting a 
mass of money and toughening monetary policy. At any rate very 
many questions connected with structural restructuring, with 
privatization, with support for business, with investments in 
sectors which are the driving ones for reform, and so forth, 
have not been reflected in the draft. With this budget the 
government should prepare for the solution of problems connected 
with mass bankruptcies and the growth of unemployment. 
  Attention is drawn by the combination of a very tough budget 
with high interest rates for bank credits, in excess of 200 
percent. These are virtually prohibitive rates for enterprises. 
In this connection I should like to obtain in addition to the 
draft budget another document on the main avenues of monetary 
and credit policy. In order to understand how this toughness in 
the budget will be compensated for from the viewpoint of the 
Central Bank's policy. In general it seems to me that the draft 
budget which is being examined in the Duma reflects the 
government's lack of resolve as to whether to move in one 
direction or the opposite one. Politically it satisfies neither 
the supporters of reform nor the opposition. 
  [Smirnov] And what can you say about the memorandum on 
accord proposed by the president? Does it open the way to the 
desired stability? 
  [Yavlinskiy] Serious documents of this kind could appear 
only as a result of lengthy, painstaking, and unfailingly honest 
preparatory political work. The parties and movements taking 
part in the preparation of the memorandum should have a clear 
idea of its concept and the terms of compromises, the range of 
key issues (on which the participants will agree), the legal 
force of the decisions enshrined in the document, the methods of 
monitoring them, and so forth. It seems to me this work has not 
been done. And in general I think the process of attaining civil 
accord should begin not with the signing of documents on 
universal love but with a discussion of specific problems which 
perturb society. The state budget could be the start for such 
open talk. It brings together the interests of all civil 
groups: the inhabitants of regions, entrepreneurs, servicemen, 
state enterprise and military-industrial complex workers, 
representatives of science and culture, and so forth. 
  Incidentally, we should examine the question of the 
alteration of the practice of forming the budget so that it is 
based on the holding of a "roundtable" at which representatives 
of all these groups could coordinate the basic principles of 
budget policy. If that cannot be done at the stage of 
preparation of the budget for the current year of 1994 then this 
task should undoubtedly be resolved in the interests of 
compiling the budget for 1995. 
  [Smirnov] As we know, in 1991, in an attempt to prevent our 
country's collapse, you and your comrades in the EPItsentr 
(Center for Economic and Political Studies) prepared something 
like the memorandum on accord. 
  [Yavlinskiy] Yes. In 1991 we did indeed work on a document 
of this kind, which prescribed the entire technology for 
preparing the relevant contract. The document was called "on a 
policy of social accord." In July 1991 it was published as a 
brochure. We suggested at the time that Gorbachev and Yeltsin 
conduct talks on our methods with representatives of leading 
political forces in order to avoid the country's collapse. 
Unfortunately that was not done. The leaders at the time 
engaged only in empty talk. Naturally this talking shop led to 
nothing sensible. 
  [Smirnov] A sorrowful date was marked recently -- it was six 
months since the tragic denouement of the conflict between the 
former Russian parliament and the executive power. The press 
has said a lot about how it will be impossible to achieve real 
accord in society until all those events have been investigated 
and assessed politically. Do you agree? 
  [Yavlinskiy] I do not think that in the search for civil 
accord we should make preliminary conditions of this kind. 
Although the question of a political assessment of last 
October's events is extremely important. The Duma "Yabloko" 
faction firmly advocates the creation of a parliamentary 
commission to investigate and sum up politically the events of 
21 September through 4 October 1993. 
  Only an independent parliamentary commission will be able to 
determine the real political guilt of those who bring the 
country to cataclysms and thus protect society from such figures 
in the future. Russia is no place for permanent coups d'etat. 
Even if they are carried out under the flag of reforms. That 
is why our faction believes the Duma's abolition of this 
commission in adopting documents in February on the amnesty was 
an erroneous and dishonest action with regard to Russia's 
citizens. I am convinced that the outcome of the parliamentary 
commission case was decided by the fact that in Russian politics 
today there are too many people who have an extreme lack of 
interest in objective investigation. This amnesty adopted by 
the Duma in February was being sought covertly or openly 
primarily by those guilty of the bloodshed. It is clear that 
these people were on both sides in those tragic days. 
  [Smirnov] And one last question. Are you not perturbed by 
the fact that because of economic and political instability it 
will be hard for us to count on foreign aid in the foreseeable 
future? 
  [Yavlinskiy] I am not. I am profoundly convinced that no 
one will be able to buy a market economy, a democracy, or a 
proper living standard for Russia. We will have to achieve all 
this through our own labor. 

