Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada believes all 
alternatives must be sought for a sea outlet. He said this when 
he arrived in our country after participating as a guest 
observer in the fifth summit of Mercosur [Common Market of the 
South] countries. 
  As soon as he disembarked from the airplane, President 
Sanchez de Lozada said the remarks he made in Colonia were 
misinterpreted. In Colonia, he pointed out that Bolivia had 
finally discovered its sea outlet through the waterway and that, 
referring to the Pacific Ocean alternative, we had been looking 
in the wrong direction: 
  [Begin recording, in progress] ... in a wrong way. It was an 
ironic, allegorical sentence, saying that, through the waterway, 
we may hint at a sovereign outlet in a multinational way because 
we would be using a Bolivian port through which we would 
directly reach the Atlantic Ocean. 
  Now then, this does not mean, as some people wanted to 
interpret, that we have neglected our Amazon or Pacific destiny. 
We have not neglected our Pacific reality, the necessity of 
linking part of Bolivia, all of Bolivia, with the Pacific ports 
and the Amazon region. That is another sea outlet. [end 
recording] 
  For the president, the outlet to the Atlantic Ocean through 
the waterway is of great economic importance to our country 
because agricultural products, raw materials, and even 
manufactured products may be exported. 
  Concerning Mercosur's acceptance of Bolivia as a guest 
observer, journalists asked the president if this would entail a 
departure from the Andean Pact: 
  [Begin recording] We must talk with the Andean Pact people 
and see if there is a way of approaching Mercosur without losing 
contact with that Pacific bloc. 
  These are things that we must view wisely, but our policy is 
very effectively and very resolutely aimed at becoming a 
Mercosur member. [end recording] 
  The president also mentioned that a tripartite agreement 
among Argentina, Paraguay, and Bolivia has been reached to 
resolve the Pilcomayo River's environmental problems. 

