Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Velovich under the rubric "Domestic Aviation </F>
Hardware": "The MiG-29M--A Familiar Stranger"] 
  [Text] The MiG-29 is well known in our country and 
abroad, and is by rights the pride of the Air Forces and the 
Design Bureau imeni A.I. Mikoyan, where it was created. The 
improvement and development of this aircraft is continuing in 
accordance with the requirements of the times; the latest 
version is the MiG-29M. The British aviation magazine FLIGHT 
INTERNATIONAL called this MiG "the supreme weapon of Russia" in 
analyzing its characteristics. 
  The new MiG-29M fighter was displayed for the first time in 
September of 1992 at the international air show at Farnborough, 
not far from London. It differs little from series-produced 
versions in outward appearance, but that impression is 
deceiving. It is deserving of a new designation--the MiG-33--in 
the opinion of many specialists. General Designer R. Belyakov, 
however, feels that this addition to the MiG family will receive 
official recognition and its own new name only upon the 
completion of state joint testing. 
  The geometric dimensions of the fighter have remained as 
before, but the design of the airframe has undergone substantial 
changes. Upper outlets for the air intakes are lacking, first 
and foremost. The protection of the engine against the ingestion 
of foreign objects is now ensured by a protective grill mounted 
in the duct. This device is analogous to that employed on the 
Su-27, but has a number of differences as well that, in the 
words of aircraft chief designer M. Valdenberg, have provided 
for the reliable protection of the protective grill against 
icing. The new device was subjected to forced verification 
during flight testing--a duck got into one of the air intakes 
during takeoff. The grill only sagged slightly, but the engine 
sustained no damage whatsoever. 
  The configuration of the wing strakes has been altered--they 
now have a sharp edge. This provides for the more energetic 
shaping of the vortex system at large angles of attack and, as a 
result of that and ailerons with increased span, for a marked 
improvement in controllability at low speeds. 
  The MiG-29 fighter has been demonstrated abroad repeatedly 
over the last several years, and one of the most frequently 
asked questions of the representatives of the firm was, "So why 
doesn't the aircraft have a fly-by-wire control system (SDU)?" 
The reason for that is the adherence of the OKB [Experimental 
Design Bureau] to the most reliable and proven engineering 
ideas. An SDU was installed on the MiG-29M, but the designers 
again used an approach that guaranteed reliability: an analog 
system with four-way back-up was used in the longitudinal 
channel, the redundancy is three-fold in the heading and roll 
channels, with one of the control loops moreover using 
mechanical wire, providing for the setting of the ailerons and 
rudder to half their full settings. 
  M. Valdenberg also substantiates the use of an analog rather 
than a digital SDU: "I am convinced that this was the correct 
decision, since it provides for greater safety and less 
likelihood of any unpleasant surprises. That is even though the 
analog SDU is more complicated and loses out in weight compared 
to a digital one." One can agree with the chief designer, 
especially if one recalls the recent accidents of the SAAB 
JAS-39 Gripen in Sweden and the YF-22 in the United States. The 
cause of both of those flight accidents was insufficient 
software support for the digital SDUs of those fighters. The 
case of the loss of a Tornado fighter/bomber of the German Air 
Force owing to the failure of the digital SDU under exposure to 
the electromagnetic field of the powerful transmitting antenna 
of a radio broadcasting station is also well known. 
  An increased-area stabilizer with a "tooth" on the leading 
edge has also been installed on the aircraft to increase the 
effectiveness of the control system. The "tooth" improves the 
flow pattern at large angles of stabilizer settings. 
  One of the noticeable outward differences of the MiG-29M 
from 
the prior model is the absence of fences running from the base 
of the rudders along the upper surface of the wings. They were 
used on the MiG-29 to house the thermal decoy target and chaff 
firing devices. This device is located under a fairing on the 
upper surface of the fuselage on the latest model. 
  There is an air brake of large area (more than one square 
meter) located behind the cockpit. The longitudinal moment that 
arises when setting the panel is countered automatically by the 
SDU. One braking chute with an area of 17 m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  has 
been replaced with two of 13 m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  each. The reinforced 
landing gear, designed for the maximum takeoff weight, has a 
brake with enhanced power, which reduces the length of the 
runout. 
  The forward portion of the fuselage, of welded design, is 
made of aluminum-lithium alloy. This has provided a sharp 
reduction in weight, since there is no need to make the joints 
airtight in the fuel tank/compartments or cockpit, there are no 
overlaps for riveting and the unit mass has been reduced. There 
is another advantage to this design--the complete utilization of 
internal spaces to hold fuel. This could not be done in a 
rivet-fastened design, owing to the impossibility of making all 
of the rivet seams airtight. 
  Composite materials are widely used on the MiG-29M, as on 
the 
MiG-29. The air brakes, engine cowlings, air-intake ducts and 
rudders are made of them. The design of most of the enumerated 
elements is composite-honeycomb, which markedly reduces the 
weight and provides quite high rigidity. 
  The fundamentally new design and the additional internal 
volume freed up after the elimination of the upper intakes has 
made it possible to increase the fuel reserves by 1,500 
l, bringing them to 5,700 l. The flight 
range at cruising speed and altitude has been increased from 
1,500 to 2,000 km. Three external fuel tanks (a center tank with 
a capacity of 1,500 l and two wing tanks with 1,150 
l each) provide a ferry range of 3,200 km. Many 
pilots in line units have repeatedly pointed out the 
desirability of increasing the operating range of the MiG-29. 
The designers took those wishes into account in the new model. 
The longitudinal instability of the aircraft and the use of an 
SDU have also facilitated an increase in range, in view of the 
decrease in balance losses in cruising mode. 
  The principal tactical-performance data typifying the 
maneuverability (sustained positive G forces in a banked turn, 
rate of climb, acceleration time) for the MiG-29M have remained 
at the prior level, but one improvement was the marked increase 
in the allowable angles of attack and, as a consequence of that, 
the available G forces for non-sustained maneuvers. 
  The new fighter has a limiter of maximum modes that does not 
permit it to go beyond a set angle of attack. The maximum value 
in testing was set at 30&deg;, but M. Valdenberg feels that the 
"bar" will be raised upon the completion of testing. R. Belyakov 
describes the MiG-29M thus: "This is the best aircraft in the 
world overall from the standpoint of overcoming stalling and 
spins. The MiG-29 had already been brought to a high level, and 
we have gone even further with the MiG-29M." 
  The RD-33K engines have thrust with afterburners of 8,800 
kgf, which is 500 kgf more than the series-produced RD-33 
engines. The letter K signifies that they belong to the 
shipborne MiG-29K version, where the increased thrust achieved 
by the installation of a new fan with increased air consumption 
supports ramp takeoff from the short deck of aircraft carrier. 
An integrated digital regulating system for the engine is 
envisaged that also devises control commands for the flaps of 
the air intake. 
  The MiG-29M, as opposed to its predecessor (intended by and 
large for the destruction of airborne targets), is a true 
multirole tactical fighter with a rich arsenal of air-to-surface 
guided weapons. The war in the Persian Gulf visibly demonstrated 
the decisive significance of so-called "smart" weapons. R. 
Belyakov relates that many potential export customers have 
appealed to the OKB to expand the capabilities of the MiG-29 in 
operations against ground targets. 
  The weapons control system (SUV) on the MiG-29M is a new 
one. 
Its foundation is the multifunctional pulse-Doppler radar 
developed by the Fazotron NPO [Scientific-Production 
Association], operating with high, medium and low pulse 
repetition rates. The antenna is a planar slit array. Even 
though the range of airborne target detection has effectively 
not increased, the variety of operating modes and the 
"intelligence" of the set, including jamming protection, has 
become substantially more extensive. 
  The air-to-air modes include tracking of up to ten targets 
in 
fire-and-forget mode, and the simultaneous firing on two to four 
of them in open space or against the ground. The automatic 
lock-on of targets from vertical-scan mode is provided in 
close-range air-to-air combat. 
  The set of air-to-ground modes is very broad--mapping with a 
active beam and synthesized aperture, enlargement of the scale 
of depiction of a selected plot on a map ("electronic loop") and 
"freezing" of an image, measurement of the intrinsic speed of 
the aircraft to correct the navigational system and to 
compensate for the wind when delivering non-guided weapons, 
measurement of the coordinates of selected land or sea targets 
and support of low-altitude flight with automatic obstacle 
avoidance. 
  The electro-optic portion of the SUV has also been 
substantially refined. The optical-locating set (OLS) is 
equipped with a new and sensitive infrared receiver with deep 
cooling, which has increased many times over the range of target 
detection from thermal emissions. The power of the laser channel 
has also been boosted, and the boundaries of the range 
determination of both air and land targets have been expanded 
accordingly. The new OLS moreover supports the detection of a 
laser spot on a ground target illuminated by an external target 
designation source, as well as the delivery of semi-active 
air-to-surface missiles with laser homing (Kh-25ML and Kh-29L). 
Up to four such missiles may be accommodated on the internal 
stores racks under the wings. 
  The OLS also has another television channel, which provides 
for the identification of air and ground targets at greater than 
visual ranges. There is a mode for the televised correlation 
tracking of a ground target. Kh-29T guided missiles and 
adjustable KAB-500KR aerial bombs with television homing heads 
may be delivered either singly or in salvos. The helmet-mounted 
target-designation system has also been modified, by and large 
with the aim of reducing the weight of the gear. 
  The aircraft cockpit has two multifunctional electronic 
indicators and a new head-up display (ILS) indicator. The 
concept of command and control of all SUV modes without removing 
the hand from the aircraft control stick or the engine control 
levers has been realized on the MiG-29M. The ILS has become the 
principal piloting instrument, and the small piloting 
instruments with round dials in the center of the instrument 
panel are only back-ups in the event of the failure of the 
electronic indicators. The "ahead and down" field of view has 
been improved (to -15&deg;) through the raised position of the 
pilot in the cockpit. 
  The MiG-29M has the same 30mm GSh-30 cannon, but its 
ammunition load has been reduced from 150 to 100 rounds. The 
general designer explained that "the cannon is principally 
employed against aerial targets. The MiG-29M is provided with 
high aiming precision, and just five to seven shells are 
required to shoot down a target." 
  The number of wing stores racks has been increased from six 
to eight, while the central one under the fuselage has been 
preserved. This provides for a maximum bomb load of 4.5 tonnes 
(nine 500-kilogram bombs). 
  The capabilities to counter the opposition of PVO [air 
defenses] have been raised substantially. An active jamming set 
and gear to warn of illumination (SPO) have been installed on 
the MiG-29M, and the store of jamming rounds has been increased 
from 60 to 120. 
  The SPO can not only warn the pilot, but also control the 
passive antiradar heads of the Kh-25MP and Kh-31P missiles, of 
which the MiG-29M can carry up to four. The Kh-25MP missile has 
a mass of about 320 kg and a maximum launch range of up to 40 
km, and is intended principally to defeat the Hawk SAM radar. 
The Kh-31P high-speed antiradar missile, with a ramjet engine 
developed by the Zvezda NPO, can defeat all existing homing and 
fire-control radars of contemporary SAM systems, including the 
Patriot, as well as the detection and warning radars of 
air-defense systems. Its launch range is up to 100 km, with a 
mass of about 600 kg. 
  The air-to-air weapons include the latest development of the 
Vympel MKB [Design Bureau]--the RVV-AE missile with an active 
homing head. This is the domestic analogue to the American 
AMRAAM missile. The RVV-AE has inertial guidance with radio 
correction and active radar homing on the final leg of its 
trajectory, making it possible to fire on several targets 
simultaneously. The MiG-29M is armed with eight such missiles, 
which gives it a very impressive appearance. The missile can 
defeat targets maneuvering at up to 12 Gs. The maximum launch 
range on closing headings and at high altitudes and speeds 
reaches 100 km, but a value of about 40 km can be considered 
typical for the conditions encountered most often. 
  The number of R-27 semi-active missiles accommodated has 
been 
increased to four, two of which can be R-27RE with a launch 
range increased to 130 km. Even though the full maximum launch 
range of this missile is not realized on the MiG-29M owing to 
their limited lock-on range, their use could nonetheless prove 
to be decisive in a closing missile battle at medium ranges. A 
missile with increased power has a higher average flight speed, 
and the gain of a few seconds in hitting the enemy deprives his 
semi-active missile the opportunity to continue guided flight. 
  The Mikoyan OKB has always assigned great significance to 
reliability and maintainability in its aircraft. No less 
attention is devoted to those aspects today than to the tactical 
flight characteristics or the features of the SUV. General 
Design R. Belyakov reported that the average run time between 
failures for a MiG-29M will be no less than eight hours, and the 
combat readiness of the fighter fleet will be at the 90-percent 
level. The average duration of the pre-flight preparations for a 
solitary aircraft is 30 minutes, and the time to prepare for a 
repeat sortie is 15--25 minutes, depending on the choice of 
weaponry. The total unit labor-intensiveness of maintenance is 
11.5 man-hours per hour of flying time. The average time to 
restore an operable state should not exceed 1.2 hours, with a 
frequency of routine maintenance operations of 200 hours. The 
time necessary to replace an engine is 2.2 hours, including 
breaking it out, greasing it and testing, with a 
labor-intensiveness of 5.3 man-hours. 
  The MiG-29M should be a long-lived aircraft, with its life 
cycle extending well into the next century. 
  The fate of the new fighter could shape up in different 
ways, 
owing to the sharp cutbacks in defense spending. First Deputy 
General Designer A. Belosvet describes the situation thus: "A 
fundamentally new financial program has been lined up and signed 
for this aircraft. It should go to the Air Forces, which will 
evaluate it and perform field testing. The Air Forces are 
essentially running the program." 
  World practices really do not know any examples of the sale 
of a combat aircraft abroad that is not in service with the 
manufacturing country. Several years ago the American firm of 
Northrop tried the creation of a special export fighter, the 
F-20, but even the Third World countries refused to acquire it, 
preferring to pay more to obtain the U.S. Air Force tested F-16 
from General Dynamics. 
  R. Belyakov feels that the opportunities for the export of 
the MiG-29M are very good: "This multirole aircraft, with the 
highest effectiveness in the performance of both air-to-air and 
air-to-ground tasks, is a twin-engine aircraft, which is very 
important for operational safety in peacetime. It has small 
reflecting surfaces compared with its competitors, and a small 
signature. We feel that it will find application." 
  The OKB imeni A.I. Mikoyan is also offering collaboration to 
European countries in the creation of a new European fighter 
based on the MiG-29M and further developments of it. The new 
Eurofighter that is now under development, in the prestigious 
opinion of the general designer, is in no way superior to the 
MiG-29M. This proposal is being discussed with interest in 
aviation circles and in the pages of the foreign press, but "the 
reaction so far is guarded." 
  More evidence in favor of the MiG-29M is the fact that 
relatively larger and more expensive aircraft such as the 
McDonnell-Douglas F-15 can be acquired only by Israel, Japan and 
Saudi Arabia. The Grumman F-14 was procured by Iran alone during 
the rule of the shah, and Russia has supplied the Su-27 only to 
China. The number of countries supplied with the F-16, a close 
analogue to the MiG, is approaching twenty. 
  The reason for that is simple--the cost of the aircraft is 
connected directly with its takeoff mass, and that is not only 
the production price but also the cost of servicing and 
operation, which comprise the greater portion of overall 
spending over the life cycle. An aircraft with a takeoff mass of 
15 tonnes understandably requires half the kerosene for a flight 
of one hour in duration or a ferry of 600 kilometers than a 
craft weighing 25 tonnes. Today, when our country is also coming 
out at world market prices, this factor obviously can no longer 
be disregarded. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

