CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Republic of Tatarstan Prime Minister N. Sabirov </F>
at extraordinary 20th session of the Republic of Tatarstan 
Supreme Soviet of the 12th term on 6 June 1994: "On the Plan of 
Priority Measures for Stabilizing the Economy of the Republic of 
Tatarstan"] 
  [Text] Esteemed people's deputies! 
  In execution of the laws passed by the Republic of Tatarstan 
Supreme Soviet and edicts of the president of Tatarstan, the 
Cabinet of Ministers of the republic has been making purposeful 
efforts to reinforce the economic independence of the Republic 
of Tatarstan, to enhance structural changes in the economy, and 
to develop a system of social protection for the citizens of the 
Republic of Tatarstan. 
  So far, structural changes in Tatarstan have proceeded at 
the 
pace and in keeping with the schedule determined by the policy 
of state regulation of the process of transition to market 
relations which is accepted here--the policy which has been 
called a "soft" entry into the market economy. Time has shown 
that this was a justified policy. Over this period the residents 
of the republic have managed to better prepare for the complex 
conditions of the future market economy and have not lost 
interest in economic reforms that are being conducted. By now 
the feasibility of such a policy has also been acknowledged in 
Russia; by now they have also started to operate in Russia in 
the mode of what they call "containing moderate inflation." By 
now it is already possible to say that the policy of state 
regulation of the process of transition to a market economy has 
proven itself. 
  However, this was the very initial stage of structural 
changes. We are now entering the next stage, in which more 
radical actions are required. 
  It was precisely from this standpoint that we have developed 
over the last few months the draft "Main Directions for the 
Economic Development of the Republic of Tatarstan in Keeping 
With the New Constitution of the Republic of Tatarstan." This 
programmatic document, whose text has been presented to you, 
esteemed deputies, analyzes the status and potential for 
economic development in the Republic of Tatarstan, specifies the 
main tasks facing each sector and the economy as a whole, and 
indicates ways to solve difficult problems that will arise in 
the social and cultural areas of the life of the people with the 
establishment of market relations. The draft Main 
Directions...were developed by a group of scientists of the 
republic and specialists of the Cabinet of Ministers. I would 
say that the document has been presented to you, so to say, for 
the "first reading"; it needs major revisions and the 
participation of all who would want to submit their proposals 
and remarks. 
  "The Action Program of the Republic of Tatarstan Government 
for Organizing the Execution of the Treaty Between the Russian 
Federation and the Republic of Tatarstan 'On Delineation of 
Jurisdiction and Mutual Delegation of Powers Between Organs of 
State Power of the Russian Federation and the Republic of 
Tatarstan'" is the second most significant document for the 
operation of the government which has been developed and 
approved by the Cabinet of Ministers. The successful 
implementation of this program...depends to a considerable 
degree on the continuous operation of the relevant coordinating 
and monitoring organ, for example, a bilateral commission for 
execution of provisions of the interstate treaty and 
intergovernmental agreements. During a visit of President of the 
Russian Federation B. Yeltsin to the Republic of Tatarstan, 
President of the Republic of Tatarstan M. Shaymiyev made a 
proposal, and the decision was made to set up such a commission 
headed by O. Soskovets, first deputy of the Russian Federation 
Government [title as published], and M. Sabirov, prime minister 
of the Republic of Tatarstan. 
  The third document is a natural continuation of the two 
above. The Cabinet of Ministers was instructed to develop this 
document by a decree of the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet 
dated 21 April 1994; consideration of the draft has been put on 
the agenda of the current session. At issue are "Priority 
Measures for Stabilizing the Economy of the Republic of 
Tatarstan." 
  What is the explanation for the need to take these measures 
at this particular time? 
  First, the explanation is that we are embarking on a period 
of radicalization and acceleration of economic reform. 
  Second, a new period of structural changes raises a number 
of 
issues in the social sphere, too. 
  Third, output is continuing to decline in the industry of 
the 
republic. 
  We can no longer reassure ourselves with the fact that this 
decline is smaller than in most regions of the Russian 
Federation. 
  Compared to the corresponding period of last year, the 
decline in the volume of production of output came to 29.8 
percent in January through April 1994. The decline was greatest 
at enterprises of the defense complex (47 percent), 
machine-building (34.6 percent), chemistry and petrochemistry 
(34.1 percent), the construction materials industry (48.8 
percent), and light industry (43.4 percent). 
  The generation of electricity fell by 25.8 percent, oil 
output--by 25.9 percent, output of gas--by 16.7 percent, 
polyethylene--by 18.5 percent, synthetic rubber--by 37.4 
percent, car tires--by 32.3 percent, and trucks--by 61.6 percent. 
  The volume of capital construction declined considerably. 
Some 76,400 square meters of total floor space in residential 
buildings were commissioned out of all sources of financing (24 
percent less than during the corresponding period of last year). 
Builders of single-family houses commissioned 237 houses with a 
total floor space of 23,200 square meters (12 percent less). 
  Output of consumer goods fell by 10.5 percent, and of 
nonfood 
goods--by 26.7 percent. To be sure, examples could be given in 
this instance which indicate the beginning of some kind of 
stabilization. For example, the volume of output of foodstuffs 
increased somewhat (3.5 percent); the production of sugar, 
butter, cheese, flour, cereals, and a number of other foodstuffs 
was up. 
  The situation at defense enterprises located in the republic 
continues to deteriorate. Compared to 1991, the volume of 
production at these enterprises in comparable prices fell by a 
factor of almost two. In the process, the relative proportion of 
military output at one-half of enterprises fell by a factor of 
four to five on average, and by a factor of two to three at the 
remaining enterprises. As of 1 May 1994 the external debt of 
enterprises, scientific research institutes, and design bureaus 
came to R165 billion. 
  The process of conversion is not developing easily, either. 
The proportion of products manufactured in 1993 and mastered 
under conversion programs ranges between 0.7 and 10 percent at 
seven enterprises and between 16 and 20 percent at six 
enterprises; only at three enterprises does it exceed 25 percent. 
  The general nonpayments crisis which has spread to the 
Russian Federation and CIS countries has been an unfavorable 
influence on the entire economy of our republic. The volume of 
accounts payable by the enterprises and organizations of the 
republic on the whole came to about R4 trillion as of 1 May; 
accounts receivable come to about R3 trillion. Overdue arrears 
in the payment of wages by enterprises and organizations 
increased. 
  Critical situations bordering on bankruptcy have developed 
at 
some enterprises as a result of the short-sighted economic 
policies of their managers in adjusting to market conditions. 
They include Polimerfoto, Santekhpribor, the Almetyevsk 
Spiral-Seamed Pipe Plant, the imeni Lenin Scientific Production 
Association, and Radiopribor. 
  The nonpayments crisis was the main reason for a shortfall 
in 
the intake of revenues by the republic budget. In the republic 
as a whole just over R500 billion was taken in in five months of 
this year, or less than 18 percent of the yearly total. The 
republic budget took in 16 percent of the yearly total instead 
of the computed 41.6 percent. The tentative shortfall over five 
months exceeded R500 billion. As a result of this, funding was 
provided at the rate 25-30 percent of the needs of sectors. 
  For the first time, arrears in the payment of wages to 
employees of institutions and organizations financed from the 
budget over a long period of time developed in the republic. 
Capital construction was funded at minimal rates; there were 
delays in the payment of subsidies for the output of animal 
husbandry and in settlements for products sold at regulated 
prices. 
  Owing to the joint actions of the government and assistance 
from a number of financial organs of the Republic of Tatarstan 
and the Russian Federation, funds were procured and existing 
arrears in the payment of wages to employees of institutions 
financed from the budget were eliminated through April 
inclusive. The government settled on its debts to construction 
personnel through the Capital Construction Administration of the 
Cabinet of Ministers for 1993 and in part for the first quarter 
of this year. Monetary funds were also provided for the payment 
of a proportion of arrears in subsidies for the delivered 
products of animal husbandry, which made it possible to pay 
wages to the employees of kolkhozes and sovkhozes for February 
and March, and in part for April. The remainder will be paid for 
in bills of exchange within days. 
  Esteemed deputies! 
  The existing situation predetermines the need to take urgent 
decisive measures to cure the economy, enhance economic reforms, 
change the orientation of property, and support 
entrepreneurship--I would say productive and creative 
entrepreneurship. What measures are proposed to this end? 
  In the area of privatization, denationalization, and support 
for entrepreneurship, the task is being set to convert up to 70 
percent of state and municipal property into private property 
before the end of 1994. To this end it is necessary: 
  --to adopt the State Privatization Program for 1994 and for 
the long term until 1997, as well as the Republic of Tatarstan 
Law "On Amendments and Additions to the Republic of Tatarstan 
Law 'On Transformation of State and Municipal Property in the 
Republic of Tatarstan (On Denationalization and Privatization)'"; 
  --to complete the conversion of enterprises in the sphere of 
material production to joint-stock operations; 
  --within three to five months to sell at auctions and 
through 
competitions up to 50 percent of the enterprises in trade, the 
service sector, and public catering; 
  --to carry out the secondary emission of shares at 
privatized 
enterprises. 
  In 1994-1995 it is planned to put up for sale on 
international markets the shares of the joint-stock companies 
Tatneft, Nizhnekamskneftekhim, Nizhnekamskshina, the Chistopol 
Watch Plant, Orgsintez, the KVPO [expansion not identified], the 
KMPO [expansion not identified], and others. It is planned to 
include in the process of privatization new facilities and 
enterprises whose privatization was previously banned or which 
did not take part in privatization; to expand the listing of 
facilities whose privatization is mandatory due to the addition 
of real estate and parcels of land occupied by privatized 
enterprises; to organize the conduct of priority privatization 
of enterprises subsidized by the state, as well as bankrupt and 
unprofitable enterprises and those with low profit margins; to 
sell through investment competitions and sales sessions 
previously unsold blocs of shares which have been retained as 
state (municipal) property. 
  It is planned to effect in stages the transfer of 
sociocultural facilities and municipal and consumer services 
assigned to privatized enterprises with the right of full 
economic administration to the balance sheets of municipal 
enterprises specifically established for this purpose; to create 
in the republic a market for housing in 1994-1995; to organize a 
system of agencies for the acquisition and sale of housing, 
mortgage (lien) banks, condominiums (association of owners of 
housing), and other institutions of a market infrastructure in 
the housing sphere. 
  We should develop a mechanism and embark on the sale of land 
to be privately owned, including sales to foreign individuals 
and legal entities, and pass the "Law on Concessions and 
Concession Operations." Furthermore, it is necessary to attract 
strategic investors through investment and commercial 
competitions and to step up post-privatization support for 
enterprises and the formation of stock market institutions. 
  We should also speed up the adoption of a most important 
document--the Program of State Support for and Development of 
Entrepreneurship, the draft of which has already been handed out 
to you. 
  Esteemed people's deputies! 
  With a view to creating conditions giving manufacturers an 
incentive to produce competitive products and stabilizing the 
economy of the republic as a whole on a competitive basis, it is 
necessary to seriously revise our financial and credit policy. 
In this area the government proposes: 
  to reduce the rates of the profit tax by 10 to 15 percent as 
of 1 July 1994; 
  to reduce the tax rate by 0.5 percentage points for each 
percentage point of the growth of output of products or types of 
services, which will facilitate the growth of the output of 
products; 
  to reduce property tax to 0.1 percent of the taxable base, 
primarily for enterprises of the military-industrial complex; 
  to develop and enact on 1 January 1995 the Law of the 
Republic of Tatarstan "On the Tax System in the Republic of 
Tatarstan," building into it a further reduction in tax rates, a 
decrease in the number of taxes, and differentiation and 
simplification of collection procedures; 
  to enact the developed and submitted draft Edict of the 
Republic of Tatarstan President "On Statutory Penalties for 
Violations of Tax Legislation," which is aimed at ensuring 
timely and complete intake of payments to the budget, the tax 
inspectorate being granted the right to collect tax arrears of 
enterprises and organizations without recourse; 
  to provide for the collection of contract penalties from 
commercial banks which have exceeded the maximum duration for 
processing of payment documents in the amount of 1 percent for 
each day of delay; in the event of above-the-norm time of action 
on payment documents, the above sanctions against banks shall be 
doubled; 
  to envision an opportunity for enterprises to pay 90 percent 
of the arrears to the budget while leaving 10 percent at their 
disposal, creating out of them a reserve to meet urgent needs, 
primarily to pay wages; 
  to grant the Cabinet of Ministers the right to exempt 
enterprises from the assessment of fines and sanctions against 
them in the event they are not financed from the budget in a 
timely manner. 
  The Credit Commission is being created under the government 
with a view to the efficient use of credit resources. Use of the 
circulation of bills of exchange in the Republic of Tatarstan is 
being expanded substantially. A system of measures to enhance 
the influence of banks on the economy is envisioned. 
  The number of state government staffs will be reduced. The 
level of wages of executives in all types of economic 
operations, including the banking system, will be influenced 
through the tax system. 
  Accomplishing the task of curing the economy is hampered by 
the fact that the progress of structural transformations at 
large enterprises that manufacture more than three-quarters of 
the republic's industrial output is extremely slow. A special 
fund needs to be established in order to speed up structural 
transformations at such enterprises. The moneys of funds for 
scientific research and experimental design work, part of the 
money of the employment fund, and a proportion of foreign 
exchange proceeds should be subordinated to the same objective. 
The State Committee of the Republic of Tatarstan for the Economy 
has developed methods for the competitive selection of business 
projects with the greatest market effectiveness. The 
implementation of many projects that have already been selected 
must ensure the sufficiently quick recoupment of funds and the 
replenishment of budget revenues. 
  An effort to inventory the existing prior accomplishments in 
scientific development and experimental design work was also 
undertaken in the republic, together with examination of the 
potential for using them for the scientific-technical 
development of economic sectors in the Republic of Tatarstan. An 
expert review of all submitted conversion and innovation 
projects was also administered. 
  The main emphasis in innovation and conversion policies has 
been laid on: 
  --development of processing sectors of the agro-industrial 
complex, perfection of oil production technologies, and 
development of oil-refining sectors; 
  --reinforcement of the equipment pool of health care, 
development of the construction industry, reinforcement of the 
equipment pool and raw material supply of light industry; 
resolution of ecological issues and accomplishment of tasks in 
the rational use of nature; 
  --development of electronics and data processing, 
introduction of a "cellular" communications system throughout 
the republic, support for accelerated production of instruments 
and automation devices for various fields of operation, new 
structural and functional materials and up-to-date technologies 
of fine synthesis; 
  --creation of civil aviation and merchant marine. 
  Jointly with the Russian Federation Ministry of Defense and 
the Russian Federation Ministry of the Economy it is necessary 
for us to: 
  --determine shortly assignments for the production 
(development) of defense materiel, pay arrears for military 
products manufactured in 1993, and make advance payments on 1994 
orders; 
  --finance special-purpose federal conversion programs 
(production of the Tu-204, Tu-200M, and Tu-330 aircraft, Mi-38 
helicopter, and a number of others); 
  --introduce a mechanism of reorganization (bankruptcy) of 
enterprises of the military-industrial complex. 
  The Cabinet of Ministers believes that the fundamental, 
long-term interests of Tatarstan require that we support 
enterprises that have promising programs and are capable of 
becoming pillars of its economy within the next three to five 
years, including from the standpoint of expanding the exports of 
the products of machine building. These are primarily 
aviation-related enterprises--the KAPO [expansion not 
identified], the KVPO, the KMPO, and Elektronpribor. The 
programs of the KOMZ [expansion not identified], the imeni 
Gorkiy Plant, Terminal, and Elekon may also be viewed as 
promising. Besides, the KMPO, Elekon, as well as Soyuz, 
Aviamotor, and the imeni Tupolev ANTK [expansion not identified] 
have largely geared their conversion programs to solving the 
problems of introducing progressive (industrial) technologies in 
the agro-industrial complex, which also necessitates providing 
assistance to them. 
  Therefore, the government is abandoning the principle of 
distributing resources to all enterprises and is switching to 
concentrating resources on effective programs, i.e. providing 
selective support. 
  In addition to the joint measures with the Russian 
Federation 
enumerated above, the measures of the Republic of Tatarstan 
Government with regard to individual large 
associations--Tatneft, Nizhnekamskshina, Nizhnekamskneftekhim, 
YelAZ [Yelabuga Automotive Plant], and others--are also geared 
toward selective support. The holding company 
Tatneftekhiminvestkholding must start operations. 
  The formation of industrial and finance groups must become 
an 
important instrument for supporting a structural policy and 
making an adjustment to the market economy. There are 
interesting proposals to this end. 
  Dropping volumes of material production, capital 
construction, and other sectors, as well as changes in the 
structure of output of the military-industrial complex and the 
growth of rates for transportation services have entailed a 
reduction in the volume of freight carriage by public-use motor 
vehicles. Compared to 1990, the volume of carriage in 1993 fell 
by 53.5 percent. The decline has continued this year. For this 
reason the government considers it feasible to break up the 
existing motor vehicle pools, create alternative structures with 
various forms of ownership, and auction off some of the existing 
pool of vehicles and equipment of large trucking enterprises. 
  In recent years the formation of a new agrarian structure 
began based on large state, collective, and joint-stock 
agricultural enterprises, associations, and agrarian companies. 
The development of farming which draws on private property and 
expansion of the individual sector are underway. A legal 
foundation for land legislation currently exists, which may lay 
the groundwork for the emergence of a mixed economy in rural 
areas. The process of privatization is underway in the food and 
processing industries, with their monopoly position with regard 
to rural areas being simultaneously weakened. 
  At the same time, despite a certain growth in the volume of 
product output, agriculture is experiencing difficulties. 
  The transition to a mixed market economy and incentives for 
entrepreneurial operations call for speeding up the 
transformation of kolkhozes and sovkhozes, with this process to 
be completed in 1994 and 1995. Implementation of land reform 
will also be accelerated. 
  In conjunction with changes that occurred after the adoption 
of the Constitution of the Republic of Tatarstan, it is 
necessary to make amendments and additions to legislative 
documents, envisioning in them the right to buy and sell land, 
the size of private holdings of land, and so on. 
  The State Fund for purchasing seasonal agricultural products 
will be established with a view to timely conduct of settlements 
for them. It will be possible to make advance payments for the 
acquisition of grain, sugar beets, potatoes, vegetables, seeds 
of oleiferous crops, grass meal, wool, and so on. 
  It is also expected to keep state support for the rural 
producers of goods in the form of selective breeding, seed 
production, pedigree maintenance, improvements in the fertility 
of land, the acquisition of mixed feed for large livestock 
breeding complexes and poultry farms, the development of 
science, cadre training, road construction, the social 
infrastructure, and gas and power supply in rural areas. 
  With a view to accelerated development of the sectors of 
agricultural production, it is planned to expand the practice of 
establishing joint ventures with the use of foreign capital. The 
production of wheat for table use in keeping with intensive 
technologies will be organized in order for the republic to be 
self-sufficient in it. It is planned to complete the 
construction of a plant near Kazan in order to produce oil and 
fat products from our own raw materials. 
  It is envisioned to cancel certain republic-level management 
structures, as well as to cut back the management staff of the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Foodstuffs of the Republic of 
Tatarstan in order to perfect the management system of the 
sector and expenditures for its maintenance. 
  It is proposed that effective 1 July of this year the 
regulation of prices for foodstuffs, with the exception of meat 
and dairy products, bread and baked products, and baby foods, be 
canceled in order to stabilize production of foodstuffs and 
their supply to the population of the republic, to protect jobs, 
and to replenish the resources of the budget in a stable manner. 
  It is necessary to sharply increase the number of sales 
outlets of enterprises of the food and processing industries in 
cities and rayon centers within a short period of time in order 
to improve the supply of an expanded assortment of foodstuffs to 
the population and the quality of service, as well as in order 
to speed up distribution of goods. It is planned to put in order 
the outside acquisition of foodstuffs with a view to giving an 
incentive to such enterprises. 
  It is proposed that a set of measures aimed at stabilizing 
the state of affairs in capital construction be carried out in 
order to preserve and develop the investment potential of the 
republic and perfect its operations in the environment of 
structural changes which are underway in the economy. 
  Housing will be built with budgetary funding mainly in order 
to provide housing for low-income citizens, those residing in 
dilapidated and condemned housing, handicapped veterans and 
participants in the Great Patriotic War, and others with acute 
needs. Heat supply, water supply, sewage treatment, and gas and 
power supply will be developed on a priority basis in the area 
of municipal facilities construction. In the area of building 
health-care, public-education, and cultural facilities, funding 
will be allocated solely for the completion of facilities under 
construction. 
  It is envisioned that facilities for production purposes 
will 
be funded from the budget only on the basis of the competitive 
presentation of projects, taking into account their high 
effectiveness, construction schedules, and the need of the 
market in the product it is expected to produce. In the process, 
funding will be allocated primarily to develop enterprises 
associated with the production of consumer goods, completion of 
the production of building materials in progress, carrying out 
of the conversion program, and resolution of ecological issues. 
The construction of large facilities will be carried out on the 
basis of holding preliminary tenders for contractor 
organizations. 
  It has been proposed that special attention be paid to the 
problem of reducing the volume of unfinished construction 
projects, primarily at facilities that are fully or partially 
financed from the republic budget. It is planned to speed up the 
process of inventorying unfinished facilities under 
construction. Based on the results, a listing of acutely needed 
construction projects in progress and measures for their 
completion will be specified, proceeding from the realistic 
potential of financial support. All other facilities without 
arranged funding and with no promise of prompt completion will 
be sold at public trading sessions, both on the condition that 
their specialization be preserved and for further use at the 
discretion of the buyers. 
  The laying of a legislative foundation for investment policy 
is among priority measures. A number of draft laws of the 
Republic of Tatarstan have been developed: "On Investment 
Activities in the Republic of Tatarstan," "On Mortgages," and 
"On Investment Tax Credit." 
  We must develop and implement comprehensive measures in 
order 
to attract foreign investment, in particular, pass the Law of 
the Republic of Tatarstan "On Free Economic Zones in the 
Republic of Tatarstan." This would invigorate our foreign 
economic activities to a considerable degree. 
  A competitive selection of investment projects of a 
production, social, and scientific-technical nature will be made 
on an annual basis with a view to the subsequent attraction of 
foreign investment in the projects selected. At present, 
preparations are underway for an investment forum in Vienna that 
will be held by the UN Specialized Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO) and to which the Republic of Tatarstan has 
been invited. 
  The creation of certain new structures--investment 
companies, 
investment banks, and companies for insuring investment--is 
planned in order to support investment activities. 
  The establishment of enterprises with foreign investment is 
one of the forms of attracting foreign capital. At present, we 
have more than 120 such enterprises. However, despite the rapid 
growth of the number of joint enterprises, their contribution to 
structural changes in the economy, implementation of large-scale 
investment projects, and production of competitive goods and 
services remains insufficient. They also need support from the 
state and certain relief. 
  It is planned to take a set of measures in order to draw 
foreign investors into the process of privatization, to 
stimulate the acquisition of enterprise stock by foreign 
investors and their participation in auctions and competitions 
in order to acquire the facilities put up for sale at them. In 
conjunction with this we will have to select the most 
prestigious units of real estate to be sold for hard currency, 
with their cost tentatively appraised in prices accepted in 
Western countries. Facilities under construction will also be 
included among such facilities. 
  We should introduce in practice the transfer of property by 
way of concession in order to attract foreign capital. To this 
end it is necessary to urgently approve the Law "On Concession 
Contracts Signed With Foreign Investors," the draft of which has 
been developed. 
  A concession contract amounts to leasing minerals, parcels 
of 
land, enterprises, and other facilities owned by the state or 
municipalities for operation under certain conditions. 
  Foreign investors demand guarantees for the return of 
capital 
and generation of profits. For this reason the government of the 
Republic of Tatarstan proposes, as one of the priority measures, 
to pass the Law "On Pledges and the Pledge Fund of the Republic 
of Tatarstan" and to establish the pledge fund of the republic, 
which will make it possible to give foreign investors reliable 
guarantees when they invest capital in the development of the 
economy in the Republic of Tatarstan. 
  Esteemed deputies! 
  As we complete the presentation of key measures to stabilize 
the economy of the Republic of Tatarstan, the following should 
be said. 
  First. Budget revenues can be increased by R60 billion by 
implementing conversion and innovation programs. 
  Second. The sale of up to 50 percent of enterprises of 
trade, 
the sphere of services, and public catering through auctions and 
competitions during the second half of the year will tentatively 
contribute to the budget upwards of 250 billion extra rubles. 
  Third. Restoration of the monopoly on production and trade 
in 
vodka and liquor products and sale of accumulated stocks at 
somewhat reduced retail prices will allow us to make up the loss 
of excise revenue to the budget in the amount of about R120 
billion. 
  Fourth. The introduction of heat, water, and gas metering 
will make it possible to reduce the size of state subsidies by 
more than R30 billion. 
  Fifth. Reform of the management structure and cutbacks in 
the 
number of employees on the staff of state organs by 10-15 
percent and of the quantity of official passenger cars will 
reduce budgetary expenditures by R20 billion. 
  Sixth. Streamlining of the number and remuneration of 
employees in the sphere financed from the budget, repeal of 
departmental acts concerning wages, and extension of a uniform 
pay scale rate to enterprises at which subsidies from the budget 
account for a considerable proportion will make it possible to 
save more than R100 billion in budgetary funds. 
  Seventh. Recovery of existing arrears from enterprises will 
make it possible to collect additionally no less than R100 
billion. 
  Therefore, the measures enumerated above will make it 
possible to substantially reduce the budget deficit and support 
manufacturers. 
  Esteemed deputies! 
  As I stressed earlier, implementation of the measures to 
cure 
the economy that have been offered for your attention will be 
closely associated with the resolution of a number of social 
issues, and with the need to defend both the employed population 
of the Republic of Tatarstan and those not involved in active 
labor. 
  In implementing the principles of the social policy which is 
being pursued in the Republic of Tatarstan, the Republic of 
Tatarstan Cabinet of Ministers hereby proposes to establish the 
indicator of a minimum consumer budget as a social norm 
determining the standard of living of the population. The draft 
Law of the Republic of Tatarstan "On the Minimum Consumer Budget 
in the Republic of Tatarstan" has been developed in conjunction 
with this. The introduction of the indicator of the minimum 
consumer budget as a social benchmark calls for making 
amendments and additions to the Program of Targeted Social 
Protection for the Population of the Republic of Tatarstan. With 
this in view, a draft of the Decree of the Republic of Tatarstan 
Supreme Soviet "On Amendments and Additions to the Program of 
Targeted Social Protection for the Population of the Republic of 
Tatarstan" has been prepared. 
  The growth trend in unemployment requires that the Program 
for Facilitating the Employment of the Population which has been 
developed by the government be approved. The program provides 
for allocation of easy credit to create jobs not only at state 
enterprises but also in the sphere of small and medium-size 
businesses. 
  In view of the unceasing stream of refugees and forced 
migrants entering the republic, as well as for the purpose of 
overcoming the unfavorable consequences of spontaneously 
developing migratory processes, it has become acutely necessary 
to regulate the latter. To this end it is planned to promptly 
complete the development of the draft Law of the Republic of 
Tatarstan "On Refugees and Forced Migrants," as well as to 
complete the establishment of the Migration Service of the 
Republic of Tatarstan. 
  Esteemed people's deputies! 
  The measures developed by the government to cure the economy 
were extensively discussed on the eve of the session. Group 
conferences were held in the rayons and cities of Tatarstan. 
People's deputies, managers, practitioners, economic scholars, 
employees of defense enterprises, and trade unions took part in 
the discussion. A joint conference of the Presidium of the 
Academy of Sciences of Tatarstan and the collegium of the State 
Committee for the Economy was held. An expanded meeting of the 
Cabinet of Ministers was held with the participation of the 
Republic of Tatarstan president and the chairman of the Republic 
of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet. 
  On the whole, the proposed measures gained support during 
these meetings. Also, a great many businesslike proposals, 
pieces of advice, and critical remarks were voiced, a great 
proportion of which the government took into account. 
  Successful implementation of "Priority Measures for 
Stabilizing the Economy of the Republic of Tatarstan" which have 
been developed by the Cabinet of Ministers calls for preparing 
specific regulatory acts on a tight schedule: laws of the 
Republic of Tatarstan, edicts of the Republic of Tatarstan 
president, and decrees of the Republic of Tatarstan Cabinet of 
Ministers. 
  I appeal to you, the Republic of Tatarstan Supreme Soviet, 
with a request to expedite your portion of work. For its part, 
the Cabinet of Ministers will take all the necessary steps in 
order for the programmatic document under review today to have 
an impact as soon and as effectively as possible. 
  Thank you for your attention. 
  Ikhtibarygyz echen rekhmet [phrase transliterated from 
Tatar]. 

