Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Gideon van Oudtshoorn] </F>
  [Text] Johannesburg Feb 16 SAPA -- The African National 
Congress [ANC] would "democratise" mineral rights but would not 
do so unilaterally, ANC reconstruction and development programme 
convenor Jay Naidoo said on Wednesday. [16 February] 
  He was addressing about 300 Witwatersrand brokers at a 
breakfast presentation at the Transvaal Automobile Club in 
Johannesburg linked by telephone throughout the country and 
broadcast live by M-Net. 
  Introduced by veteran politician Helen Suzman, Mr Naidoo 
said 
in most developed countries like Britain, Australia and Canada 
minerals belonged to the people and were used to benefit their 
societies. 
  However, in South Africa mineral rights -- "like the rest of 
the economy" -- were concentrated in the hands of a few 
conglomerates and had not been used to benefit the people. The 
current system of mineral rights also prevented the optimal 
development of mining and use of urban land. "We are seeking to 
return mineral rights to the hands of the democratic government, 
in line with the rest of the world. However, I must stress that 
this, along with our policy proposals, will not be implemented 
unilaterally. We will consult and invite all stakeholders in 
the process of restructuring," Mr Naidoo said. 
  He said the ANC's principle objective was to transform 
mining 
and the processing of minerals to serve all people. This goal 
could be achieved through a variety of government interventions, 
incentives and disincentives. "The management and marketing of 
our mineral exports must be examined together with employers, 
unions and the government to ensure maximum benefits for our 
country. There are no quick-fix solutions to the problems 
apartheid has created. Till today miners who work underground 
at great risk in the most dangerous conditions are excluded from 
fundamental decisions that affect their work situations. If we 
value the lives and well-being of workers and higher levels of 
efficiency and productivity, we must look at democratising the 
mining sector through involving workers, management and the 
unions in negotiations on the organisation of work." 
  Mr Naidoo said the government should consider ways to 
encourage small-scale mining and enhance opportunities for 
people to participate through financial and technical support 
and aid in access to mineral rights. 
  However, standards of health and safety, the environment and 
working conditions had to be improved. "International supply 
and demand patterns for metals and minerals have undergone 
fundamental changes in recent years that necessitate the 
restructuring of this major industry. In the medium term this 
probably means a continued decline in the number of people 
employed in mines. Up to now, the heaviest burdens associated 
with down-scaling have been borne by miners, one-third of whom 
have been retrenched." 
  Referring to taxation, Mr Naidoo said the present system 
showed "glaring discrepancies" and placed an unfair tax burden 
on women and the middle and lower income groups. "Here we are 
proposing that the democratic government mandates the financial 
and fiscal commission to review the tax structure in order to 
develop a more progressive, fair and transparent tax structure." 
  Priorities should include eliminating tax bias against women 
regardless of marital status, taking into account unpaid labour 
performed by them and child care costs. 
  Personal income tax should be reviewed to reduce the 
financial drag on middle income earners, while company tax 
breaks for health, education, housing and other expenditures 
should be rationalised. 
  VAT [value-added tax] on basic foodstuffs should be 
zero-rated. "The new democratic government will also have to 
tighten up on tax collection and ensure that the current 
situation of billions of rands in tax evasion must not be 
allowed to continue," Mr Naidoo said. 

