BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed BN/SV: "Convention on Climate Effective as </F>
of Monday; Fighting the Greenhouse Effect; More Active Measures 
Are Required"; as released by Bern ATSA/SDAA database] 
  [Text] Bern, 17 Mar (ATS) -- The UN framework convention on 
climate change will take effect as of Monday. Its aim is to 
limit the emission into the atmosphere of greenhouse gases. In 
February, Switzerland presented a report explaining the basis of 
its strategy for fighting global warming. Certain governments 
and ecologists are demanding more restrictive measures to limit 
this problem. 
  The convention comes into force 90 days after having been 
ratified by a 50th state and less than two years after it was 
signed at the Rio Summit in June 1992 by more than 150 
governments. It requires developed countries to reduce their 
carbon dioxide (CO2) emission and the emission of other 
greenhouse gases, in particular CFC's 
[Chlorofluorohydrocarbons], to 1990 levels by the year 2000. 
These countries have until 21 September to present their 
official reports explaining how they intend achieving this aim. 
Developing countries have been granted a period of three years. 
<H5>  Support for Developing Countries </H5>
  The other commitments included in the convention concern the 
protection and expansion of forests which absorb CO2 in the 
atmosphere, and financial and technological aid for developing 
countries enabling them to respect the terms of the convention. 
These countries have notably agreed to implement programs 
intended to strengthen scientific and technical research in this 
domain. 
  Where Switzerland is concerned, Philippe Roch, Director of 
the Federal Office of Environment, Forestry and Countryside, in 
February presented the report on global warming. The document 
provides the first complete inventory of greenhouse gas 
emissions in Switzerland. It aims to be an "evolving program" to 
set up strategies of prevention and adaptation to climate change. 
  The document also analyzes the possible effects of such a 
warming and does not rule out the rise in sea level, the 
increase in floods, heat waves and droughts. However, Mr. Roch 
avoided the catastrophic approach, although he stressed that 
regions of Switzerland, especially the mountainous areas, could 
suffer directly from global warming. Adopted by the Federal 
Council in February, the report will serve as a basis for a 
definitive program to be set up in the summer. 
  However, despite the convention coming into force, most 
governments recognize that this will not be enough to achieve 
its global aim. The aim is to stabilize concentrations of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at a level which makes it 
possible to avoid attacks on the climate due to human activity. 
  The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) has asked industrialized 
countries to take additional measures to reduce CO2 emissions by 
a further 25 percent by the year 2005. 
<H5>  Measures Demanded by Greenpeace </H5>
  For its part, Greenpeace wants Switzerland to reduce the 
emission of such gases by a further 20 percent by the year 2005, 
beyond the deadline set by the convention. To achieve such a 
result it is necessary to introduce, as soon as possible, a 
combined CO2 and energy tax, and to regulate the use of vehicles 
and other engine-driven machines. 
  It is also essential that financial incentives be proposed 
in 
favor of low-consumption machines and renewable energy sources. 
Switzerland must finally abandon nuclear energy and stop cutting 
public transport services. 
  To date, the Convention on Climate Change has been signed by 
16 countries and ratified by 55. A number of problems remain 
unresolved, with the distribution of resources being provided 
for by the Global Environment Facility. This fund, created in 
Rio, was boosted on Wednesday by another $2 billion for the 
coming three years. Switzerland should receive some $40 
million. The signatories of the convention will meet again in 
March 1995 in Berlin. 

