BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 4 May (NOTIMEX) -- The Colombian 
Senate today strongly condemned what it views as U.S. meddling 
in Colombia's judicial system. 
  During a debate that lasted several hours, the legislative 
branch closed ranks around Prosecutor General Gustavo de Greiff, 
whom the U.S. State Department has accused of acting 
independently in the Colombian Government's struggle against the 
mafia. 
  Senator Fernando Mendoza said the country to the north "has 
no moral basis for criticizing the Colombian authorities." He 
noted: "In Colombia, people die from drug traffickers' bullets, 
while in the United States people die as a result of overdose." 
  Senate President Jorge Ramon Elias criticized the position 
of 
Colombian Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez for maintaining a 
weak stand in the face of criticism from U.S. congressmen and 
U.S. officials in Colombia. 
  Gonzalez, promoter of a bill calling for stronger penalties 
against the mafia, admitted that "the nation's sovereignty is 
being threatened not only by foreign pressure, which we must 
reject strongly and with dignity, but also by crime." 
  During the debate at the Senate session to which De Greiff 
was summoned, the senators discussed an eventual modification of 
the Criminal Procedure Code and, especially, the possibility of 
toughening the sentences handed down to confessed 
drug-traffickers who surrender to authorities. 
  Liberal Party Senator Humberto Pelaez said the executive 
branch's proposal to reform penal legislation "is the result of 
U.S. pressure." Senator Maria Izquierdo, of the same party, 
cautioned that Congress will not make changes to this law. 
  The Criminal Procedure Code grants significant sentence 
reductions to drug traffickers who surrender to authorities, 
confess to at least one crime, and collaborate in the arrest of 
other criminals. The code also envisages releasing prisoners 
who spend six months in prison without being brought before a 
court. 
  Last Sunday, President Gaviria decreed, for the third time 
in 
the past two years, a state of internal disturbance, which 
enables him to issue or void public order decrees to prevent the 
release of more than 800 inmates, most of whom are accused of 
drug trafficking or terrorism. 
  According to U.S. congressmen and other U.S. officials, De 
Greiff has adopted a "weak" position in his negotiations on 
sentencing Cali Cartel and Medellin Cartel bosses. 
  De Greiff has denied the charges and reiterated: "I am not 
scared of a foreign power or pressure from organized crime." 
The prosecutor general quipped at the Senate's full session: 
"I suffer from a strange spinal disease that prevents me from 
bending down in front of the powerful." 

