CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tadahide Ikuta, journalist: "Record of `The Man </F>
Who Manipulated the Prime Minister' and Ambitions That Persist 
Despite the Abortive Attempt at Welfare Tax Legislation"] 
  [Text] Capabilities That Cause Minister To Be Termed 
Chief Clerk 
  The upheaval caused by the "national welfare tax" initially 
announced during Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's press 
conference at 0100 on 3 February 1994 brought sudden notoriety 
to Administrative Vice Minister Jiro Saito of the Ministry of 
Finance [MOF] who should normally function as a behind-the-scene 
staff adviser. His newsworthiness reached a level where 
television covered scenes such as his commute to work and 
leisurely walks. 
  Several days after the "national welfare tax" proposal was 
withdrawn, one of his friends remarked to Saito, "You've been 
made out to be the nation's consummate villain." In response, 
Saito, as if he were enjoying his notoriety, remarked, "They're 
using my name in vain and creating a ruckus." 
  That particular friend comments that Saito was ridiculing 
tendencies in Japanese political and government circles to blame 
Saito for the commotion over the "national welfare tax." 
  Saito is a capable bureaucrat labelled as "a Ministry of 
Finance vice minister of the decade." Once, when former Prime 
Minister Takeo Miki served as minister for MITI [Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry], Administrative Vice Minister 
Shigeru Sahashi exercised his influence and was sarcastically 
referred to as "Minister Sahashi assisted by Vice Minister 
Miki." However, conditions at the MOF are worse. Reference is 
now made to Minister Hirohisa Fujii through remarks such as, 
"Vice Minister Saito and Chief Clerk Fujii." In this connection, 
mention should be made of the fact that Saito is the one who 
asked Shinseito Secretary General Ichiro Ozawa to appoint Fujii 
as minister of finance. Moreover, Saito has not limited himself 
to the MOF; he exercises his unlimited influence over other 
ministries and agencies as well. 
  The MOF is referred to as the "government agency among all 
government agencies" and has produced a number of powerful vice 
ministers over the years, but Saito is probably unprecedented in 
the extent of coverage he has won from the mass media and the 
attention he has enjoyed as a powerful bureaucrat. The question 
is, why is it that Saito creates such interest? What kind of 
person is he? First, let us examine the role played by Saito in 
connection with the recent "national welfare tax" which served 
as the reason for intimate pursuit of Saito by television 
cameras. Let us retrace the events of that particular episode. 
<H5>  A "Close Ally" Who Arranged Public Works Projects </H5>
  Saito was appointed as administrative vice minister of the 
Ministry of Finance in June 1993. Events subsequently taking 
place included the split in the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), 
a general election which resulted in the loss of a majority by 
the LDP and its perennial control of government, and the birth 
of the coalition government. Appointment of Saito to the 
position of vice minister was coincidentally timed with the 
collapse of the "1955 structure" of the LDP government. 
  Just as the end of July approached and it became clear that 
a 
non-LDP coalition would be formed, Saito remarked, "When there 
is a lack of political leadership, bureaucrats should conduct 
themselves with confidence." In reality, various ministries and 
agencies that had endured the oppression of LDP zoku Diet 
members for an extended period, suddenly conducted themselves as 
if they were freed of all constraints. Comparatively speaking, 
the MOF made itself prominent in this respect over all other 
ministries and agencies. 
  Upon learning of the results of the general election, the 
MOF 
immediately approached Ozawa and Hosokawa. Ever since the 
implementation of the consumption tax, the MOF had referred to 
itself as "the Takeshita bureaucracy" or "God, Buddha, Mr. 
Takeshita," but it abandoned all such references and rallied 
around the new government once the latter was formed. Needless 
to say, Saito was the individual who took the initiative in this 
respect. 
  Initially, Saito had a long talk with Ozawa. He also spent 
many nights with Hosokawa in discussing government policy 
concerning financial and monetary matters, while partaking in 
highballs. 
  During those discussions, Saito emphasized the critical 
condition of Japan's financial situation. As of 1993, the 
accumulated national debt, including construction bonds and 
government deficit bonds, totaled about 184 trillion yen. 
Moreover, it is now certain that fiscal year 1993 deficits will 
be of record proportions for the first time in 11 years since 
recording a 2.5 trillion yen deficit in fiscal year 1981. 
  Ever since his appointment as vice minister, Saito has vowed 
repeatedly, "We shall under no circumstances issue government 
deficit bonds." That being the case, Saito devoted much time to 
deter Hosokawa's cherished view that, "A cut in income taxes is 
the foremost, orthodox measure to be taken in order to counter 
declining consumer sentiment." And, according to MOF officials, 
Saito stressed, "As a means of coping with the aging of society, 
we have no choice but to alter direct and indirect tax systems. 
Thus, we cannot avoid an increase in the consumption tax rates." 
  An increase in the consumption tax has been a long-cherished 
desire of Saito as well as other bureaucrats of the MOF. 
Fortunately, that desire also reflected the cherished view of 
Ozawa who exercises authority "equal to that of secretary 
general" of the coalition government. In other words, the view 
has been that "The current 3-percent consumption tax should be 
increased to 10 percent which would fall in the mid-range rates 
currently existing in Europe and the United States. 
Concurrently, we should reduce income and residence taxes by 
one-half." 
  Moreover, Saito and Ozawa are "dedicated allies" of sorts. 
The two have been friends ever since Saito served as a budget 
officer in charge of public works projects. It was the 
"international contribution tax" concept, created during the 
fiscal year 1992 budget compilation phase, which inspired the 
creation of firm ties between the two individuals. That concept 
was formulated by Saito who was then serving as director of the 
Budget Bureau and Ozawa who had just left the position of LDP 
secretary general and was serving as acting chairman of 
Keiseikai [Takeshita faction]. Eventually, the "international 
contribution tax" was abandoned because of opposition from 
within the LDP, but that defeat brought the two closer together. 
  Saito visited Ozawa immediately just before the 
establishment 
of the coalition government because he firmly believed that 
"Ozawa would certainly have a sympathetic ear for the MOF 
position concerning the critical financial situation." 
  Further, his intent was to push through a consumption tax 
rate increase before the Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] 
and Komeito--which had opposed such an increase during their 
opposition party days--could block the move as members of the 
new coalition. In exchange, he offered Ozawa and Hosokawa the 
MOF's support for the coalition government. 
  Furthermore, Saito assumed leadership in establishing an 
unprecedented cooperative stance of the MOF in support of the 
coalition government. For example, although the ministry has 
embraced the "absolute rule" of compiling the budget before 
yearend, the ministry cooperated with the "Ichiro Ozawa-Yuichi 
Ichikawa position" of placing priority on "political reform." 
<H5>  Scenario Which Began To Fall Into Disarray </H5>
  However, postponement of the budget processing work to 1994 
met not only with resistance from Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Masayoshi Takemura, but also with strong objections from 
Director Kyosuke Shinozawa and Budget Bureau officials of the 
MOF. But, according to MOF officials, "About that time, rumors 
were rife that Shinseito action would be initiated to relieve 
Shinozawa from his position and Saito pushed through the 
postponement." 
  On the other hand, from around 23 December 1993, Saito 
accompanied by MITI Administrative Vice Minister Hideaki Kumano, 
visited the four economic organizations, national newspapers, 
news correspondent firms, the Rengo labor organization, and 
influential politicians of the governing and opposition parties 
to explain the "economic plan" compiled jointly by the MOF and 
MITI. 
  The main features of the plan included: 1) implementation of 
a several trillion yen income tax cut effective January 1994, 2) 
implementation of an offsetting consumption tax increase from 
the current rate of 3 to 7 percent 15 months later effective 
April 1995, 3) cut in premium consumption tax for standard-size 
cars from 4.5 percent to 3 percent, and 4) cancellation of the 
special 2.5-percent special corporate tax established during the 
Gulf war. 
  It was unusual for top officials of the MOF and MITI to 
conduct themselves in such a manner reflective of anticipation 
for a "national welfare tax" even before an agreement had been 
reached within the coalition parties on tax reform, and, above 
all, even within the MOF, only a small group of officials had 
any knowledge of the "economic plan." 
  Reportedly, Hiroaki Taya, chief of the General Affairs 
Division of the Budget Bureau, was the author of the economic 
plan. Others participating in its preparation were limited to 
Shinozawa, director of the Budget Bureau, Takeshi Omura, 
secretary general, and Takashi Sugii, chief of the Secretarial 
Dividion, Minister's Secretariat of the MOF. Even Director 
Tadashi Ogawa of the Tax Bureau that exercises jurisdiction over 
tax systems had not been informed of the plan. It is rumored 
that Ogawa protested to Saito, "I am not aware of such plans," 
and that the confrontation between Saito and Ogawa became very 
ugly. 
  In any event, Saito was working assiduously toward his goal 
of "being absolutely against government deficit bonds and for 
raising consumption taxes." However, the scenario of attaining 
tax reform in January as conceptualized by Saito began to fall 
into disarray. The political reform-related draft bill passed 
the House of Representatives but was stalled in the House of 
Councilors for some time and finally rejected. An agreement at 
the top level between Hosokawa and Yohei Kono, president of the 
LDP, resulted in the approval of the draft bill on 29 January, 
but debate on tax system reform was completely shelved. That was 
only two weeks before the Japan-U.S. summit and deadline for 
processing the budget. 
  Moreover, sentiment among the coalition parties including 
Shinseito had changed to favor "separation of tax decrease and 
increase measures and an early income tax cut. The idea was to 
assume a leisurely pace in considering ways to offset the tax 
cuts. That position seemed to have been reinforced by Prime 
Minister Hosokawa's remarks of 29 January in which he said, "I 
have no intention of increasing the consumption tax," while on 
the next day on the 30th in Takamatsu City [Kagawa Prefecture], 
Takemura said, "We will offset tax cuts with government deficit 
bonds. For the time being, we will not insist on increasing the 
consumption tax." 
  Naturally, Saito reacted violently to such statements 
because 
after he had cooperated with the coalition government by 
suppressing opposition within the MOF for six months, the 
scenario which he had envisioned would fall into complete 
disarray if the outcome assumes a delay in the implementation of 
an increase in the consumption tax and the issuance of 
government deficit bonds. 
<H5>  Saito Effects a Massive Withdrawal of Cohorts </H5>
  Saito utilized a dedicated "hot line" with Ozawa to attempt 
a 
desperate recovery in his position. A secret conference took 
place between Ozawa and Saito in the evening of the 31st at a 
posh restaurant in the Akasaka district of Tokyo. At that point, 
Ozawa concluded that it would not be advisable to disregard 
Saito and make an enemy out of the MOF. Further, he figured 
that, although the SDJP was voicing opposition to the opening of 
rice market and the political reform draft bill, it would agree 
with the coalition party plan in the final analysis and remain a 
part of the coalition government even if it resists "concurrent 
tax decrease and increase measures," at which time he, Ozawa, 
would push through his position. 
  It was at that point that the two put their heads together 
and formulated the "national welfare tax" concept. Reportedly, 
Hosokawa is the one who made the "decision" on the title of the 
proposed tax system, but it would not be in error that the two 
were responsible for deciding on a "three-year implementation of 
the tax cuts" and a "rate of 7 percent for the newly proposed 
tax." Next, at 1000 hours, 1 February 1994, Saito accompanied by 
officials of the MOF visited Hosokawa at the Prime Minister's 
Residence. A final presentation and explanation was made before 
the prime minister. 
  In the afternoon of 2 February, Prime Minister Hosokawa made 
his first presentation of the "national welfare tax" concept at 
a coalition party representatives' conference held at the Prime 
Minister's Residence. Secretary General Wataru Kubo of the SDPJ 
voiced objection to the concept at the meeting, but others 
voiced approval. Prime Minister Hosokawa was entrusted with the 
authority to make a decision, thus leading to the predawn press 
conference of 3 February by Prime Minister Hosokawa. 
  This article will not cover the details of what ensued. The 
SDPJ opposed the concept while threatening to leave the 
coalition government and Takemura and his party Sakigake, Japan 
New Party, and the Japan Democratic Socialist Party [DSP] 
sympathizing with the SDJP position forced Prime Minister 
Hosokawa to "withdraw the national welfare tax concept." 
However, at that point, MOF forces led by Saito effected a mass 
exodus from the scene under the assumption that "residual 
aspects of the matter should be disposed of as political issues." 
  On 8 February, the issue was settled with a decision to 
"provide for implementation of a 6 trillion yen tax cut" and 
"provide for legislation by the end of the year under an 
agreement by the coalition parties to cover an offsetting tax 
package." However, although Saito came through in one piece, the 
final decisions reflected complete destruction of his position. 
  In essence, the reason for his complete defeat is reflected 
in the final outcome which calls for issuance of government 
deficit bonds, issuance of such bonds at a rate 22.1 percent 
above initially conceived targets for fiscal year 1994 in 
initial fiscal year plans and a gross government deficit bond 
balance exceeding 200 trillion yen. 
  Moreover, there was an outburst of criticism on the ruling 
and opposition parties regarding the strategy played out by 
Saito in the final stages of the negotiations. According to the 
25 February edition of the SHUKAN ASAHI, Hiroshi Kato, chairman 
of the government's Tax Commission, condemned Saito by saying, 
"Mr. Saito cuts costs relentlessly, saying he does so for the 
sake of the people. He conducts himself in a manner typical of a 
member of the Budget Bureau who exercises authority over the 
national budget. The recent incident is reflective of a 
situation where an official tries to carry the ball by himself. 
He had failed to build a consensus and assumed an overly 
optimistic outlook. One wonders about the quality of his 
performance as vice minister in handling the recent affairs." 
  This statement can probably be regarded as criticism of MOF 
Administrative Vice Minister Jiro Saito's "unbridled" actions. 
When one looks at his past performance, one will readily note 
the conspicuous presence of arbitrary actions and secrecy of 
Saito. 
  Former minister of the MOF and current LDP Policy Research 
Committee Chairman Ryutaro Hashimoto has said, "I think this is 
a case which the situation was created by the excessive actions 
of a bureaucrat, especially an administrative vice minister, 
because of a weak cabinet. However, those actions will probably 
become a source of future problems. For one thing, there is the 
issue of what disposition should be made of the disruption in 
relations between Vice Minister Saito and the Tax Bureau and the 
government's Tax Commission. Another issue concerns policy 
coordination within the ministry. 
  "In prior times, the vice minister never played an obvious 
role in handling tax system matters. This time around, 
coordination of policy among Budget, Financial, and Tax Bureaus 
was handled with the vice minister playing a very conspicuous 
role, leading to probable objections in this respect." 
  Although he is referred to as "a prominent vice minister of 
the decade," everyone agrees that Saito disgraced himself in his 
recent fiasco concerning the "national welfare tax." But MOF 
officials say, "Although Saito is surrounded by a prevailing 
atmosphere of trepidation, Saito himself displays even stronger 
determination to excel in his job." 
  The question is, how will he extricate himself from his 
current predicament? It is said that Saito is "unyielding," and 
"tough in the face of adversity," and one can easily understand 
his high-handed methods, if one examines Saito's upbringing. 
<H5>  Intellectual Family Including Siblings Who Are Academics </H5>
  Saito is 58, having been born in 1936 in former Manchuria 
(northeastern sector of China). 
  His father, Yoshito, served with the Research Division of 
the 
Manchurian Railways and had once served as a subordinate of 
Hozumi Ozaki, former ASAHI SHIMBUN reporter, who was arrested 
and executed in connection with the "Sorge incident" of that 
period. In this connection, we should note that Ozaki had 
transferred from the status of a contract employee of the 
Fumimaro Konoe cabinet to a contract employee of the Manchurian 
Railways' Research Division. 
  Saito has referred to his father as being a "member of the 
left wing in those days" and overheard his father say at the end 
of the Pacific War that it was "good that Japan had lost the 
war." 
  In 1948, when Saito was 12 years old, his family evacuated 
from the former Manchuria and returned to a Japan occupied by 
General Headquarters of the Allied Supreme Command. Yoshito 
established family life in a two-story house located in the 
Suginami ward of Tokyo. A classmate of Saito at the private 
Seijo Middle School recollects that his father was operating a 
small import-export firm. The classmate recalls that the family 
maintained a relatively affluent lifestyle and had an electric 
phonograph which was rare for those days, and that classical 
music such as that of Shubert could be heard from the family 
home. Saito's family had three siblings all considered 
intellectuals. His older brother Ichiro teaches French at the 
Tokyo College of the Arts, and his younger sister also teaches. 
<H5>  Referred to as "Homeless" in His Middle School Days </H5>
  However, although the family's lifestyle was comparatively 
affluent, Saito's clothes were always in terrible shape. A 
former classmate at Seijo Middle School remarks, "Saito was 
referred to as a `homeless child.'" It was a teacher who once 
said that his clothes are always in shambles and he walks in a 
very sluggish manner, just like a homeless child." 
  Saito advanced from the Seijo Middle School to the Tokyo 
metropolitan-operated Shinjuku High School. Before World War II, 
Shinjuku High School served as a prep school for many students 
who aspired to enter the Japanese Naval Academy and projected a 
chic, open, and free atmosphere, but Saito again projected an 
image that was far from "stylish." A former female high school 
classmate comments, "Saito would have looked better in a pair of 
hip boots. I still have recollections of his thick glasses." 
  Even today, old photographs do not project Saito as having 
been stylish. He was far from being urbane, but rather rough and 
uncouth. 
  However, in the world of MOF bureaucrats, especially those 
of 
the senior bureaucrat rankings, special emphasis is placed on 
scholastic records as a student. Among MOF bureaucrats, there 
are many talented individuals who "graduated with top standings 
from the Law Faculty of Tokyo University" and who achieved "top 
rankings in the government entrance examinations." Let us take a 
look at Saito's grades at Shinjuku High School. 
  According to a high school classmate, "Shinjuku High School 
is a prep school for many students entering well-known colleges 
such as Tokyo University. However, Saito was not of the 
valedictorian genre. Needless to say, he was a superior student, 
but ranked only 10th or 20th in his class. Only once, just 
before graduation, he ranked third on one of the tests. But that 
was probably a case where he put forth a special effort for his 
final exams." 
<H5>  "Densuke's" Mahjong Career of 40 Years </H5>
  He, then, took entrance examinations for Tokyo University, 
but failed. He attended Surugadai Prep School and passed in his 
second challenge at the entrance examinations, winning 
acceptance at the Category I Liberal Arts Faculty at Tokyo 
University. 
  It appears that Saito applied himself considerably after 
gaining entrance to Tokyo University. He chose civil law as a 
specialty and attended seminars conducted by Ichiro Kato (former 
chancellor of Tokyo University). Kato recollects impressions of 
Saito's student days, in stating, "Four or five members of my 
seminars who graduated in 1959 joined the MOF. Saito did well 
academically and spoke up in class frequently, but all of the 
students did well. My recollection is that he was one of the 
group." 
  Tokyo University professor Akira Yonekura who graduated from 
Tokyo University and entered the MOF together with Saito, but 
resigned from the ministry in his second year, recalls, "I was 
with the MOF for two years, but my social dealings with Saito 
were almost nonexistent and I do not have any definite 
recollections of any conversations with him." 
  It appears that Saito did not perform in a conspicuous 
manner 
as a student at Tokyo University. 
  Life at home was imbued with considerable freedom. At the 
MOF, Saito is known by the nickname of "Densuke," a monicker he 
acquired as a result of his love for mahjong and his habit of 
exclaiming "Den!" when concluding a game. His mahjong playing 
dates back to his student days at Seijo Middle School and there 
were times when he would invite his friends over to play the 
game overnight into the early morning hours. It is said that his 
father, Yoshito, would merely watch the games with a smile 
stretching from ear to ear. 
  According to a middle school friend, "Saito was an easy 
mahjong opponent. He was especially easy to kid when he began to 
lose and he would become upset making it easy to anticipate his 
next move because he would aim for the more valuable pieces. It 
was easy to win a game with him as long as you made him angry." 
  Saito, who was raised in a home with a liberal atmosphere, 
did not "dedicate himself to his studies" and exercised interest 
in whatever matter that caught his fancy at a particular moment. 
He once was deeply attracted to movies and he wrote an article 
titled "Mukden Record" about the situation in Manchuria before 
his family evacuated from that country and sent it to a literary 
coterie magazine for publication. He even joined the school 
chorus and sang as a first tenor. He also played a leading role 
in the theatrical department. During his high school days, he 
already held the second degree rank in the go game; he now holds 
the fifth degree rank. 
  Even today, no matter how busy his work becomes, Saito 
manages to find time for go or become engrossed in a mystery 
novel. 
<H5>  "Sketch of Married Life" During Honeymoon Days </H5>
  Saito exercises considerable flexibility in his lifestyle, 
but when it comes to relations with people, work methods, or 
thought process, he is a completely different person. He allows 
no flexibility whatsoever and is a model of integrity. Among his 
middle school and high school friends, there are more than just 
a few that refer to him as "hardheaded." 
  During his Shinjuku High School days, Saito was a member of 
the student council. It was during the time when the "Bloody May 
Day Incident" took place and there was a heightening leftist 
mood. However, Saito separated himself from such left wingers. 
One of his fellow council members recall Saito's activities, in 
saying, "I served with Saito on the student council, but if he 
joined a council meeting, it was impossible to hold a 
discussion. That was because he would dampen discussion on a 
variety of topics by saying, `I question whether this or that 
topic is an item which should be tabled at meetings of the 
student council!!' There were several council sessions which 
were terminated without any meaningful discussion because of his 
presence. Thus, others in the council meetings would whisper 
among themselves that `We'll accomplish nothing today,' whenever 
Saito appeared at the meetings. In his case, he would refuse to 
alter his positions." 
  Saito, in essence, could not remain contented unless he made 
a statement. However, in contrast to his days at Shinjuku High 
School, it was very difficult for him to play the role of a 
"controversialist" at Tokyo University. One classmate of Saito, 
who sat near Saito during lectures and who graduated in the same 
class, comments, "Mr. Saito would often speak up even during 
lectures. He wouldn't hesitate to express his opinions. However, 
the professor would cut him down to size. After the exchange he 
would have the habit of sitting down with an expression of agony 
and mumble, "Oh. If that were the case, I should have kept my 
mouth shut." Certainly, it was a case even from those days that 
he would charge ahead without considering the consequences." 
  We have examined Saito's student life by concentrating on 
his 
activities during his days at Shinjuku High School. In the final 
phase of this review, we will introduce replies to several 
questions Saito sent to a publication issued by the journalism 
club formed by fellow classmates at Shinjuku High School and 
published eight years after graduation targeted for fellow 
students of the same graduating class under the title of 
"Tsurezure Shimpo" (collection of essays on married life of 
former fellow classmates). In this connection, noteworthy is 
that his wife Keiko was a classmate at Shinjuku High School. She 
is a specialist in china-painting and has translated and 
published a specialty book on chinaware painting techniques 
which was originally written in German. 
  [Question] Where did you go on your 
honeymoon? 
  "Personal secret." 
  [Question] What were the events leading to 
matrimonial love? 
  "That is difficult to explain." 
  [Question] How does the wife evaluate the 
husband? 
  "Perfect. At times he is a fear-inspiring, 
strict husband, at times he is a gentle sweetheart unchanged 
from his younger days, and at times he acts like a young kid 
when he frolics around with his eldest daughter Yoshiko who is 
married to an MOF bureaucrat." 
  [Question] What is your evaluation of your 
wife? 
  "Perfect and faultless. (This is an untrue 
statement. He is always complaining about something. Signed 
Keiko.)" 
  [Question] Have you ever had a husband-wife 
argument? 
  "There's no reason for arguments." 
<H5>  Convictions Cultivated in Germany </H5>
  Saito graduated from the Law Faculty of Tokyo University and 
was employed by the MOF in 1959. He was initially assigned to 
the General Affairs Division of the Budget Bureau. In those 
days, the best of a newly hired group would be assigned to the 
Secretarial Division or Overall Coordination Division of 
Minister's Secretariat and the second-tier group would be 
assigned to the Coordination Division of the Budget Bureau. This 
means that Saito was handicapped in his initiation as a 
government employee in aiming for the position of administrative 
vice minister which is the highest position attainable by a 
career bureaucrat. The individual in the same group who was 
considered to be the prime candidate for achieving that career 
goal was former Director General Masaaki Tsuchida of National 
Tax Administration Agency who currently serves as president of 
the People's Finance Corporation. 
  Two years after joining the ministry, he was assigned to 
regional positions such as the Financial Division, Kinki 
Regional Taxation Bureau, and in 1962 he was assigned to the 
Financial Division, Kinki Local Finance Bureau. Even in 
connection with these mid-career assignments, the 
best-performing officials remain in assignments at ministry 
headquarters, meaning that Saito fell further behind in career 
advancement prospects. Later, in 1965, he was given his first 
overseas assignment with the International Tourists' Promotion 
Association in Frankfurt, Germany. 
  After completing a 40-month tour in Germany, he was assigned 
as assistant to the director, Legal Section, Budget Bureau. It 
was from that point that second-tiered Saito began to perform in 
a conspicuous manner. Hideyuki Aizawa (currently LDP Diet member 
and former administrative vice minister of the MOF) was then 
serving as deputy director of the Budget Bureau and whenever 
Aizawa would disagree with a draft document prepared by Saito in 
the Legal Section, the latter would remark, "Aizawa's comments 
are akin to saying that white is black," creating an episode 
which was reflective of his personality. 
  Then, in 1970 he was assigned as assistant budget officer of 
the Budget Bureau serving as a chief auditor of construction 
projects. Serving under Yoshihiko Yoshino, then functioning as 
program and budget officer (currently president of the Japan 
Development Bank and former administrative vice minister of the 
MOF), inspired the beginning of an intimate relationship between 
the two. Yoshino progressed through the positions of deputy 
director, Budget Bureau; director, Budget Bureau; and 
administrative vice minister, and is now powerful enough to be 
considered as "leader in MOF circles," but throughout that 
period he consistently gave recognition to Saito's abilities and 
developed him into a "budget expert." 
  Subsequently, Saito progressed over an elite course 
including 
assignments as assistant chief of the Coordination Division, 
Budget Bureau; and assistant to the chief First Funds Planning 
and Operation Division, Financial Bureau. In 1976 he was 
assigned as councilor in the Japanese Embassy, West Germany, 
where he served again for three-plus years. Takeshi Nakai, 
professor of Seijo University, who happened to be leading a life 
of academic research in Bonn about the same time and who was a 
former classmate of Saito at Shinjuku High School comments on 
Saito's lifestyle in Germany by saying, "Mr. Saito was very good 
with the German language. He had a good vocabulary and spoke the 
language fluently. However, he was serious and inflexible. After 
he learned that we were former fellow classmates, his mannerisms 
changed and relaxed a little, but only to the extent that he 
would remark, "We've really aged mutually," and finally left 
Germany without cracking a single joke. He was very 
business-like in his contacts and would limit them to bare 
essentials. It was as if he had built a fortress around himself." 
  And, in that assignment, Saito learned much from his 
exposure 
to work with the West German central bank known as the 
Bundesbank. The lesson learned here was that the Bundesbank was 
so "stubborn" that its conviction concerning restraints over 
inflation which threatened the livelihood of German citizens 
would not be altered under pressure exercised over the central 
bank by the German Government or members of the G7 nations. 
<H5>  Distrust Rising to Extremities </H5>
  Saito must have strengthened his conviction based on the 
experience gained at that time that all moves such as political 
and foreign pressure must be "obstinately" resisted and rejected 
in order for the MOF to avoid financial failure of a nationally 
destructive nature. 
  Saito returned to Japan in 1979 and was assigned as budget 
officer in charge of programming, a position which was once held 
by Yoshino whom he respect. The position was referred to as the 
"staff headquarters of the Budget Bureau." It was the time when 
the government was dedicated to implementation of administrative 
and financial reforms recommended by Toshio Doko's Provisional 
Research Council on Administrative Reform report, Saito quickly 
dedicated himself to work on spending cut plans. He first 
classified spending into the three categories of general 
expenditures, national debt servicing costs, and local tax 
allocations and established goals for cutting general 
expenditures. He introduced reduced ceilings for the first time 
relative to budget estimates submitted by the various ministries 
and agencies along with reduction goals for each budget officer. 
  MOF officials, who were subordinates of Saito, recall events 
of the time by commenting, "The decisions made were certainly 
unprecedented and questionable as to feasibility in view of past 
practice. The reason we subordinates of Saito were able to 
overcome the resistance of the various ministries and agencies 
was that Mr. Saito was so "obstinate" as to be unmovable." 
  Saito's performance as a budget officer in charge of 
programming earned him the title of "budget expert" and a high 
appraisal of his capabilities in and out of the MOF. 
  Subsequently, Saito successfully treaded a career path as 
budget officer in charge of construction and public works 
projects; chief, Coordination Division, Budget Bureau; and, in 
1986, deputy director of the Budget Bureau. 
  About that time, the rise in the value of the yen 
accelerated 
following the Plaza Accord of September 1985, the economy 
deteriorated sharply primarily in the export industry sector and 
the Japanese economy fell victim to a recession instigated by 
the rising value of the yen. The then-Prime Minister Yasuhiro 
Nakasone and cabinet members concerned with the economy such as 
Kiichi Miyazawa, minister of finance; and Hajime Tamura, 
minister of international trade and industry, strongly 
petitioned the MOF to implement a large-scale economic stimulus 
package. 
  In response to such moves, Saito beseeched Miyazawa not to 
take excessive economic stimulus action and visited concerned 
agencies to explain his position. However, in the final stages, 
a 4.3 trillion yen package envisioned by Saito was suddenly 
increased by 700 billion yen. At that point, Saito was summoned 
to the office of Yoshino who had become the ministry's 
administrative vice minister and asked angrily, "Are you folks a 
bunch of traitors?" 
  Saito was probably struck by an indelible impression of 
those 
angry words. However, he continued to play a key role in the 
Budget Bureau and subsequently as director general of the 
Economic Planning Agency, director general of the MOF, and 
director of the Budget Bureau, he espoused "sound financial 
management" and "stubbornly" resisted the politicians but was 
always overruled by politicians who were incapable of 
conceptualizing anything beyond winning elections. 
  The foregoing situation existed clearly as a result of 
"political" influence exceeding the authority of the MOF based 
on 38 years of long-term control by the LDP. Saito's distrust of 
politicians had reached extreme heights. Eventually, in June 
1993, he was appointed as administrative vice minister, but his 
distrust of politicians continued to grow. 
  Moreover, Saito' distrust toward insiders of MOF bureaucrats 
was increasing. He had taken an especially dim view of budgeting 
bureaucrats who were supposed to represent a pool of elite 
ministry officials. 
  Those individuals were supposed to be handpicked from among 
those who had excelled academically as well as professionally, 
were assumed to be smart and faultless, and widely known with 
broad personal connections with principal officials in political 
and government circles. Yet, Saito distrust them because there 
were only a few bureaucrats who would deal with financial crises 
at the risk of their personal careers. 
  From Saito's perspective, it appeared that such elitists 
were 
condoning the wanton requests of the various ministries and 
agencies at budget assessment time and taking a condescending 
attitude toward politicians. 
<H5>  Considered by Politicians as a "Sluggard" </H5>
  One former administrative vice minister of the MOF who 
exercises considerable influence over MOF personnel matters 
spoke with strong emotions when Saito was appointed to the 
position of vice minister, in saying, "Saito does not fit the 
mainstream type in the budget area and is a freak. I am amazed 
at his appointment as vice minister." 
  In reality, Saito was completely different from the typical 
elitist budget bureaucrat, when viewed from the way he handled 
his work or approached people from his younger days. Perhaps, it 
is a case where Saito's very existence could be labelled an 
antithesis to the typical budget bureaucrat. There's even the 
view that Saito took the initiative in conducting himself 
deliberately in such a manner. 
  Budget bureaucrats are frequently invited to banquets and 
golf by politicians, other ministries, agencies, and local 
government agencies. Budget bureaucrats who received such 
invitations would handle them with finesse. However, Saito 
avoids banquets and golf invitations. 
  Even if he couldn't avoid and attended one, he would 
suddenly 
announce, "I must attend a meeting. [Please execuse me] I am 
pushing for time," and leave only to return to his office to 
enjoy a session of go. 
  When once asked by a close bureaucratic associate about how 
one might turn down an invitation to a banquet, Saito 
nonchalantly replied, "Even if invited, the thing to do is fail 
to appear. Repeat that approach two or three times and the other 
party will cease to extend invitations." 
  His resolute attitude was also displayed in his work. When 
consulted by politicians and officials of the ministries and 
agencies, he would rarely make an attempt to avoid the issue by 
answering, "Let me consider the matter," as is often done by 
Budget Bureau elitists. He would take a clear-cut negative or 
positive stance by saying, "I'll take action," or "That's not 
feasible." 
  Politicians who have had dealings with Saito evaluate him as 
follows: Kozo Watanabe, acting secretary general of Shinseito, 
says, "MOF bureaucrats are considered politely insolent, but 
Saito ranks a step higher and is arrogant and insolent." 
Ryutaro Hashimoto says, "I have had dealings with `Densuke' 
ever since he served as a budget officer. He is stolid and a 
sluggard. In contrast to the knowledge retained on a mental 
basis, he lacks the power of expression. He assumes the attitude 
that "Knowledgeable people will comprehend," his position. 
However, he has an aspect which lacks maturity and proves 
himself to have a measure of appeal when he accidentally makes a 
mistake." Shizuka Kamei, LDP diet member and former chariman of 
the LDP Political Affairs Research Council, says, "He is lazy, 
clumsy, `nondescript as a steer in the dark,' and has no 
noteworthy aspects whatsoever. He makes no attempt to be 
selective with strategies when dealing with issues and 
approaches issues head-on, but when he is overruled by politics 
and loses a battle, he assumes a nonchalant attitude." Junichiro 
Koizumi, LDP diet member and former minister of post and 
telecommunications, says, "He is unaffable and blunt. However, 
he is an essential individual filling a "thankless role" in the 
MOF. 
<H5>  "Politics of Fear" Exercised Through Personnel Assignments </H5>
  Saito also differs from other elite MOF bureaucrats in the 
way he addresses subordinates. Once Saito explains his policies 
to his subordinates, he does not become involved with details. 
And he assumes complete responsibility. Once a subordinate 
submits a paper to him, he does not "nitpick" like many other 
superiors. Reportedly, he asks for a briefing on the main 
points, counts the number of pages and applies his personal seal 
of approval. Another aspect which appeals to his subordinates is 
that Saito takes the initiative in appearing at concerned 
offices to conduct personal negotiations. He does not utilize 
procedures in which he delegates such negotiations to 
subordinates or engage in consensus building among concerned 
agencies. 
  And, for the sake of "sound financial management," he did 
not 
hesitate to go out of his way to provide complete backing to 
subordinates who had to deal with politicians, other ministries, 
and agencies. That was the way he treated his subordinates. 
  At the present time, members of the "Saito clique" in the 
MOF 
who were evaluated and later rewarded through preferred 
assignments by Saito include only the following four 
individuals: Takeshi Komura, director general; Yoji Wakui, 
director general, Economic Planning Agency; Hiroaki Taya, chief, 
General Affairs Section, Budget Bureau; and Takashi Sugii, 
chief, Secretarial Division. 
  As is seen in the events surrounding development of the 
"national welfare tax," Saito uses only these four individuals 
on important issues. It is a "clique" that undisputably crosses 
seniority lines and represents "confidant politics." 
  With respect to the foregoing situation, LDP Diet member 
Hakuo Yanagizawa, who was two years junior to Saito in the MOF, 
expresses strong criticism, saying, "Saito has concentrated his 
important assignments to subordinates who just happened to 
handle public works projects at the Budget Bureau. It is unusual 
that an individual who took such an approach would be assigned 
to the position of vice minister. When viewed from the potential 
for the ministry as a whole to demonstrate its maximum 
capabilities in the future, Mr. Saito's personnel practices 
leave much in doubt." 
  Needless to say, considerably strong backlash and aversion 
exist not only among budget bureaucrats but other ministerial 
bureaucrats in reaction to that situation. However, it is very 
difficult to resist the "Saito clique" which exercises complete 
control over personnel authority through the positions of 
"administrative vice minister, director general, and chief of 
the Secretarial Division." Some MOF officials refer to the 
clique as representing "politics of fear." 
  In any event, Saito has established personal control over 
the 
MOF which was previously governed by traditional budget group 
bureaucrats. However, that Saito system is not only the target 
of intraministry criticism but a system with many weaknesses. 
  First, Saito's tenure as administrative vice minister will 
be 
limited to one or two years at the most. 
  Another weakness is that the initial ministry appointment 
years of the "Saito clique" are 1959 for Saito, 1963 for Komura, 
1964 for Wakui, 1968 for Taya, and 1969 for Sugii and cover a 
number of years. 
  Moreover, the four members of the "Saito clique" were 
organized into a group only because of the strong personality of 
a "clique leader" known as Saito. Relations among the four are 
delicate and once Saito leaves office, breakup of the "clique" 
is considered unavoidable. There is no way that a huge 
organization such as the MOF in charge of financial and monetary 
affairs can be managed with a small group of five individuals. 
<H5>  Similarity With Internal Turmoil in MITI </H5>
  Saito is well aware of the weak point concerning the Saito 
system. In the meantime, we witnessed the collapse of the "LDP 
structure established in 1955." Saito must have thought now that 
the LDP has surrendered control of the government and I am a 
vice minister, if I don't grasp this opportunity, another chance 
for tax reform will probably not arise for some time. 
  Then, as mentioned earlier, assuming the leadership, Vice 
Minister Saito himself mobilized the "Saito clique" and charged 
full speed ahead for the sake of "opposing issuance of 
government deficit bonds and supporting an increase in the 
consumption tax." 
  As a result, although he has survived in one piece, he faced 
complete defeat and the situation in which the mass media 
directed a barrage of criticism for his unbridled head-on 
charge. Even after the "national welfare tax" was withdrawn and 
a decision was made for a tax cut and issuance of government 
deficit bonds, Saito held a press conference in which he assumed 
a firm stand indicating that there was still room for a 
"simultaneous increase and decrease in taxes." However, since 
the whole issue gave birth to a deep split among the coalition 
parties, the future prospects of such a concept are completely 
obscure. 
  On the other hand, individuals such as Eiki Watanabe, 
director of Planning and Research Bureau, the SDJP Central 
Committee, takes a firm stand in questioning the status of the 
MOF itself, in saying, "Recent handling of the `national welfare 
tax' indicates that bureaucrats have encroached upon political 
territory. I believe that this issue will become a very critical 
policy matter within the coalition parties." 
  Saito will probably continue to maintain a firm position in 
handling future problems. But the question is what will happen 
otherwise within the Ministry of Finance. That skepticism is now 
being voiced within the ministry. 
  Certainly, "absolute opposition to the issuance of 
government 
deficit bonds and an increase in the consumption tax rates" were 
"long-cherished desires" of the MOF and no one within the 
ministry criticizes Saito who fearlessly fought for those 
positions. Among young bureaucrats, the overwhelming majority 
take the view that, "We are deeply impressed with the fact that 
Vice Minister Saito handled the issues fearlessly." 
  However, when it comes to the procedures and methods used by 
Saito in handling the recent issues, we see a different picture. 
We must take the view that Saito's arbitrary actions, secrecy, 
and coercive methods calling for a conspicuous role for the 
"Saito clique" in disregard of the traditional organizational 
structure have, as previously mentioned in a statement by 
Hashimoto, chairman of LDP Political Affairs Research Council, 
left deep scars within the MOF. 
  In this connection, we can point to a similarity with the 
incident leading to the removal of Masahisa Naito, director of 
the Industrial Policy Bureau of MITI that developed into a major 
event at the end of 1993. 
  The "Naito incident" was instigated in connection with the 
retirement of Administrative Vice Minister Tanahashi of MITI in 
reaction among MITI officials to his high-handed methods of 
managing the ministry. 
  Similar to the position taken by Saito, Tanahashi had 
harbored strong dissatisfaction with the elitists who had formed 
the mainstream element of MITI in the past. 
  And, as soon as he was appointed vice minister, just like 
Saito, Tanahashi assumed leadership and forged full-speed ahead 
in winning approval of 10 trillion yen in August 1992 and 13 
trillion yen in 1993 for emergency economic measures. 
  Once Tanahashi left office, however, criticism erupted 
against officials considered part of the Tanahashi regime such 
as Naito, director of Industry Policy Bureau, who had 
collaborated in high-handed management of the ministry. And the 
true facts of the "Naito incident" reveal the intervention of 
Minister Hiroshi Kumagai of MITI who was appointed to that 
position in connection with a change in government. 
<H5>  Undesirable Connections With an Unnamed Magazine </H5>
  During that time, mystery documents exposing Tanahashi's 
"scandal" were repeatedly circulated. Saito is widely regarded 
within the ministry for not having any "selfish motives." 
However, there is no lack of the viewpoint that his greatest 
point of vulnerability is the "RONSAI" incident. 
  The "RONSAI" incident originated with a round table 
discussion sponsored by Jiro Kamiba, publisher, of the RONSAI at 
his office between a large number of bureaucrats and top 
officials of industrial firms under their jurisdiction. Through 
that process, Kamiba used the influence of bureaucrats to extort 
huge sums of money from businesses. Reportedly, MITI assumed 
responsibility for the incident, leading to the resignation of 
Kosuke Yamamoto, director of the Industrial Policy Bureau. 
  However, it was the then-Budget Bureau Director Saito who 
gave a speech as the principal guest at Kamiba's wedding on 28 
July 1991. Saito has never been mentioned in the RONSAI 
magazine, but it is a well known fact among bureaucrats that he 
was an intimate friend of Kamiba. 
  Now, the question is, what will happen in the case of the 
Ministry of Finance? 
  Currently, the "Saito clique" exercises complete control 
over 
those who hold any personnel authority, and unlike MITI, the MOF 
operates an efficient personnel management program. As long as 
Saito remains as vice minister, intraministry discontent would 
not surface. However, when it comes to the time for Saito to be 
relieved of duties from the ministry, criticism over the "Saito 
clique" will probably surface just as it did in MITI. In fact, 
individuals marked as leading and second contenders as a 
replacement for Saito as vice minister include Budget Bureau 
Director Shinozawa and Tax Bureau Director Ogawa, respectively, 
who are both known as typical "conservatives." If Saito takes 
action that would cause any of these two individuals to be 
passed over, there would be an all-out rebellion by 
"conservatives" who represent the overwhelming majority. 
Further, if the LDP should regain control of the government, 
there is the possibility that conservatives will retaliate for 
the interim shift within the ministry to support Ozawa. 
  Saito has dedicated all of his energies to the realization 
of 
"sound financial management." However, it is questionable 
whether bureaucrats following in his path will appreciate the 
work which he did. Perhaps, just as they say that it will take 
at least 10 years for MITI to recover from the residual effects 
of the "Naito incident," Saito's actions may leave a long-term 
legacy of "complications." It appears that, contrary to Saito's 
wishes, the day is nearing when "conservative" elitist 
bureaucrats whom he dislikes so much will regain authority. 

