BFN 

  [Excerpt] Aboard the icebreaker "Almirante Irizar," 2 May 
(NA) -- President Carlos Menem has underlined that if the United 
Kingdom were to authorize Argentine citizens to travel to the 
Malvinas Islands, he would be "the first to visit" to pay homage 
to the soldiers who fell in the 1982 war. 
  The president voiced his willingness to travel to the 
islands 
for the first time while sailing toward the place where a 
memorial ceremony was held this morning, in honor of the members 
of the Argentine Navy who died in the sinking of the cruiser 
"General Belgrano." During a dialogue with the journalists who 
accompanied him on this voyage, Menem said that "if we were 
allowed to travel to the Malvinas I would be the first to go 
there." 
  In justifying today's homage, 12 years after the war was 
concluded, the president vindicated the war veterans and 
recalled that he felt "a sort of shame" at the end of the war. 
He noted that "the soldiers who had left to fight were welcomed 
back through the rear door, rather than in the manner they 
deserved." He went on to say that "it is the government's duty 
to remember those who fell in the sinking of the `General 
Belgrano,' as it allows their relatives to pay tribute to their 
beloved ones." 
  With regard to the War Veterans Federation's demand that the 
sinking of the "Belgrano" be declared a "war crime," the head of 
state stated that Argentina "has long considered it to be so. 
For us, it was a war crime. It was a ship that was sailing 
outside the exclusion zone with no purpose of engaging in 
battle, and the word was given to sink it. This was a highly 
irresponsible and irrational decision by those who were 
conducting the war from the British Empire," he said. 
  Menem advised that this tribute to the "General Belgrano" 
and 
its dead "should not be a matter for concern for Great Britain," 
as Argentina has decided to resort to "diplomatic means" to 
recover its sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands. 
  Menem took advantage of this episode to once again label 
Margaret Thatcher's remarks in Chile "sheer nonsense." Thatcher 
said that the Argentines owe democracy to the British. "The 
United Kingdom should be applauding this homage to the heroes of 
the Belgrano," he remarked, remarking that "after the two world 
wars, they have gotten tired of paying tribute to those who 
fought for their country." 
  On the evening of 1 May the president dined with a group of 
relatives of the seamen who died in the sinking of the 
"Belgrano." At approximately 2200 local time, the sea was still 
calm and the temperature was 0 degrees Celsius, in contrast with 
the warm atmosphere that reigned inside the icebreaker. During 
the early hours of the morning, however, the icebreaker had to 
make its way through more turbulent waters, which made the 
passage difficult due to the constant movement of the vessel. 
  During the memorial ceremony on the morning of 2 May, the 
temperature was 1 degree below zero and it was snowing 
continuously, with strong gales and precipitation. Despite 
these weather conditions the ceremony took place on the landing 
deck. 
  Menem pointed out that "despite the fact that 12 years have 
elapsed, the memorial ceremony has reawakened the appreciation 
and memories of those who gave up their lives for the country." 
[passage omitted] 

