BFN 

  [Text] On 15 May, JIJI NEWS SERVICE released results of 
its monthly opinion poll in May, giving the support rate for the 
Hata administration for the first time. According to the public 
opinion poll, the support rate for the Hata administration was 
40.9 percent, down 5.3 percent from that of the Hosokawa 
administration surveyed in April. On the other hand, 27.6 
percent said they do not support the Hata administration (while 
the nonsupport rate for the Hosokawa administration in April was 
at 33.2 percent). It is quite unusual that an inaugurated prime 
minister is less popular than his resigning predecessor. Unlike 
the popular administration led by Hosokawa, Hata's support rate 
for the Hata administration was as low as former administrations 
of the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP]. Yet, it appeared many 
respondents want to watch future courses of the Hata 
administration, as 31.5 percent chose the "do not know" answer 
(compared with 20.6 percent in the April survey). Meanwhile, 
the support rate for the Japan New Party [JNP] has drastically 
dropped to 2.1 percent. 
  The JIJI poll was conducted 7-10 May--immediately after 
former Justice Minister Shigeto Nagano's resignation for his 
remarks on the Nanjing massacre--as individual interviews of 
2,000 eligible voters picked from all over the nation. 
Responses were obtained from 72.9 percent of the pollees. 
  The opinion poll has been conducted every month since the 
administration of former Prime Minister Shinsuke Kishi. Since 
then, Noboru Takeshita was the only prime minister who was less 
popular than his resigning predecessor. When Takeshita was 
inaugurated, his popularity was 3.1 percent lower than that of 
Yasuhiro Nakasone immediately before his resignation. 
  Among the pro-Hata cabinet respondents, the largest group of 
14.1 percent said they passively support Hata because they see 
"no other person suitable to be prime minister." This was 
followed by such responses as "the prime minister is 
trustworthy" (11.1 percent), "he gives a favorable impression" 
(9.5 percent), and "no changes would happen no matter who was 
prime minister" (7.9 percent). The largest group of anti-Hata 
respondents (16.5 percent) said they do not support him because 
they "cannot place hope on him." 
  With respect to support rates for individual political 
parties, the JNP's popularity was halved from the April poll 
(4.3 percent). This was even lower than the support rate for 
Komeito. The support rate for the LDP was at 21.3 percent (22.8 
percent in April); the Social Democratic Party of Japan was at 
6.8 percent (5.3 percent in April); Shinseito [Japan Renewal 
Party] was at 4.6 percent (3.3 percent in April); Komeito was at 
2.5 percent (2.8 percent in April); the Japan Communist Party 
was at 1.4 percent (0.8 percent in April); and both the 
Democratic Socialist Party and Sakigake [Harbinger] were at 1.4 
percent, unchanged from the previous month. 

