BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Kathrin Hoffmann and Bertram Heimlich: "Like </F>
the Phoenix Rising From Its Ashes -- A Modern Industrial Estate 
Born in Bitterfeld"] 
  [Text] Where the chimneys of 92 factories once belched out 
evil-smelling smoke in the old days of the GDR [German 
Democratic Republic], a modern industrial estate will now be 
born, a showpiece example of reclamation and redevelopment of a 
large-scale derelict, polluted industrial site. Ultramodern 
production facilities for the chemical and other industries are 
being built in Bitterfeld on the site formerly occupied by the 
chemical combines. 
<H5>  Bitterfeld/Wolfen Well Surveyed </H5>
  The Federal Government and the Land of Saxony-Anhalt spent 
270 million German marks [DM] on the environmental reclamation 
of the Bitterfeld/Wolfen area up to the end of 1992 alone. 
"This is now probably the best surveyed area in the whole of 
Germany," says Volker Eisewicht of Bisantech Chemical 
Engineering and Reclamation Bitterfeld GmbH, the Preussag AG and 
Chemicals AG Bitterfeld-Wolfen joint venture that has been 
engaged in consulting and engineering work on the site since 
1991. Its work also includes the planning of the 
Bitterfeld-Wolfen municipal sewage treatment plant, which is 
being built on the edge of the industrial estate. 
  The firm, which was formed from Chemicals AG in 1991, 
employs 
a staff with first-hand knowledge of the chemical works and 
their former output, an advantage that has paid dividends. 
  The sewage works will not treat only the effluent from the 
future industrial estate but will receive input from the sewers 
of the 26 municipalities making up the Lower Mulde and Wolfen 
sewage treatment consortia. Four high-level bioreactors of 
sealed tank design will purify the water, and their compactness 
means that considerably less space will be taken up than is 
usually the case. The new plant is designed in three stages, 
including biological after purification and sludge draining. In 
addition to a prepurification stage for effluent containing 
dyes, the sewage works has a simultaneous activated carbon 
adsorption system for substances that are not readily degradable 
and a simultaneous phosphate elimination unit. 
<H5>  Reclaimed Areas for Redevelopment </H5>
  Right next to the sewage treatment works, Bayer is building 
a 
total of five production facilities. Europe's largest 
pharmaceuticals factory and one paint and one methylcellulose 
factory are scheduled to go into production before the end of 
the current year. However, the site had previously been cleaned 
up at the state's expense. Bisantech played a major role in the 
planning and supervision of this project as well. 
  The gigantic survey program carried out on the factory site 
and in the surrounding area to locate the dumps immediately 
after unification came in handy. As Eisewicht says, "Sample 
drillings and analyses were performed over the areas according 
to a specific grid." Old records were subsequently assessed in 
the search for missed pockets or old dumps. The industrial 
waste was then studied thoroughly, and aerial photographs were 
evaluated as well. 
  Although only selected areas required reclamation on the 
site 
taken over by Bayer, redevelopment was no easy matter. "The 
mains that supply the whole complex with cooling and service 
water from the Mulde water works ran straight across the 
building site and had to be replaced with kilometers of pipes. 
An old, open sewer also had to be cased," says Eisewicht. 
Deposits of demonstrably nonhazardous waste were removed to a 
regulation dump. The perimeter area bordering on the former dye 
works also presented problems, as no detailed information about 
it was available. 
<H5>  Interim Soil Storage </H5>
  Analyses performed as the building work progressed ensured 
that the work proceeded smoothly. "Contaminated soil was 
removed and is being stored pending completion of the planned 
disposal and reprocessing center," says Eisewicht of the interim 
solution. Leveling the site's irregular terrain and, above all, 
the immense pressure of time, added to the problems. 
  Whereas the sewage works and the new Bayer buildings are not 
being erected on areas on which production facilities once 
stood, as many of the other incoming industrial companies as 
possible are scheduled to occupy dismantled sites. The 
buildings were tested both inside and out, and the surrounding 
areas surveyed prior to demolition, after which Bisantech, in 
conjunction with the Environment Office and Chemicals AG, drew 
up a disposal and reprocessing strategy for the complex, laying 
particular stress on the reprocessing of the demolition rubble. 
<H5>  Dismantling by Stages Possible </H5>
  The chemical plants are currently being dismantled by 
stages. 
Eisewicht takes the lime-ammonium nitrate plant as an example to 
describe the process: The production plant was first dismantled 
up to the upper perimeter of the site, followed by the other 
facilities, such as the warehouse, rail tracks, and roads. This 
in turn is being followed by the complete dismantling of the 
underground systems to a depth of 2.5 meters. 
  As much as possible of the hazardous waste that accumulates 
during the reclamation work will be reconditioned or disposed of 
on site, so it is planned to set up a modern disposal and 
reconditioning center with physicochemical treatment and 
hazardous waste incineration facilities on the reclaimed land 
occupied by Chemicals AG. For the time being, an immobilization 
process is being used to render heavily polluted soil reusable. 
  All this preliminary work on the site of the future 
industrial estate is creating incentives for potential 
investors. As a location, Bitterfeld-Wolfen is now offering 
more and more facilities that will encourage further companies 
to move in. In addition to Bayer, other famous names have 
already taken up residence, including Heraeus Quartz Glass, a 
company that produces optical fibers for telecommunication 
cables. Ultraclean production conditions are absolutely 
essential for the manufacture of optical fiber cables, so this 
is yet another sign of the enormous improvement in Bitterfeld's 
image. 
  Volker Eisewicht reckons that the bulk of the work on the 
whole site will be completed in five years at the most, by which 
time a gigantic mechanism combining dismantling and reclamation 
will have completely changed the face and the character of the 
area. It will be exciting to see if the costly efforts on the 
part of the Federal Government, the Land of Saxony-Anhalt, and 
the firms involved will not only benefit Bitterfeld itself as a 
location but will serve as a model for other areas. 

