CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katsuto Uchihashi, critic: "Cause of U.S.-Japan </F>
Economic Framework Failure"] 
  [Excerpts] Public opinion that the "United States is 
wrong" is being molded through clever manipulation of 
information and using that public opinion as a support, 
diplomatic negotiations are being conducted high-handedly under 
bureaucratic leadership. The end result of repeated policy 
failures was the recent "rupture." 
<H5>  Is Japan a Practitioner of Free Trade? </H5>
  The economic framework talks at the U.S.-Japan summit 
meeting 
failed to come to an agreement. Japanese bureaucrats' opposition 
to "numerical targets" proposed by the U.S. side was stubborn 
and the position of flat refusal was maintained throughout. 
  Subsequently, the U.S. side presented the new concept of 
"objective criteria," which might be construed as a compromise 
plan, but an opening for a breakthrough in U.S.-Japan 
negotiations could not be found. 
  With respect to numerical targets and objective criteria 
proposed by the U.S. side, details of either or differences 
between them are not altogether clear. 
  If significant points of benchmarks or objective criteria 
are 
to be summarized, it would probably be as described below. 
  If an agreement is reached between the United States and 
Japan on numerical targets, the numbers would exert some form of 
a binding power on the Japanese side. If targets are not 
reached, Japan must be prepared for the U.S. side to apply 
sanctions--at least, that is the Japanese interpretation. 
  As for the latter objective criteria, it is interpreted as a 
proposal to establish standards to measure the extent of 
achievements, i.e., how much progress has been actually made 
toward the goals. 
  With respect to both, the Japanese side resisted, claiming 
establishment of numerical values woud lead to managed trade, 
and the result was the issuance of a joint statement that an 
agreement without substance would be meaningless. 
  The Japanese side, which refuses to accept numerical targets 
or objective criteria, claims that the universal principle of 
"free trade" justifies its stand. Meanwhile, Japan staged a 
counterplay by bringing up deregulation as a domestic 
development at the summit meeting and tried to gain the 
understanding of the U.S. side toward Hosokawa regime's 
political posture. The Hosokawa government, which is trying to 
break away from the bureaucracy-led structure, decided that 
acceptance of numerical targets or objective criteria would run 
counter to the deregulation move and strengthened its strategy 
to reject numerical targets. 
  The reasoning was that the government and administration 
must 
intervene in the private sector's corporate activities to reach 
numerical targets, which would help preserve bureaucratic 
leadership in Japan, and ultimately, that might become a factor 
to obstruct the surplus reduction demanded by the U.S. side. 
  However, the two reasons given, free trade and deregulation, 
were not convincing arguments. 
  On the one hand, Japan had been asserting that "our markets 
are fully open already." Japan's position is that since it is a 
practitioner of free trade, it can tell other countries to 
protect free trade. If that were not true, it cannot reject U.S. 
demands on the grounds that they would jeopardize free trade. 
  Actually, however, over 11,000 regulations, mainly 
concerning 
permits and licenses, are being enforced in Japan. That is why 
deregulation becomes necessary and from the U.S. standpoint, 
such a market cannot be considered as free and open. 
  Japan's huge trade surplus of $140 billion is also seen as 
nothing more than the result produced by the extensive 
regulations and the "market structure" protected by those 
regulations. 
  The U.S. thinking is that only a market in which consumers 
have free access to all products and services and can select 
what is desired at fair prices is deserving of the label of free 
trade. And what is obstructing that is the network of 
regulations extending in all directions. 
  In other words, it means that the fact Japan has finally 
opted to grapple with deregulation, 10 odd years after the 
United States, certifies the reality that the market is not free. 
  If that is so, the U.S. argument becomes plausible that to 
make the deregulation course set by the Hosokawa regime 
effective and to advance market liberalization steadily, 
numerical targets proposed by the United States should, instead, 
be accepted. 
  The reasoning is that numerical targets are needed for the 
very purpose of pushing "deregulation." 
  The subject of deregulation brought up by the Japanese side 
ultimately left a strong feeling of distrust on the U.S. side 
that it was an excuse to reject numerical targets. 
  This is only one example. 
  In view of the grave realities--the extreme U.S.-Japan trade 
imbalance and excessive accumulation of trade surpluses against 
one country--it must be said that both of the arguments, one for 
free trade as a universal principle and the other for 
deregulation as a specific factor, were truly lacking in 
persuasive power. 
  The summit conference was applauded domestically on the 
grounds that "Japan said `no'" for the first time to U.S. 
proposals, but the results are clearly different from such 
self-adulatory evaluations as "a step toward maturity" or 
"adultlike relationships." 
  In the assessment of the summit meeting's results, a 
perception gap that is deeper than ever before emerged between 
U.S. and Japanese authorites concerned and that is intensifying 
mutual distrust. 
  In effect, that is the emergence of a new crisis. 
  The underlying basis of recent developments, where one side 
pressured with numbers and the other refused throughout from the 
very beginning, is the "U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement" 
signed in September 1986. 
  While the Japanese side said that it did not want to repeat 
the mistake like the one made at the time of the semiconductor 
agreement, the U.S. side pressured Japan for agreement on 
numerical targets using the semiconductor agreement as the text 
of a successful case. 
  The semiconductor agreement is an extreme example where 
interests and assessments are exactly the opposite depending on 
the position. 
  Then, what did happen in the course of U.S.-Japan relations? 
<H5>  U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement Is Starting Point of </H5>
Frictions 
  The "U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement" was signed in 
Washington, D.C., in September 1986. 
  Although a lengthy period of seven and a half years have 
passed since the signing, the circumstances surrounding the 
conclusion of the agreement live on as a history of unpleasant 
quarrels which still constrain both the United States and Japan. 
  A number of facts, which were not known during the turbulent 
agreement negotiations, have become clear now. 
  What happened before and after the signing of the 
"semiconductor agreement," which might be called the starting 
point of U.S.-Japan frictions, must be reexamined. 
  It is still fresh in our memories, but in April 1987 only 
seven months after the signing of the U.S.-Japan Semiconductor 
Agreement, the U.S. Government applied sanctions against Japan 
on grounds that the agreement was being violated. There was a 
notification, then imposition of the expected levy of 
100-percent retaliatory duties on Japanese-made personal 
computers, power tools, and color TV sets. 
  The action was viewed by the Japanese Government, 
administration, and semiconductor circle as a one-sided 
retaliation carried out in too short a period after conclusion 
of the agreement. Opposition heightened against "the 
unreasonable United States." 
  Two months prior to the U.S. Government's decision to apply 
sanctions, MOSS (Market-Oriented Sector Selective) talks had 
been held in Tokyo. 
  Reportedly, at the meeting, U.S. representatives criticized 
the Japanese response with an unusually tough attitude, 
complaing that "the semiconductor agreement was not producing 
positive results," and moreover, left the meeting midway. 
  Numerous questions were raised and conjectures were made as 
to what sections in the agreement the U.S. side was referring to 
when it said, "there were no practical results" and what were 
the underlying reasons for such tough complaints? [passage 
omitted] 
  According to the notice delivered to the Japanese Government 
at the time, the date of implementation was set as 17 April 
[1987]. In response to the request of the Japanese side which 
wanted to avoid sanctions, an emergency U.S.-Japan meeting was 
held hastily in Washington. [passage omitted] 
  The basic perception of the Japanese representatives leaving 
for the emergency meeting was, "the notice of imposing 
retaliatory duties on Japan was a characteristic pose of the 
United States." Both the government and the semiconductor circle 
had the same perception regarding this development. [passage 
omitted] 
  The Japanese side, which believed that "retaliatory tariff 
levy was only a pose of the United States," set up a strategy of 
prolonging the itinerary of the U.S.-Japan emergency meeting and 
hopefully, snarl the discussions until the scheduled activation 
date of 17th. The calculation was if that happened, "the 
counterpart would back down and something can be worked out." 
  However, the U.S.-Japan emergency meeting ended woefully. 
[passage omitted] 
  When the "allegation of pose" that the "retaliatory duty" 
was 
nothing more than a threat broke down, the Japanese Government 
turned about and endeavored to publicize its "appeal to GATT," 
while simultaneously, it kept informing the mass media of "an 
outlook for early withdrawal." 
  "With respect to the United States, which resorted to 
unreasonable measures that can be construed as denial of free 
trade, we will say what we have to and appeal to world opinion 
by fighting in an official arena." 
  On the day the notice of retaliatory duty levy was 
announced, 
all of the Japanese newspapers reported, "the counteraction is 
appeal to GATT." Day after day even after that, the item, "GATT 
appeal," headlined the news. 
  The Japanese Government's response was seen as "fair and 
square counteraction" and public opinion swelled that "United 
States was the wrong party." [passage omitted] 
  During the course of developments leading to the retaliatory 
tariff levy, the schema of "high-handed United States and 
victimized Japan" had been imbedded in the memories of many 
Japanese. 
  The schema stirred up the people from time to time, as 
government leaders called for "GATT appeal," and the mood that 
statements urging cooperation with the United States indicated a 
weak-kneed diplomacy grew in the public sentiment. 
  However, what was behind the seemingly one-sided U.S. levy 
of 
retaliatory duties? There were too many facts which were not 
revealed to the people at the time. 
<H5>  Hidden Side of Semiconductor Agreement </H5>
  All government officials now say that they do not want to 
repeat the folly of the semiconductor agreement. 
  Harsh words, such as retaliation and sanction, are 
constantly 
bantered about to press for observance of the agreement terms. 
Troubles between the United States and Japan do not cease over 
the 20-percent Japanese market share of foreign-made 
semiconductors. The figure of 20 percent, which was intended not 
as a promise but a goal to strive for, has become an isolated 
target and only Japan has shouldered a heavy burden. 
  The United States is the unjust party. This thought runs 
deep 
in the public sentiment. 
  However, one cannot say that details about U.S.-Japan 
relations concerning trade and economic frictions have been 
reported in full, accurately and objectively, to the people on 
all occasions. 
  What was the extent of the people's knowledge about the real 
situation surrounding the semiconductor agreement? 
  For example, the U.S. retaliatory action was taken because 
"the semiconductor agreement was not producing positive results." 
  Various explanations were given as to why sanctions were 
applied in so short a time after the agreement was concluded. 
  There was the version that, "Obligations which were 
considered difficult from the start, such a price monitoring in 
Third World markets, were imposed on Japan. The United States is 
blaming us high-handedly because that has not been carried out." 
[passage omitted] 
  The message that, "we are fed up with the U.S.-Japan 
Semiconductor Agreement--we must not make that mistake again," 
permeated the bureaucratic circle and appeared to have gradually 
jelled into an unwritten, ironclad rule. 
  The "numerical allergy" affected not only the government and 
bureaucracy but the vast majority of the people and the 
Hosokawa-Clinton "summit conference breakdown" occurred with 
that as the backdrop. 
  However, there were many hidden scripts in this scenario. 
What did the people know and what weren't they told? There is 
an urgent need to reorganize the facts again. 
  In the first place, the problematical "U.S.-Japan 
Semiconductor Agreement" was intended to stop the dumping 
investigation of Japanese semiconductors by the U.S. Commerce 
Department and was concluded at the last moment, immediately 
before the start of the investigation, in exchange for its 
suspension. 
  At the time, on the basis of complaints from domestic 
semiconductor manufacturers, the Commerce Department was about 
to begin the investigation of suspected dumping of Japanese 
semiconductors in the U.S. market. 
  It was surmised, as shown by many precedents, that if this 
investigation proved dumping, there would not only be an 
imposition of heavy punitive tariffs, but there would be 
incalculable negative effects for Japanese mandufacturers. 
  A meeting was arranged through the urging of the Japanes 
side, which realized that the charge of dumping, to which the 
image and label of illegal trade would be attached, must be 
avoided at all costs. With the U.S.-Japan agreement that in 
exchange for suspension of the investigations, some form of a 
governmental treaty would be concluded, the negotiations finally 
began. 
  Doesn't the Japanese judgment that "it was more expedient to 
seek refuge in an agreement" reveal that the posture was too 
weak to attempt refutation of dumping charges? 
  "At that time, it was practically certain that dumping of 
Japanese semiconductors would have been validated if there 
hadn't been a switch to an agreement. It was a critical moment." 
A certain industrial leader now says so reflectively. 
  The semiconductor agreement was formed with these 
developments as the backdrop and, as a result, obligations Japan 
should bear such as, "prevent dumping," "free access to Japanese 
markets," and "monitor exports to Third World countries," were 
incorporated in the agreement. 
  Several years before the 1986 conclusion of the 
semiconductor 
agreement, particularly in 1984, Japanese semiconductor 
manufacturers rushed, at once, to make huge capital investments 
which can be considered excessive. [passage omitted] 
  The United States Trade Representative (USTR), who was 
disturbed by the investment rush, cautioned the Japanese 
Government that, "if excessive investments continue, there would 
be a supply surplus in the world's semiconductor markets and 
concern about export dumpings would arise." That was in 1985. 
[passage omitted] 
  Nevertheless, how many Japanese have an objective 
understanding of the circumstances which led to the U.S.-Japan 
Semiconductor Agreement? 
  That is the first point that should be considered. 
<H5>  Use of Confidential Letter as Makeshift Tactic </H5>
  Second, doubts remain as to how earnestly the Japanese 
Government and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry 
(MITI) tried, after conclusion of the semiconductor agreement, 
to initiate actions to carry out the objectives and particulars 
stated in the agreement. 
  The dissatisfaction of the Japanese side, which had to sign 
the agreement reluctantly, is believed to have continued long 
after that. 
  As mentioned earlier, Japanese officials involved in the 
negotiations say despairingly, "price monitoring in Third World 
markets that is mentioned in the agreement was an impossible 
commitment from the start." [passage omitted] 
  Ten days after the MOSS conference in Tokyo ended in failure 
as mentioned earlier, MITI received a written notification. 
  "An improvement in the situation within 30 to 60 days is 
requested. There is concern that unless practical results are 
seen, the U.S. Government will be forced to take appropriate 
actions." 
  MITI began to act, finally. 
  It began to take steps to enforce administrative guidance, 
its forte, against the semiconductor industry. [passage omitted] 
  In the fall of the preceding year, simultaneously with the 
effectuation of the semiconductor agreement, MITI had proposed a 
"uniform 20-percent production cut" (256K DRAM's) as an 
administrative guidance measure. [passage omitted] 
  However, the attempt failed and the administrative guidance 
was not heeded. The reason is that the industry's leading 
corporations strongly objected to the market share. 
  Receiving the harsh notification after the MOSS conference, 
MITI was shocked by the tough U.S. attitude and started to 
reactivate the administrative guidance measure which had been 
suspended in midair. [passage omitted] 
  Seriously troubled by the U.S. notification, MITI was 
prodded 
by a sense of crisis and putting down the resistance of leading 
corporations on this occasion, ultimately succeeded in making 
the industry fall in step along the line of 20-percent decreased 
production. 
  The optimistic outlook of MITI bureaucrats that retaliatory 
tariffs would not be levied probably depended too heavily on 
successful implementation of the 20-percent production cut 
before that. [passage omitted] 
  However, the matters described above are still trivial in 
nature. 
  There is an even more important happening. 
  The third point that should probably be mentioned is the 
suspicion that the practice by officials engaged in U.S.-Japan 
negotiations to use makeshift tactics, such as handing over 
so-called "side letters" in secrecy from the Japanese people, 
was followed again in the semiconductor negotiations. 
  The problem is that they, who mention "appeal to GATT" on 
every occasion to create the impression that "we are just," have 
actually not only failed to carry out the GATT appeal but made 
the temporizing art of passing "confidential letters" to 
counterparts--unbeknownst to the Japanese people--a commonplace 
practice. 
  Is the statement, "to make the share of foreign 
semiconductors 20 percent," in the Japanese market, simply a 
goal to strive for or a promise by the Japanese side? 
  A fruitless dispute of "accusations" and "denials," 
involving 
the "side letter," which was not revealed to the people, started 
between the U.S. and Japanese sides over an important issue and 
is still continuing. 
  Was there a side letter or not? Explanations are given by 
Japanese officials through the mass media but no direct 
explanation of the incident has yet been given. 
  What should probably be feared is the posture of Japanese 
bureaucrats to arouse opposition among the people against the 
United States by saying, "avoid repeating the humiliation of the 
semiconductor agreement," while hiding important information. 
<H5>  GATT Appeal Is a Pose, Too </H5>
  As it is already known, the ASAHI SHIMBUN reported in March 
1988 that it appears there was a "confidential letter" related 
to the U.S.-Japan Semiconductor Agreement (12, 13 March 1988 
morning editions). 
  Reportedly, when the agreement was to be signed, the 
Japanese 
side submitted a confidential letter, like the following, which 
was to be appended to the agreement. 
  "Regarding the attainment of the U.S. corporate goal to 
increase the share of U.S.-made semiconductors in Japan to 20 
percent within five years, the Japanese Government understands 
it, welcomes it, and will strive to support it." 
  The person who revealed the existence of the confidential 
letter was Clyde Prestowitz (presently, director of the Economic 
Strategy Institute), who was one of the U.S. negotiators at the 
time, and developments of that period are mentioned in his 
writings. [passage omitted] 
  Although Prestowitz has written that existence of the 
confidential letter was common knowledge within the U.S. 
administration, even with regard to very existence of the 
letter, the Japanese side has continued to strongly deny that 
"there is no possibility such a letter could exist." 
  Even to this day, the position is maintained that "what we 
do 
not recognize does not exist." [passage omitted] 
  In the "implementation articles" appended to the 
semiconductor agreement, with respect to "access to the Japanese 
market," it is stated that "the U.S. side desires that the share 
of U.S. semiconductors become 20 percent in Japan," while the 
Japanese response is, "we favorably acknowledge the request." 
  As far as the implementation articles are concerned, the 
word, "promise," is not noted, as the Japanese side asserts even 
today. 
  However, Prestowitz exposed that in the side letter, it was 
a 
"promise to provide support." [passage omitted] 
  That MITI hastily instituted administrative guidance to 
reduce production, after receiving notification following the 
Tokyo MOSS conference, was reported earlier. The administrative 
guidance at that time directed a production cut of 20 percent. 
  Doesn't this figure correspond to the figure in the 
commitment to the United States that, "we promise to provide 
support so that the share of U.S. semiconductions will increase 
to 20 percent?" 
  Too many evidences to disprove the denial that a side letter 
existed. 
  A number of points can be raised regarding the foregoing 
developments. 
  First, there is the suspicion that for a long period on the 
stage of diplomatic negotiations, information was manipulated 
cleverly through use of this type of skillful maneuvering. 
Public opinion is formed without factual basis and diplomatic 
negotiations are conducted independently by the bureaucracy with 
the public opinion as a support. 
  If the side letter, reported to have been exchanged during 
the semiconductor negotiations, had not been exposed by a U.S. 
negotiator nor revealed by the mass media, the Japanese people 
would have been totally uninformed and might have been mobilized 
into a more intense and a larger scale opposition against "the 
wrongful United States." 
  What happened eventually is apparent. 
  That statements by Japanese bureaucrats of "justice is on 
our 
side" amount to only mimicries is shown in the pose assumed of 
shouting for "appeal to GATT" in every trade negotiation. 
  To oppose imposition of the semiconductor retaliatory 
duties, 
the Japanese Government resorted to GATT. However, the appeal 
was based on "GATT Article 23, Section 1" and not on "Article 
23, section 2." There is a big difference between sections 1 and 
2. 
  Section 1 refers to "bilateral meetings" between parties 
involved in the conflict. This is a request to "reopen once 
again" negotiations that have ruptured while Section 2 makes the 
conflict official by establishing a panel (subcommittee for 
multilateral meetings) and seeks adjudication. Countries 
involved are hauled to a court, so to speak, and the conflict is 
disclosed in an international setting. 
  With regard to the semiconductor retaliatory tariffs, the 
Japanese Government did not ask for panel meetings subsequently 
and failed to protest the action at GATT executive meetings 
since 1988. 
  That is truly an example of mimesis. 
  Through these developments, the distrust of U.S. side 
deepened that "the Japanese Government makes a number of 
promises, but it does not try to fulfill the promises," and the 
accumulation of distrustful feelings led to the request for 
establishment of "numerical targets" and "objective criteria." 
  It is simple to discuss the propriety of these U.S. demands, 
but it is probably very difficult for the Japanese side to 
evaluate the past developments and take the initiative to 
present more effective solutions for the trade imbalance. 
<H5>  "Japan's Surplus" as a Global Problem </H5>
  An economists' group in Japan, numbering well over a hundred 
persons, agreed to oppose "numerical targets" and their views 
were consolidated. As though in response, in the United States, 
just as many scholars have taken a similar action. They claim 
that the establishment of numerical targets is a denial of "free 
trade" and will lead to "managed trade." 
  Not only economists but leading members of international 
organs, including the OECD, are sounding alarms about the U.S. 
proposal whenever the occasion arises. 
  As though they gained allies, Japanese mass media are making 
efforts to present, at every opportunity, arguments opposing 
"numerical targets." 
  Meanwhile, in Japan, "arguments pardoning trade surpluses," 
as presented in the Komiya doctrine (theory of Ryutaro Komiya, 
Aoyama Gakuin University professor), have emerged and he is 
being treated as a savior at Kasumigaseki. 
  Komiya asserts that, "the Maekawa report proposed reduction 
of the surplus on the assumption that Japan's current account 
surplus would hurt other countries," but that was a mistake in 
the first place. 
  He concludes that, "Perhaps, to cope with the mass 
psychology 
of other countries' general public, politicians, and mass media, 
which do not understand logic based on economic rationality, 
unreasonable arguments had to be accepted" (4 December 1993 
issue of SHUKAN TOYO KEIZAI). 
  He claims that the structural cause of trade imbalance is 
the 
difference between total savings and total investments and that 
the gap equates to current account surplus in the long run so 
the huge Japanese surplus against the United States is unrelated 
to the issue of Japanese market closure. 
  According to Komiya's theory, the U.S. current account 
deficit is due mainly to the fact that savings are too meager in 
the United States and all of the Japanese efforts to reduce the 
surplus are fruitless. 
  The 1993 "White Paper on International Trade" was compiled 
on 
the basis of this line of thinking. 
  Kasumigaseki's opposition to the establishment of "numerical 
targets," which showed a monolithic unity centered on 
MITI-Finance Ministry bureaucracy, was probably encouraged 
greatly by the remarks of thse scholars. 
  These developments should have foreshadowed the rupture in 
Clinton- Hosokawa talks. 
  However, a close examination of the strikingly similar 
theories on the causal relations of the surplus reveals that the 
assertions are not necessarily uniform as to whether Japan's 
trade surplus, which is steadily climbing year after year, is a 
matter that can or cannot be afforded to be left alone. 
  The views of Lester Thurow, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology professor, are entirely different from the above 
theories. 
  "If Japan continues to record trade surpluses as it is, the 
world economy cannot keep functioning. No country will be able 
to bear the limitless increase in debts to Japan." 
  From the standpoint of a country's finances, the expansion 
of 
foreign liabilities means an increase in loans from overseas. 
Countries burdened with huge debts must allocate the people's 
tax money to loan repayments, and undoubtedly, national strength 
will decline and taxpayers will be impoverished. 
  At the OECD ministerial meeting held in Paris in May 1993, 
U.S. Treasury Secretary Bentsen stated, "Japan's surplus is 
obstructing the world's growth. This is a global problem." 
  If economics is a science which refers to such basic 
understanding as the "mass psychology of various countries' 
general public, politicians, and mass media which do not 
understand the logic based on economic rationality," it is no 
longer a social science that can set forth a guiding principle 
for the present-day society. 
  That is like a game of seeking "conformation of vain logical 
reasoning" that has nothing to do with what the world is 
suffering from and agonizing over to resolve. Is it possible for 
a country to pursue stability and security supported by such a 
game? 
  Japan's surplus stems from excessive savings. Komiya's 
theory 
does not differ from other expostulations regarding this point. 
Why do savings become excessive? Is it a problem that should be 
solved or conversely, is it desirable? 
  The reason Japan has excessive savings is that people are 
striving to save because of future uncertainty and high land and 
housing prices. To prepare for that, the establishment of a 
system to actually circulate the savings being made to build up 
assets should be the first step. 
  The government should aggressively encourage savings to 
build 
up assets indispensable for a secure livelihood and also, 
undertake a program of "reverse income transfer" of the savings. 
  After a certain period, the savings would be directed to 
housing construction as a form of building up assets. This will 
eventually create domestic demand which will ensure stable 
growth for the Japanese economy and savings will drop to a 
reasonable level. That will lead to surplus reduction. Such a 
policy must be adopted. 
  To "say what should be said" is the most important behavior 
in the international society. 
  However, the utmost consideration is that statements made 
under such circumstances must be rational arguments that are 
persuasive and convincing to counterpart negotiators. Otherwise, 
they could lead to a power confrontation or become irrefutable 
even they are taken as threats made by the weaker side. 
  It can be seen that the real cause of the U.S.-Japan split 
is 
not as prosaic as reported publicly. 

