CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Li Yulong (2621 3768 7893), President of the </F>
Sichuan Provincial Higher People's Court: "Work Report of the 
Sichuan Provincial Higher People's Court; Presented 22 Jan 1994 
at the Second Session of the Eighth People's Congress"] 
  [Excerpt] Each level of the Provincial People's Court and 
the Chengdu Railroad Transportation Special Court 
conscientiously implemented the fundamental line and spirit of 
the 16th National Court Working Conference. The courts focused 
on economic construction and faithfully carried the duties 
entrusted to them by the constitution and the law, severely 
assaulting serious criminal offenses and economic crimes, fully 
exploiting legal means to regulate economic, civil, and other 
social relationships, strengthening self-reform and 
construction, and making new progress in every aspect of its 
work. Last year, we accepted and heard a total of 310,281 first 
trial cases, tried and wound up 282,598 cases, which were 
increases of 10.94 percent and 12.85 percent respectively; 
mediated and dealt with 21,208 simple and non-lawsuit type 
cases. The Provincial Higher People's Court handled 3,579 cases 
of various types in accordance with the law, an increase of 21.4 
percent over last year. We have made positive contributions 
toward keeping society stable and promoting further development 
of the anti-corruption struggle, so as to guarantee reform, 
opening, and economic development. 
<H5>  I. Launched Further "Severe Attacks" in the Fight To Keep </H5>
Society Stable 
  Courts throughout Sichuan province persist in the principle 
of "conducting dual tactics, with both tactics being tough," 
developing massive, concentrated "severe assaults" and various 
special fights, making a severe assault on criminal activities 
of all kinds. We accepted and heard a total of 40,332 
preliminary hearing criminal cases, with 38,169 cases brought to 
completion, with 43,971 prisoners sentenced. This protected 
public security, and provided a better social environment for 
reform, opening, and economic construction in Sichuan province. 
  Stressed the key points of attacking and strengthening 
our power to attack. Always direct the spearhead of the 
attack against those who seriously endanger public security and 
the people's lives and property. Last year, we tried and 
completed a total of 10,419 cases of murder, robbery, bombing, 
rape, and gang activity, especially group criminal acts with 
underground characteristics, and sentenced 14,652 prisoners, 
increases of 23.2 percent and 24.5 percent over last year. For 
the worst criminals, under the precondition of guaranteeing case 
quality, we sped up handling their trials in order to sentence 
them as severely as possible. Among completed criminal cases, 90 
percent were completed within the legal stipulated time period. 
Of those sentenced to prison, 17,493 felons received sentences 
of more than five years' imprisonment, 2,007 were sentenced to 
life imprisonment or the death penalty (including stays of 
execution); this was a total of 19,500 prisoners, which was 
44.35 percent of the total number of prisoners sentenced, an 
increase of 6.6 percent over last year. We moved up our handling 
of major cases, trying and handling them rapidly; for those 
criminal cases where something less than the death penalty would 
leave people dissatisfied, we resolutely sentence the criminals 
to death. For example, when the murder of National Softball 
Training Team member Liu Li [0491 7787] was discovered, the 
Zhigong Intermediate People's Court immediately dispatched 
officials to make an investigation and obtain evidence. Within 
three days after the case was prosecuted, the criminal defendant 
Jiang Bin [3068 1755] was sentenced to death at the first trial. 
Soon after learning of the case, the Provincial Higher People's 
Court also sent an official to make double verification, and the 
death penalty for the criminal was verified and approved. 
Meanwhile, we consciously carried out the policy of combining 
punishment with leniency. In order to expand the social effect 
of our "critical attack," we selected typical cases for public 
pronouncement and judgment, and by the National Day alone we had 
made 764 case of public pronouncement and judgment, which 
promoted further development of the "critical attack" struggle. 
  Launched special items of the struggle, and implemented 
special treatment. Last year we tried and completed 1,351 
cases of "highwaymen," sentencing 2,413 prisoners; tried and 
completed 12,180 cases of larceny, sentencing 20,013 criminals 
in the first trial; tried and completed 2,027 cases of swindling 
and selling women and children, luring, abetting, compelling or 
organizing women into prostitution, and sentenced 3,657 
prisoners. To support the "26 June International Day of Drug 
Abolition," Railroad Transport Intermediate Courts in such 
cities as Liangshan and Chengdu individually held pronouncement 
and judgment meetings, concentrated on executing a group of drug 
dealers. This showed China's solemn and just standpoint on 
severely suppressing criminal drug activity. 
  Enthusiastically attended to comprehensive treatment 
of public security. Courts at each level persisted in the 
principle of "stressing both attack and deterrence, treat both 
the target and the foundation," and enthusiastically attended to 
comprehensive treatment of the public security. We held a total 
of 1,549 pronouncement and judgment meetings, directly educating 
as many as 19.46 million people (times); a total of 4,595 
suggestions on enforcement were made, and 3,452 of these were 
adopted, encouraging relevant departments to strengthen their 
protective measures; we persisted in combining punishment with 
education for teenage criminals, and educated and saved a group 
of teenagers who had taken a wrong step in their lives; we paid 
attention to doing a good job in our legal publicity, education 
and conciliation work, preventing 4,858 cases of dispute from 
becoming more serious; we gave reduced sentences and releases on 
parole to those who showed repentance and mended their ways, and 
to those who rendered meritorious services, maintained order in 
prison governance, or stimulated enthusiasm for reform in other 
prisoners. 
<H5>  II. Sternly Attacked Serious Economic Crimes To Promote the </H5>
Construction of Clear and Honest Politics 
  We consciously implemented the major and important decisions 
and the demand of the central CPC that there must be periodic 
achievements in launching the anti-corruption struggle, by 
making stern attacks on serious economic crimes. Last year we 
accepted and handled a total of 6,203 cases of economic crimes 
which were prosecuted by procuratorial organs in the first 
trial. We completed a total of 5,843 cases, a case completion 
rate of 94.3 percent, sentenced 7,570 prisoners and recovered a 
total of 62.7 million yuan in economic losses for the State and 
collective. 
  Focused on attacking the crimes of graft, acceptance of 
bribes, and diversion of public funds. Courts at each level 
conscientiously implemented the "Supplementary Rules for 
Punishing Crimes of Graft and Bribery," passed by the National 
Congress, by accepting and handling a total of 1,893 cases 
prosecuted by procuratorial organs in first trials for graft, 
bribe-taking and diverting public funds. We completed 1,717 
cases, a case completion rate of 90.7 percent, and sentenced 
2,072 prisoners. We promoted the further development of the 
anti-corruption struggle by launching stern attacks against 
economic criminals. 
  To maintain economic order, we meted out stern 
punishments for such economic crimes as tax evasion, tax 
resistance, swindling, and making and selling fake or bad 
quality commodities. Last year we accepted a total of 73 
cases of tax evasion, and completed 67 cases; we accepted 302 
swindling cases, completing 283. We enthusiastically waged a 
special fight to "attack fake products and deal with bad 
products," firmly sentencing criminals to death if their crime 
was carried out in a vile way and caused severe consequences. 
Take for example the case of Wang Lingang [3769 5677 0474] of 
Gulin, who trafficked in bogus fertilizer: The volume of his 
illegal operation reached 208,000 yuan, while he personally made 
an illegal profit of 118,000 yuan, and in one year caused a 
severe output reduction in more than 20,000 mu of farmland in 
Rongchang, Xuyong and Gulin, leaving hardened soil which will be 
difficult to recover, and extremely critical consequences. The 
court sentenced the criminal Wang to the death penalty, a good 
outcome for society. 
  Paid serious attention to trying and dealing with big 
and major cases of economic crime. We established a 
registration and reporting system and a supervision system for 
big and major economic cases, moving these cases up on the 
calendar in order that they could be tried as soon as possible 
after indictment. Last year, among economic criminals sentenced 
by courts throughout the province, 1,212 of the crimes involved 
more than 1,000 yuan, and 66 of these involved more than 100,000 
to 500,000 yuan, while three involved between 500,000 and 
1,000,000 yuan, and two in which over 1,000,000 yuan was 
involved. In order to expand the effects of trying and handling 
big and major cases, the Provincial Higher People's Court 
organized courts in four localities, including Chengdu and 
Chongqing, to concentrate on publicly charging 28 serious 
grafting and bribing criminals on the same day. They also held a 
press conference to let the masses of people see the 
determination of the party and government to punish corruption, 
and do a good job of building clear and honest politics. 
  Strictly delineated the boundary line between guilt and 
innocence. We adhered to the principle of "being firm on 
the one hand, but on the other hand be cautious and certain." If 
the policies and legal regulations were unclear, if there was no 
clear delineation of guilt or innocence, then we were cautious 
in judgment; for those who were bold in reform, even if they 
made mistakes in their work, we did not charge them with crimes; 
those who had not committed a crime were declared innocent in 
accordance with the law; in cases where the principal facts were 
unclear and proof was lacking, we firmly returned these to 
procuratorial organs for supplemental investigation. We fed a 
total of 800 economic crime cases back to procuratorial organs 
for supplemental investigation, declared 40 cases to be exempt 
from criminal punishment, and declared 25 cases of innocence. 
<H5>  III. Adjusted Economic Relationships by the Full Use of </H5>
Legal Means To Promote Macroscopic Adjustment and Control and 
Development of the Market Economy 
  Courts at each level tried vigorously to widen service areas 
and channels, actively serving the nation's macroscopic 
adjustment and control and establishing the socialist market 
economy. Last year we accepted and handled a total of 65,349 
first trial economic dispute cases of various kinds, completed 
57,325 cases, increases of 28 percent and 30 percent 
respectively. The total amount of money involved in these 
lawsuits was 300,298 yuan, an increase of 125 percent over the 
year before. This work was important for speeding up opening and 
reform and economic development. 
  We coordinated with the reorganizing financial order, 
trying and examining bank loan cases. We vigorously carried 
out and fulfilled the central government's decision concerning 
strengthening and improving macroscopic adjustment and control 
by launching special trials and services for recalling loans. 
Last year we tried and completed a total of 20,793 loan cases, 
lawsuits which involved a total of 62,323 yuan. This recovered a 
great deal of capital for financial organs, alleviating a tight 
capital situation. In just the period July to October, the Dazhu 
County Court recalled 20.47 million yuan in "outstanding" loans 
for financial departments by concentrating its time and force. 
  Strengthened investigation and handling of cases of 
enterprise converting their operational system, to promote 
enterprises entering the market. Courts throughout Sichuan 
have always done a good job in their investigation and handling 
of such cases as state-owned enterprises' (especially medium and 
large State-owned enterprises) contractual, leasing, joint stock 
operations and enterprise cooperation, and annexing and 
bankruptcy, regarding these as focal work points. Last year we 
tried and completed a total of 1,654 such cases. We protected 
enterprises' right of self-operation in our handling of these 
cases, supporting the triumph of the excellent with elimination 
of the bad, and fair competition, encouraging enterprises to 
convert their operational system and enter the market. We 
enthusiastically and conscientiously handled cases with strong 
policy connection, having wide scope and major social effects, 
especially in bankruptcy cases. 
  Did a good job of investigating and handling cases of 
production and circulation to protect and promote healthy 
development of the market economy. Last year we tried and 
completed a total of 27,069 economic dispute cases which dealt 
with purchasing and selling, cooperation, contracts for 
construction projects, contracts for processing, financing and 
leasing, property leasing and goods transportation, an increase 
of 33.4 percent over the previous year. Through investigating 
and handling cases, and punishing those whose activities 
violated the law, we protected a group who were engaged in legal 
production operation activities. The courts at each level made 
bold explorations, investigated and handled a group of disputes 
involving stocks, bonds, trademarks, patents, and technical 
contracts. The courts also appropriately and vigorously provided 
the legal services for further reform. 
  Enthusiastically investigated and handled rural 
contractual disputes and township enterprise economic dispute 
cases to promote rural economic development. Last year we 
tried and completed a total of 8,389 cases of rural contractual 
disputes and township enterprise economic disputes, which 
defended the responsibility system which links remuneration to 
output and promotes the development of a rural market economy. 
<H5>  IV. Comprehensively Strengthened Civil Trials To Promote </H5>
Stability, Unity, and Economic Development 
  Courts throughout Sichuan further improved trial methods, 
and 
improved the level of enforcement, making new progress in civil 
trials. Last we accepted and handled a total of 202,412 civil 
cases of various kinds, and completed 185,185 cases, increases 
over the previous year of 7.27 percent and 9.7 percent 
respectively. 
  Enthusiastically tried and handled real estate and 
labor dispute cases connected with further reform and 
development of the market economy. With the development of 
a real estate labor market, real estate and labor disputes have 
increased, as well as growing more complicated and having strong 
policy effects. Courts at each level courts enthusiastically and 
conscientiously tried and handled 8,249 real estate and labor 
dispute cases. The Provincial Higher People's Court strengthened 
its supervision to promote development of this work. 
  Strengthened handling of marriage and household, debt, 
and damage compensation cases. These three types of cases 
constituted over 90 percent of the civil cases, great in number 
and in difficulty. We always persisted in combining trials with 
publicizing the law, proposing good social habits and building 
ideological civility, with an emphasis on alleviating disputes 
through mediation and conciliation. Last year we tried and 
completed a total of 172,351 of these cases, alleviating social 
controversies and protecting the parties' legal rights, 
promoting stability and unity and constructing "two 
civilizations." 
  Examined and handled personal rights and intellectual 
rights cases. We strictly delineated the boundary line 
between appropriate use and violation, between proper media 
coverage and damage to reputation. Last year we tried and 
completed a total of 446 cases of violation of citizens, legal 
person reputation right, title rights, portrait rights, and 
intellectual rights, which was and increase of 38 percent over 
the year before. We protected the legal rights and interests of 
citizens and legal persons. 
  Properly handled cases of land, mountain forest, and 
water conservancy rights. These cases usually occurred in 
the countryside, and involved the reasonable use of resources. 
Related to the lives and production of the masses, 
contradictions of this sort can easily become intense and 
violent. Each local court properly tried and completed 815 of 
these cases in accordance with relevant laws and policies, 
eliminating unstable factors and playing a positive role in the 
maintenance of rural stability and the promotion of agricultural 
production. 
<H5>  V. Conducted Administrative Trials in Accordance With the </H5>
Laws, While Safeguarding and Supervising Administration Organs 
in Carrying Out Their Administration in Compliance With the Law 
  Last year we accepted and handled a total of 2,188 cases of 
every kind in the first trial, completing 1,919 cases. These 
included 333 cases in which the actions of administrative organs 
were sustained in detail, 303 cases in which details of the 
actions were reversed, 13 cases in which a punishment verdict 
was amended in the interest of fairness, and 1,270 cases in 
which the plaintiffs withdrew their suits or the cases were 
dealt with in other ways. 
  Enthusiastically tried and handled administrative cases 
in which enterprises' rights to self-operation were 
violated. Last year we tried and completed a total of 28 
cases of in which enterprises' rights to self-operation were 
violated. We protected enterprises' self-operation rights, 
promoted the government's conversion role, and the enterprises' 
conversion of their operating system. For example, Guangan 
County Court tried and completed a case in which the Guangan 
County No 2 Construction Corporation brought suit against the 
Guangan County Agricultural Machinery Bureau for violating their 
right to self-operation. The Court's judgment was to reverse the 
defendant's administrative decision to nominate, hire, and fire 
the Managers and vice-managers of the Guangan County No 2 
Construction Corporation. This protected the plaintiff's 
self-operation rights and was better for society. 
  Properly tried and handled administrative cases 
involving reduction of farmers' burdens. Courts at each 
level firmly implemented relevant decisions of the CPC, State 
Council, Provincial Party Committee and Provincial People's 
Congress which deal with reducing unreasonable burden on 
farmers. They enthusiastically and consciously handled 
administrative cases of farmers' burden. A total of 249 cases 
were tried and completed, involving more than 73,000 farmers, 
and in which more than 13.37 million yuan in overcharged fees 
were returned to the farmers. We protected the legal rights of 
the masses farmers, as well as their interest in and enthusiasm 
for production, promoting rural stability and the development of 
production. 
  Strengthened examination and handling of administrative 
cases dealing with tax revenues, industry and commerce, state 
lands, environmental protection, transportation, city 
construction, and birth control. Last year we tried and 
completed a total of 465 cases of the above types, including 133 
cases in which the actions of administrative organs were 
sustained in detail, 132 cases in which plaintiffs withdrew the 
suit, 3 cases where there was withdrawal or changes in 
accordance with law, and 197 cases of other treatments. Each 
local court also actively supported relevant administrative 
departments in undertaking special trial and enforcement work in 
tax collection, state land usage fees, selling prices, and 
related fixed fees in accordance with the law. Last year there 
was a total of 12,938 cases in which administrative organs 
applied for enforcement. These cases involved tax receipts, 
fixed fees, etc., in the amount of 58.63 million yuan. We 
safeguarded and supported legal administration by administrative 
organs. 
<H5>  VI. Strengthened Supervision of Trials, Professional </H5>
Guidance and Enforcement To Safeguard the Judiciary 
  There has been new progress in the area of appeals and 
petitions. Last year, Sichuan courts received a total of 
187,739 persons (times), and handled 247,578 letters from the 
masses. The number of visiting higher level officials and 
repeated petitions dropped compared to the year before, and the 
number of visits from Beijing government officials and letters 
of appeal dropped 2.5 percent and 2.7 percent respectively. For 
appeals and request for a second hearing, we persisted in the 
principle of "seeking truth from facts, every error must be 
corrected," to conscientiously investigated and dealt with each 
of these. We investigated 92 cases in which the trial procedure 
was appealed, and after a second hearing, judgment in 30 was 
changed in accordance with law; we retained as correct the 
original judgment in 53 cases in which the appeal was untenable; 
there were 9 cases in which the appealing party withdrew the 
appeal or in where there was other treatment. We were practical 
in protecting the quality of case handling the parties' rights 
and interests. 
  Upper level courts strengthened professional guidance 
of lower level courts. Court leadership at each level took 
the lead in developing investigation and research, increasing 
their initiative and forecasting work. On the grounds of 
investigation and research, the Provincial Higher People's Court 
formulated its "Suggestions Concerning the Strengthening of 
Current Trial Functions to Provide Enforcement Protection for 
Social Stability, Construct Clear and Honest Politics and 
Macroscopic Adjustment and Control," a professional document for 
judging the nature of collective ownership enterprises and 
trying and handling cases involving bankruptcy, loans, reduction 
of farmers' burdens, etc. This provided effective instruction in 
doing good a job of the various kinds of trial work. During the 
"severe attack" period, the Provincial Higher People's Court at 
one time or another sent many work groups to deal promptly with 
problems related to policy and legal matters, and promotion of 
the "severe attacks" was successful. 
  Further strengthened implementation. In order to 
safeguard the solemnity of the law and the authority of the 
People's Courts, courts throughout Sichuan adopted measures to 
further strengthen implementation. The Higher and Intermediate 
Courts strengthened coordination and supervision among courts 
both inside and outside the province. Last year we implemented a 
total of 81,483 cases of various kinds, with a total of 775.54 
million yuan involved in the implementations. These were 
increases of 5.9 percent and 78.88 percent, respectively, over 
the year before. [passage omitted] 

