BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jon Hibbs and George Jones: "Tories Settle </F>
Euro-Poll Manifesto"] 
  [Text] Cabinet ministers yesterday agreed to sink their 
differences on Europe and approved a manifesto for the June 9 
elections spelling out a "positive," Conservative agenda for a 
decentralised and free-enterprise Community. 
  Euro-sceptic ministers backed away from a confrontation over 
the manifesto when the Cabinet held a "political session," 
without officials present, to discuss preparations for the 
Euro-elections. 
  The manifesto, drawn up by a committee headed by Mr Douglas 
Hurd the Foreign Secretary, has been shortened by about a third 
to give it more political punch. 
  Officials said the central theme was decentralised, 
deregulated open and competitive European Union. It would also 
underline the Government's commitment to maintain Britain's veto 
on EC decisions affecting vital national interests, the two 
opt-outs on the Social Chapter and a single currency. Mr Major 
rejected calls from the Tory Right for the manifesto to be 
recast to give it a more Euro-sceptic tone and has sought to 
maintain a balance which will unite both wings of the party. 
  Although it will not seek to demean EC institutions, it will 
strongly attack the policies of the Labour and Liberal Parties, 
arguing they would lead to an over-regulated federal European 
superstate. The manifesto will be published in about 10 days. 
  Despite the Cabinet's decision to adopt a manifesto which 
argues that the EC and the Euro elections matter to Britain, a 
full-scale Commons debate on Europe on Monday week could 
undermine efforts by ministers to present a united front. 
  The decision by Government business managers to schedule the 
wide-ranging discussion on the European Union only days before 
the launch of the European elections campaign was seen as a 
calculated gamble. But ministers believe it will also be an 
opportunity to call the bluff of critics who fear Britain is not 
taking a tough enough line in resisting the Community's drift 
towards federalism. 
  They want to use the occasion to challenge Labour's 
commitment to a pan-European socialist manifesto which endorses 
an extension of majority voting, effectively giving up Britain's 
national veto. 
  Officially the debate is billed as a routine discussion of 
European issues, in advance of the regular six-monthly summit 
meeting of Community leaders in Corfu next month. 
  It could have been postponed until after the European 
elections, though that would not giye much time for routine 
parliamentary consultation before the heads of government 
meeting on June 23. 
  It would also open the Government to charges of suppressing 
parliamentary scrutiny of European matters to avoid political 
embarrassment. 
  As is customary on an adjournment debate there will be no 
vote, so there is no danger of the Government's majority being 
threatened. 
  Mr Tony Newton, Leader of the House, also announced 
yesterday 
that MPs will examine the arrangements admitting Austria, 
Finland Norway and Sweden to an enlarged Community, just 
approved by the European Parliament, in a Commons standing 
committee next week. 
  In the long term, primary legislation will be required, 
probably in the next session of Parliament, to amend the 
treaties governing Britain's membership to take account of their 
accession. 

