CSO 

  [Text] Economics Division. During the eight years of the 
sacred defense, despite serious damage, our nation's industries 
were the greatest support for our nation's sacred defense 
against oppression and aggression. 
  Great efforts were made at the beginning of the First 
Five-Year Plan to make use of unused capacities after 
reconstruction. 
  Some people believed that development of the country without 
industrial development was impossible. 
  In any case, after reconstruction our nation's industries 
are 
striving, as they reach their ultimate production capacity, to 
find a place for themselves in the international market. 
  To discuss the nature of the nation's industrial situation, 
we spoke with Engineer Mohammad Reza Ne'matzadeh, minister of 
industries, and we devote today's page to the economic 
achievements of the Islamic revolution. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What is the Ministry of Industry's area 
of responsibility since the triumph of the Islamic revolution? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] Before the triumph of the Islamic revolution a 
ministry called Industries and Mines had the responsibility of 
managing the nation's industries and mines. After the triumph of 
the Islamic revolution, in the year 1360 [21 March 1981-20 March 
1982] a part of this ministry became the Ministry of Mines and 
Metals, which took on the responsibility of managing basic mines 
and metals. About a year later a part of this ministry became 
the Ministry of Heavy Industries, which took on the tasks of 
vehicle manufacture, machinery manufacture, and foundry 
operations. 
  What was left of this ministry continued to operate as the 
Ministry of Industries, which covered 80 percent of the 
producing units and 75 percent of the nation's added value and 
industrial employment. It now serves the Islamic nation with 
electrical and electronic industries, foods and drugs, chemicals 
and cellulose, textiles and leather, nonmetallic minerals, and 
light metals as its areas of oversight. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] Was the separation of these ministries 
successful in practice? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] Conditions at that time required that such a 
division take place, because the flight of the owners of 
industries and the stagnation of the industrial sector demanded 
that the government take over the management of industries. 
During the war investors were not willing to get involved in the 
production sector and produce basic needs. Thus it was quite 
necessary for the government to take over management of the 
nation's affairs, including industries. 
  In my view this was a natural decision, which took place 
over 
a period of time. Now that conditions have returned to normal, 
it would be better to consolidate these organizations to make 
better use of them. 
  Because the policies of privatization esepcially must not be 
carried out in haste, along with the transfer of producing 
units, it is also better gradually to reconsolidate, because the 
government wants to do the work of supervision, planning, and 
guidance. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What effect did the war have on the 
nation's light industries? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] Under this ministry industries were divided 
into two sectors, the ones that produce basic and necessary 
goods, and the ones that do not. During the war the first sector 
continued to operate, and it sometimes even expanded with the 
production of needed goods. However, because of the imposed 
war it was not possible to reform their economic structure. 
Because of shortages the second sector reduced production, its 
unused capacities increased and it was not able to develop. Of 
course during the First Five-Year Plan we were unable to make 
use of these capacities and develop them to some extent. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] Does this mean that the war had a 
negative effect on industry? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] In my view, considering the fact that we were 
unable to depend on ourselves and move in the direction of 
creativity and prosperity, the war was a blessing, just as His 
Holiness the Imam (peace be upon him) said. 
  From an economic standpoint, however, because of the 
stagnation and failure of the economy to move, our industrial 
and investment foundations have become weak. Therefore, because 
of the limitations and implementation of the controls of that 
time, to some extent work initiative was lost. Even so, I 
think that a comparison with wartime and nonwartime conditions 
with regard to industry is not a fair comparison, because in two 
separate periods two separate policies were in effect. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What policy was used for postwar 
industrial reconstruction? 
  Was the reconstruction done in the traditional way, or was 
it 
done along with modernization and development? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] The necessary changes were made in most of the 
required situations. Sometimes development also took place along 
with the reconstruction. In most cases even structural reform 
took place. In some cases, however, it was necessary to complete 
the reconstruction in two phases. 
  At the Khorramshahr Soap Factory, development and 
modernization was done along with the reconstruction. 
  Of course, I must add that until the first year of the First 
Five-Year Plan, in a 12-year period amortization was proceeding 
at twice the rate of new investments. In other words, our 
industries are wearing out rapidly. 
  Along with the new investments, we set out to rebuild 
producing units. Perhaps our oldest industries are in the food 
and textile sectors. Of course, some of them are also in the 
cement sector. Fortunately, reconstruction has taken place in 
more than 100 units. However, we still have many units in the 
textiles sector that are completely worn out. To replace them we 
activated the Ghadir Machine Manufacturing Plant to build 50 
spinning machines and 1,400 weaving machines. Unfortunately, 
despite the payment of foreign exchange to this unit, which is 
under the mantle of the Ministry of Heavy Industries, its 
performance has been unsuccessful and there have been many 
delays in the delivery of the machines. We hope that the 
reconstruction in the textiles sector will be done as quickly as 
possible with the delivery of these machines. 
  There has also been good reconstruction and capacity 
creation 
in the cement industries. In the sugar cube factories, which are 
in excess of 35 units, we had eight inoperative units at the 
time of the beginning of the Five-Year Plan. Today seven of 
those units are back in the production circuit, and the eighth 
one, which is 50 years old, is being rebuilt. In view of the 
fact that no sugar cube factories have been built since the 
triumph of the Islamic revolution despite the increase in the 
production of sugar beets, this year we had the greatest use of 
the beets and we set a record for sugar cube production. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What was the nature of the performance 
of 
the Ministry of Industries under the First Five-Year Plan? Did 
you reach the goals in the plan or not? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] The best judge of this is the people 
themselves, who can judge the performance of the Ministry of 
Industries. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] Even so, I wish to note that it is the 
performance of industry that must be evaluated, not that of the 
officials. Thus what has been achieved is the result of the 
labors of industrialists and the nation's hard-working laborers. 
  [Ne'matzadeh] Before I paint a picture of these performances 
in the framework of statistics and figures, I must discuss the 
policies, which are among the government's main 
responsibilities, and have to do with this ministry in the 
industrial sector. 
  First of all, the obstacles in the path of industry, such as 
limitations on the issuance of agreements in principle, on 
capital investment, and production, which were removed over a 
period of six months. In other words, it may be said that we 
freed industry from excessive regulation, and the prerogatives 
were turned over to the provinces so the decision making would 
be decentralized. 
  A system for supervision and inspection was established with 
the collection of reports from the units. The statistics system 
was reinforced, first-hand inspections were conducted, model 
units were selected, and model exporters were selected from 
among the 25,000 existing units, which was a very good 
experience. 
  Other achievements by the Ministry of Industries to improve 
industry included the creation of sound competition and the 
establishment of a policy to break up monopolies. 
  The ministry also encouraged the formation of specialist 
organizations and encouraged the nation's economic and monetary 
system and also the banks to invest in the industrial sector, 
which brought a good return despite the limitations. 
  The ministry created encouragement mechanisms to develop 
industries in the deprived areas and it also established 
privileges in foreign exchange and construction materials and 
encouraged educational and research activities, whose 
manifestation can be seen in the producing units. 
  The deregulation of prices was another important step for 
industrial development. It was in the framework of the above 
policies that the following statistical results were achieved. 
  The growth in added value for four years in the industries 
under this ministry was 10.5 percent, while this figure was 
projected at 6.5 percent in the Five-Year Plan. We hope that by 
the end of the Five-Year Plan (the five-year performance) this 
figure will reach 8.5 percent. The projected figure in the 
Five-Year Plan is 7.5 percent. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] It appears that the growth in added 
value 
began with good speed and then dropped sharply. What is the 
reason? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] The reason for the initial jump was the 
abundant initial effort to fill the nation's gap in the 
production of industrial goods, which was made based on the 
stagnation and the war. 
  Of course it was also the government's view that in the 
first 
years of the Five-Year Plan we should have more activity than 
the final years in order to get results more quickly. 
  For example, in the first years of the Five-Year Plan many 
of 
the slow development projects were in cement and construction 
materials. However, we were forced to expedite production of 
construction materials. 
  Many of the goods on the black market were very expensive 
due 
to their short supply, and the differences between the costs of 
production and consumption were very high. On this basis, we had 
to increase supply to fill this gap. 
  In any case the 8.5 percent growth was the result of 
increased industrial production. For example, during recent 
years 3.5 million tons of sugar cubes and sugar was produced. In 
the year 1367 [21 March 1988 - 20 March 1989] the year's 
production of sugar cubes and sugar was 640,000 tons. Last year 
we reached the figure of 830,000 tons, which is the nation's 
highest record. 
  During the last four years in the country about 2.6 million 
tons of vegetable shortening was produced and refined. In the 
year 1367 [21 March 1988 - 20 March 1989] the figure was 357,000 
tons. Last year this figure reached 608,000 tons, and this again 
was a national record. We hope to reach a higher figure this 
year. 
  With regard to cement, in the year 1367 [21 March 1988 - 20 
March 1989] we produced 12.2 million tons. Last year this figure 
reached 15.1 million tons, and we hope it will reach 16 million 
tons this year. 
  In the household necessities sector, in the year 1367 [21 
March 1988 -20 March 1989] about 50 [as published] color 
televisions were produced. Last year this figure reached 
250,000. In the year 1367 275,000 refrigerators and freezers 
were produced, and in the year 1371 [21 March 1992 - 20 March 
1993] this figure reached 850,000. 
  In the area of paper and cardboard, in the year 1367 [21 
March 1988 - 20 March 1989] production was 93,000 tons. Last 
year this figure reached 172,000 tons, and we hope it will be 
more this year. Of course more than 2,000 kinds of goods are 
produced under the mantle of the Ministry of Industries, of 
which I have mentioned only a few examples. 
  In general, we have had increased production in all areas. 
For example, in the pharmaceutical industries sector, which is 
one of society's basic goods, in the year 1367 [21 March 1988 - 
20 March 1989] a total of 8.8 billion drug items were produced. 
This figure reached 12 billion last year, and in the current 
year, despite the foreign exchange limitations, in the first 
nine months of the year [21 March - 21 December 1993] we have 
produced the same amount as the year 1367. About 90 percent of 
the drugs consumed in the country are produced domestically. 
  We have had good creation of capacity and if the investment 
limitations were removed, we could increase production to a 
level higher than the nation's consumption. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] The statistics on the production of 
pharmaceuticals are quite hopeful, but unfortunately in society 
one continues to see drug shortages. How can this be explained? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] Policy-making on drug production is the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Health Care, Treatment and 
Medical Education, and the industrial sector follows their 
policies. 
  In my view one of the problems may be that the constituent 
elements of drug production are not correct, meaning that 
production is high for some items and insufficient for others. 
Another point is that late last year due to foreign exchange 
limitations, production was limited for items whose foreign 
exchange consumption is high. In recent months efforts have been 
made to alleviate these shortages. 
  Another issue is the exit of drugs from the country, which 
almost everyone acknowledges. Another point may be wasteful 
consumption. Today unused drugs are seen in most homes. In any 
case, we do not make policy on drug production. Industry 
produces in accordance with the plan it receives. 
  Perhaps if the production of drugs was also the 
responsibility of the Ministry of Industries, its problems would 
be reduced as they have been in the other sectors. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] In general you have described the 
Five-Year Plan in the industrial sector as being successful. Was 
there an isolated sector that did not reach its goals? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] As I said, we have reached the general goals 
of 
the Five-Year Plan. Only in the cement sector, despite increased 
production, did we fail to reach the enacted figure of 18 
million tons per year. This year the nation's cement production 
will reach 16 million tons. 
  I must note that the initial operational projections for 
several new projects were made based on full capacity, and these 
projects did not respond according to schedule. We hope in the 
coming years to see another jump in the nation's cement 
production. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What is the situation in the country 
with 
regard to industrial exports? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] In my view the industrial foundations have 
been 
built. The research sector has been established as a specialty 
and quality has found its place in the buyer countries. Today 
industries are struggling for sound competition, an unobstructed 
path and abundant supply and demand. Under such circumstances, 
our export situation is as follows: 
  In the year 1367 [21 March 1988 - 20 March 1989] the exports 
for the industries under this ministry were more than $70 
million. Last year this figure exceeded $400 million, which is 
good growth. This year also, despite the drop in average 
industrial production compared to last year due to the foreign 
exchange rate, we hope to have exports that exceed last year's. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What is your view of the quality of the 
goods produced? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] The quality of goods, due to sound 
competition, 
has increased greatly, and the statistics from the Standards 
Institute show that at the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan 
we had about 350 items with the standard seal, and today more 
than 1,250 units were unable to get the standard seal. 
  In addition to today's compulsory standards, the production 
units want industry with quality. 
  For example, concerning the production of men's shirts, I 
must say that one of our successful units was able to win first 
place among 260 world-famous brands on the European market 
(Jamegan Shirts). Likewise, in the foodstuffs sector we were 
able to win several international prizes. These things show that 
the atmosphere is suitable for production, the nation's industry 
is capable of marketing its capabilities internationally. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] Have you been successful with 
investment, 
acquiring credits and creating employment? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] With the deregulation of the issuance of 
agreements in principle, more than 35,000 agreements in 
principle were issued during the First Five-Year Plan, and a 
number of them have also produced results. Today the issuance of 
agreements in principle has become routine and it is purely an 
economic matter. In the area of employment, in the last four 
years more than 160,000 jobs have been created in the industrial 
sector. 
  Likewise, the total amount of foreign exchange obtained is 
about $2 billion. In view of the fact that our priority is 
intermediate and basic industries, about 75 percent of this 
foreign exchange was obtained in these sectors. 
  We also obtained about $2 billion in foreign exchange 
credits 
(financing), of course with Majles approval. These credits 
created good capability in the industrial sector to enable us to 
meet our needs. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] The agricultural conversion industries 
are another shortcoming in the industrial sector. What measures 
have you taken in this area? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] The forgotten agricultural conversion 
industries sector is receiving special attention today. Credits 
have been obtained for about 30 cheese production units, and 
their machinery is ready. We hope to put them into operation at 
the beginning of next year. Today there is an investor seeking 
to build flour factories, while at one time no one was willing 
to build them. Effective steps have been taken for the packaging 
of fruits and fresh vegetables. More than 50 refrigeration 
facilities have been put into operation in the country. 
Attention has been given to units producing plant protein and 
there has been good activity in the production of fruit juice 
and fruit concentrate. 
  [JOMHURI-YE ESLAMI] What is the outlook for industry under 
the Second Five-Year Plan? 
  [Ne'matzadeh] We have semi-complete projects, and we hope 
with their completion to complete the chain of production to 
exports and to make the nation's capabilities even greater. 
  Likewise, under the Second Five-Year Plan we must have total 
added value of 6.5 percent, which will be distributed among the 
various sectors. 
  We have projected growth in utilization of five percent per 
year, which will make industries more economical. Exports will 
grow 15 percent during the Second Five-Year Plan. In general, 
under the Second Five-Year Plan quality will have priority. Of 
course quantity is also a basic consideration. 
  On the one hand, during the Second Five-Year Plan we will 
increase the government's policy-making ability, and with 
encouragement programs, we will continue to turn the work over 
to the people. 


