Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] It has been a little over a month since it became 
clear that Russia resumed its dumping of radioactive waste into 
the Sea of Japan. At the London meeting, held until 12 November, 
of the nations that signed a treaty on the regulation of ocean 
dumping (the London Treaty), the decision was made to ban all 
dumping of radioactive waste into the ocean. Japan, as well, 
relinquished its option on the ocean dumping of low-level 
radioactive waste. There is also an indication that the problem 
of nuclear power plants discharging radioactive wastewater into 
the ocean will lead to unexpected consequences. Concerned 
parties worry that ``atomic energy development will be driven 
into a difficult position because of the waste problem.'' 
  When the revisions to the London Treaty were decided by an 
overwhelming majority, an official of the Science and Technology 
Agency (STA) disclosed the following: ``We cannot go against the 
trend toward banning all ocean dumping of radioactive waste. 
But, in a form that appears to yield to the pressure, hasn't 
Japan given the impression of having distorted the meaning of 
its government policies on nuclear energy?'' 
  ``Pressure'' means the suddenly loud calls in government 
circles saying that ``to make Russia stop the dumping, Japan 
should take the initiative and stop dumping waste into the 
ocean.'' 
  For fourteen years up until 1969 Japan was dumping 
medical-use radioactive isotopes and other such radioactive 
waste into the open sea, but since then has not been doing so. 
At the on-land radioactive waste processing facilities in Aomori 
Prefecture's Rokkasho-mura, a low-level radioactive waste burial 
center went into operation last year. The STA claims that burial 
space that will last for ``several decades to almost a century'' 
has been secured and that the provisions for on-land disposal 
are adequate. 
  Nevertheless, the possibility still remained for ocean 
dumping as an arrangement in case the use of nuclear energy 
becomes more vigorous in the future. Eventually, however, the 
Atomic Energy Commission (chaired by Science and Technology 
Director-General Eda) preceded the London Treaty meeting and 
decided on 2 December that ``ocean dumping is not an option.'' 
  Indeed, the Atomic Energy Commission is not completely 
letting go its attachment to ocean dumping, saying that ``if the 
situation changes significantly in the future, a change of 
government policy will also be considered.'' At least there is 
an air of welcoming the fact that conditions were attached: 
whether or not to continue the ban on the ocean dumping of 
low-level waste will be reconsidered every 25 years. 
  What sort of effect Japan's ``concession'' will have on 
Russia's dumping ban is another ticklish point. Russia, along 
with the U.K. and France, abstained from voting on revisions to 
the treaty. If the abstentionist countries lodge an objection 
before the treaty goes into effect, they will not be bound by 
the treaty. An ironic situation where Russia continues dumping 
while Japan bans it is likely to arise. 
  Japan's nuclear energy development is coming to a crucial 
turning point. Next spring, for example, the Monju FBR will 
achieve criticality. Under a coalition government that includes 
the strongly anti-nuclear Socialist Party of Japan, the 
quarelling between the pro-nuclear and anti-nuclear factions is 
approaching a delicate stage. Given that situation, there is a 
strong feeling among the pro-nuclear side that altering the 
basic government policy ``would amount to showing the 
anti-nuclear side our weakness.'' 
  That unease has materialized in an unexpected form. Once 
again radiation released from Japan's nuclear power plants was 
highlighted when Russia's Nuclear Power and Energy Minister 
Mihailof came to Japan and announced that ``Tokyo Electric 
Power's Kashiwazaki-Kariwa nuclear power plant releases about 10 
curies of radioactive tritium per year.'' 
  The total amount of radioactivity that Russia dumped into 
the 
Sea of Japan in October was 0.38 curies (the initial 
announcement was 1.08 curies). Mihailof daringly tried to 
emphasize the insignificance of the effects of his country's 
ocean dumping and seemed to be citing Japan's nuclear power 
plants as an example to support his case. His statement was 
conveyed to Korea where it caused an uproar that invited the 
passionate opposition of the Korean people. 
  Nuclear power plants evaporate and concentrate their cooling 
water and wash water, filter it to reduce the level of 
radioactivity, then release it into the ocean along with thermal 
effluent. In the case of tritium, Japanese power plants that 
release 100 curies or more per year are not unusual. 
  Nuclear power facilities release radioactivity in the 
gaseous 
form as well as in liquid form. The government and the electric 
power industry say that ``there is no problem when it comes to 
safety.'' Their true intent, however, is that if possible they 
would like the matter to be left alone. 
  Greenpeace, the international environmental protection group 
that was encouraged with this recent all-out ban on ocean 
dumping, takes the standpoint where it ``regards all 
radioactivity released into the environment from nuclear power 
facilities, including waste liquids, as a problem.'' Greenpeace 
Japan is also eager to ``aim at Monju's criticality and take up 
the issue of radioactivity discharged into the environment.'' 
  Science and Technology Director-General Eda's stance is to 
change the point of attack: ``The ocean dumping by Russia is a 
problem of another dimension compared to the release of 
radioactivity from nuclear power facilities.'' Nevertheless, 
there are more than a few concerned parties who take the 
radioactivity discharge problem as if it were a body blow and 
worry about how it will impact the future of atomic energy 
development. 

