BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xie Yicheng: "First Nuke Station `Safe and Reliable'"] </F>
  [Text] China's first self-designed and self-built nuclear 
power station has met all safety requirements after running at 
full capacity for almost two years, according to an official 
survey. 
  The Qinshan Nuclear Power Plant in Zhejiang Province, with a 
generating capacity of 300 megawatts, has been free from 
accidents since operations began, the survey said. 
  The results were released by the National Environmental 
Protection Agency (NEPA) and China National Nuclear Corp (CNNC) 
at a press conference over the weekend in Beijing. 
  "The Chinese-built reactor has shown to be safe and 
reliable," said Wang Yangzu, deputy head of NEPA, calling the 
station a major breakthrough in China's nuclear technology. 
  And because of the success, provinces like Liaoning, Hainan, 
Fujian, Jiangsu and Shandung are seeking sites and conducting 
feasibility studies for nuclear plants, said Li Dingfan, deputy 
general manager of CNNC. 
  The International Atomic Energy Agency sent two 
pre-operation 
review missions to Qinfihan in 1989 and 1991 and reported that 
construction was "of high quality and has been carried out at a 
satisfactory level which is universally acknowledged." 
  Since trial runs started in August 1992, the plant yielded 
3.2 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity by the end of May. 
  No problems were detected in the toxic waste treatment 
systems and radiation gauging system. 
  Data shows that the radiation volume discharged in waste 
water is less than one-thousandth of the State limit, and the 
inert gas discharged is lower than one-hundred-thousandth of the 
State permit. 
  The independent regular tests conducted by the Zhejiang 
Environmental Radioactivity Monitoring Station also reported no 
change in the radiation level of the surrounding environment. 
  "We have paid special heed to protecting resident health and 
to keeping land free from pollution from the very beginning," 
said Qin Jianqiu, vice general manger of the plant. 
  He said refueling and renovations will proceed smoothly this 
year and promised that safety standards in 10 important areas 
will he examined. 
  "Facts have clarified previous doubts about nuclear 
electricity," Wang said. "It is a reliable and clean energy. 
  "Our policy is to actively push the development of nuclear 
energy while exerting strict supervision over it," Wang said. 
  Li Dingfan predicted that nuclear stations will emerge as an 
important source of energy in China in the years ahead. 

