BFN 

<F P=106> ["Holiday" interview with Ashkenazi Chief Rabbi Yisra'el </F>
Me'ir Lau and Sephardic Chief Rabbi Eliyahu Baqshi-Doron by 
unidentified correspondent; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Correspondent] Moving on to 
the political problems, what is the Chief Rabbinate's attitude 
toward ceding territory within the peace process? Jerusalem was 
in the headlines this week. What are the rabbis' enlightening 
views? 
  [Baqshi-Doron] I knew such a question would be asked. I 
think one of the nicest and most heroic things we did this past 
year was not to talk about the issue. As the saying goes, he 
who is prudent will keep silent in such a time, for it is an 
evil time. Keeping silent is not easy. However, we set 
ourselves a rule in our capacity as chief rabbis who feel the 
influence they have on the entire nation to keep silent on such 
a controversial issue. 
  [Correspondent] This silence is being interpreted as 
cowardice and gutlessness. 
  [Baqshi-Doron] God forbid. The moment we are called upon to 
make an halakic ruling on the issue -- and this will happen -- 
we will consult our eminences and give our opinion. Today I do 
not know whether the leaders know where they are headed. 
  [Correspondent] But the rabbis cannot sit idly by when the 
nation is so split. 
  [Baqshi-Doron] Not only the nation, but also the rabbis, are 
divided. Rabbis and religious Jews differ on political and 
halakic issues. We know that our opinion does not carry any 
weight at this point. Consequently, as long as this is not 
necessary, we do not want to make a ruling favoring one side, 
which would only exacerbate the conflict. 
  [Lau] The issue came up in a meeting of the Chief Rabbinate 
Council after the publication of the Oslo agreement. 
  The Chief Rabbinate in its current constellation abides by 
resolutions passed by its predecessors. The matter has been 
discussed in one way or another over the 27 years since the 
Six-Day War. Since we accept these resolutions based on the 
halakic ruling about "honoring the edicts of elders," we 
presented them to current council members. These resolutions 
are registered in the minutes of the council's sessions, which 
answers your question about our position on the issue. The 
Israeli people's right over Eretz Yisra'el is inalienable. So, 
I speak as an educator, a father, a rabbi, and a teacher -- not 
as a politician -- when I emphasize the verse: He has shown His 
people the power of His works, in giving them the heritage of 
the nations. This is the basis of the entire Bible, and there 
is no question about it. On the basis of this principle that we 
all abide by, a process is currently under way whose details we 
are not familiar with. We said that as rabbis we must be sure 
of one thing: that the right over Eretz Yisra'el is not 
impaired. Even if politicians and the military must decide in 
their peace talks that they must give self-rule in a certain 
place within a certain period of time, this should not undermine 
our right over Eretz Yisra'el. 
  We will not be dragged into any corner of the political 
arena. We uphold the basic right concerning the integrity of 
Eretz Yisra'el, the right of Jews to live in all parts of Eretz 
Yisra'el. As long as this right is assured and is not impaired, 
we will abide by the consensus. 
  [Correspondent] Could you be more specific about the 
evacuation of Jews from Hebron? 
  [Lau] We are opposed to the evacuation of Jews from Hebron. 
We must pray for them to be able to live there, but we are 
opposed to their evacuation. 
  [Baqshi-Doron] I am in principle opposed to an evacuation, 
but the duty to save Jewish lives legitimizes an evacuation. 
[passage omitted] 

