Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Youcef Khatib, chairman of the National Dialogue </F>
Commission, at the swearing-in ceremony of new President Liamine 
Zeroual in Algiers--live] 
  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate: 
Gentlemen, ladies: After the establishment of the Higher State 
Council, which worked for the adoption of dialogue as a way to 
solve the country's problems, dialogue was given a new push for 
political life. The results of this dialogue were a draft 
proposal of a platform which did not receive the required 
support. However, we ought to address our thanks and 
appreciation to the members of the Higher State Council who 
shouldered this responsibility in very difficult circumstances. 
Thus, the Higher State Council supported a good initiative 
which was manifested in the setting up of the National Dialogue 
Commission whose efforts led to the platform for the management 
of the transitional phase which encompassed all the remarks, 
views, and proposals of the sides involved in the dialogue, and 
was crowned with the convening of the conference on national 
consensus. This conference was held despite the absence of and 
hesitation by some parties. Its success was guaranteed by the 
participation of the living forces which are represented in some 
parties and economic and social organizations, and led to 
positive and actual results. 
  Gentlemen, ladies: Dialogue is the most important method of 
success. It will continue to be the only way to achieve gains 
in the future and is the most exemplary means for solving the 
country's current problems. Mr. President, on this 
distinguished and promising occasion we wish you total success, 
beseeching God Almighty to inspire you with the correct view and 
ensure security, stability, progress, and prosperity for 
Algeria. May God render us successful for the good of the 
country and people. Peace and God's mercy and blessings be upon 
you. [applause] 

