CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary from New Delhi: "Why Is V.P. Singh Not Accepting </F>
Party General Secretary Position?"] 
  [Text] The consensus of the veteran leaders of Janata Dal 
[JD] is that V.P. Singh is not accepting the party leader 
position because he is himself convinced that the party can no 
longer be saved from splintering and disintegrating. These 
leaders have tried to explain to Singh in the past two days that 
if he does not accept the leadership, the party will face more 
factions and will disintegrate completely, but Singh fears that 
the party is falling apart anyway, and also that the blame might 
come to him, should he take on the reins at this moment. 
  Vishwanath Pratap Singh has told his confidants that he will 
not accept the party leadership. He has also warned against 
bringing popular pressure to make him the leader by saying he 
will explain to the masses his reasons for not seeking party 
leadership. Sources close to him say that some people have a 
vested interest in Singh becoming the leader of the party. 
  According to sources, V.P. Singh wants to create a national 
alternative [to the present government] without aligning with 
JD. He aspires to see a grouping of the backward, the depressed, 
and the Muslims emerge as one force. He would like to bring 
together the leftovers of the JD, Mulayam Singh's Samajwadi 
Party, Kanshiram's Bahujan Samaj Party, as well as other parties 
representing depressed classes, and unite them all into one 
group. Singh believes that the JD has run its course and 
fulfilled its objectives, and now there is the need for a new 
party. The JD has already broken into three factions, and now 
the fourth factious group is forming. According to sources in 
the Congress (I), this new group may at anytime be announced as 
the new party. The JD is finished in many of the states. V.P. 
Singh appreciates this very well and is therefore apprehensive 
of accepting party leadership. Singh has already spoken with 
Kanshiram in Bombay. He is in Lucknow today, where a talk with 
Mulayam Singh is scheduled. According to JD sources, in Uttar 
Pradesh, the JD is completely defunct, and in Bihar, it is 
extremely weakened, and exists only in name. The chief minister 
of Bihar, Lalu Prasad Yadav, is pressuring Singh the most to 
become the leader. People close to Singh say that when Singh was 
the leader in the past, Lalu Yadav disregarded him and 
constantly ignored his directives to show himself the more 
powerful and may wish to form such conditions to return. 
  Even now Lalu Yadav wants Singh to become the leader once 
more only because then he will not have to worry about 
interference in state affairs and he can exert his own wishes in 
Assembly elections, etc. In Bihar, the JD is divided into three 
camps--of Lalu Prasad Yadav, Ramvilas Paswan, and Nitish. There 
is serious talk that Nitish's camp is going to separate from JD 
soon. 
  Rabi Roy's announcement of starting a new party in Orissa 
has 
caused V.P. Singh some concern. Rabi Roy is a senior leader who 
is accusing Biju Patnaik of establishing his own government in 
Orissa, which is not JD, and gives that as his reason for 
starting the new party. The Samajwadis of JD, like George 
Fernandez and Madhu Dandavate, are telling Mulayam Singh Yadav 
that they are frustrated with the communal tendencies in JD and 
that they want to adopt the Samajwadi Party's manifesto inspired 
by social reformers like [Ram Manohar] Lohia. Ramvilas Paswan 
has told V.P. Singh that, if he does become the leader, then he 
will consider giving his group called the "Dalit Sena" some 
political form. 
  V.P. Singh is all too familiar with these internal problems 
of JD, and so he is not feeling confidant that this fractured 
party can once again grow together into a whole and cohesive 
group. Its long-known Mandal slogan is also finished, and 
reviving it looks next to impossible. In addition, Singh's 
health has suffered gravely, and has rendered him apprehensive 
of taking excessive responsibilities. 
  According to sources in the Congress Party, the Bihar JD has 
also become increasingly factious. The party members are quite 
upset with Chief Minister Lalu Yadav's administrative programs. 
His Cabinet is openly criticizing him. Some prominent 
legislators like Abdul Gafur, Nitish, and George Fernandez have 
participated in open criticism of Lalu. 
  In addition, Singh has announced many times that the highest 
position in the JD should be given to a representative of the 
backward or depressed class. Ramakrishna Hegde has reminded him 
of this through special correspondence. Another reason Singh 
will not seek leadership may be that he does not wish to retract 
his pronouncements. 

