Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on developments related to the Colombian elections, 
scheduled for 8 May 1994. 
  Presidential hopefuls expressed their opinions on whether 
tax 
evaders should be jailed. Humberto De la Calle said that 
fiscal policy should specify jail sentences for tax evasion, 
especially now that illegal enrichment is an important issue. 
Carlos Lemos Simmonds said he also favors harsh punishment for 
tax evasion. General Miguel Maza Marquez said tax evaders should 
be jailed, but he added that other measures are also necessary. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 
1730 GMT 3 Mar 94) 
  Humberto De la Calle criticized Ernesto Samper's reluctance 
to debate him, saying that Samper lacks a firm willingness to 
make changes and to establish a truly independent position. De 
la Calle also criticized Samper's plans to reimpose certain 
taxes and to eliminate international agreements signed with 
Venezuela and Ecuador. He also claims that candidate Samper is 
contradictory; for example, Samper advocated the legalization of 
drugs, then changed his mind. 
  Lemos Simmonds criticized candidates who are avoiding 
debates. He said that the Liberal Party and the Colombian voters 
are the losers because the election will involve more guesswork. 
Carlos Lleras de la Fuente also criticized those who have 
avoided a debate between New Democratic Force Candidate Andres 
Pastrana and Liberal Party candidates. 
  For his part, Pastrana reaffirmed his intention to defend 
and 
support coffee growers during his administration while on a tour 
in Caldas Department. Pastrana called for education reforms and 
added that women should play the role they deserve in society. 
(Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 
0130 GMT 6 Mar 94) 
  According to the most recent poll by the National 
Consultation Center, Samper and Pastrana are tied. Samper 
claims he continues to lead the polls and is quite confident he 
will win the elections. He denies claims that Pastrana is doing 
well even though Pastrana does not have an electoral mechanism 
behind him yet. Samper said that such mechanisms are becoming 
less important in modern elections because Colombians are not 
stupid. 
  Pastrana campaign manager Luis Alberto Moreno said that 
Samper's popularity is decreasing and that Pastrana's is on the 
rise. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision Television Cadena 1 in 
Spanish 1730 GMT 7 Mar 94) 
  All presidential hopefuls closed campaigns in public squares 
on 6 March. Pastrana visited several municipalities in Caldas 
Department, where he promised to support coffee growers. Gen. 
Maza Marquez visited Villavicencio and Suba, where he said peace 
can be consolidated through the development of social policies. 
Samper visited Barranquilla, where he vowed to fight poverty. 
De la Calle visited Santa Fe de Bogota, where he said that his 
administration will be characterized by investment. Antonio 
Navarro of the 19 April Movement Democratic Alliance closed his 
campaign in Medellin by saying he will do whatever it takes to 
see that no child goes to bed hungry in Colombia. Lemos visited 
Cucuta, where he vowed to open a university. Liberal Party 
hopeful Rodolfo Gonzalez visited Bucaramanga and insisted on a 
dialogue between the guerrillas and the government. 
Conservative Party hopeful Gabriel Melo Guevara registered his 
presidential candidacy before the overseer of the national 
treasury and presented the accounting books for his campaign and 
a copy his income tax return. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision 
Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 0000 GMT 8 Mar 94) 

