BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Egyptian President Muhammad Husni Mubarak at the </F>
opening session of the OAU summit in Tunis--live] 
  [Text] In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate: 
Brother heads of state and government, Your Excellencies heads 
of delegations, Mr. OAU secretary general, ladies and gentlemen: 
Let me convey to each of you the most sincere feelings of 
brotherhood and cordiality and express my pleasure at meeting 
with you once again as we work together to realize the hopes of 
our struggling African peoples to deepen the bonds of unity and 
solidarity among themselves and serve their legitimate 
objectives and highest ambitions for development, progress, and 
civilization. 
  It pleases me on this happy occasion--the opening of the 
30th 
African summit--to express warmest gratitude and appreciation to 
the fraternal people of Tunisia and their leader President Zine 
El Abidine Ben Ali for the hospitality they have accorded us and 
for their obvious eagerness to provide all the necessary 
requirements for the success of this conference. I am also 
pleased to express my complete confidence that the ability and 
wisdom of President Ben Ali will lead the OAU, at its 30th 
summit, in extensive work and great achievements. 
  Brothers and sisters: It is one of the greatest moments in 
the history of Africa and its organization to see the new South 
Africa, under dear brother President Nelson Mandela, join the 
independent and free countries that are working to advance the 
united African march. The people of South Africa were not 
absent from us and from the OAU. They have always been with us 
in their heroic and glorious struggle, through which they 
recorded a bright page in the history of humanity and 
strengthened man's confidence that truth, virtue, and justice 
must triumph over the forces of evil, darkness, and coercion. 
  Allow me to salute brother President Nelson Mandela once 
again and to congratulate him on the high confidence he won from 
the sons of his country, both the majority and the minority, and 
on the establishment of the first nonracist government, 
reflecting the united will of the entire nation, without 
discrimination. While we wish this historic experience in 
democratic transformation all success and prosperity, we hope it 
will become a model to be emulated, not only in Africa but 
throughout the other continents, where there is a pressing need 
for coexistence, dialogue, the renunciation of violence, and 
elimination of hatred and the spirit of contradiction and enmity. 
  Reconstruction is, and will always be, harder and more 
difficult than revolution and change. The task of 
reconstruction requires security and stability as well as the 
cooperation of everyone in the pursuit of the national goals of 
social and economic development. 
  The African nations, who have stood firmly behind the South 
African people during their struggle, are determined to maintain 
their solidarity with the South Africans in the reconstruction 
phase. The Africans will give their support to the brotherly 
South African people and help them assume their responsibility 
in this strategic part of our glorious continent. 
  Brothers and sisters, a year has passed since we last met in 
Cairo last June, a year that brought with it glimmers of hope 
for a better future. The past year saw continued efforts by the 
OAU leaders and peoples to confront the numerous problems facing 
our nations, which are and exhausting a large portion of our 
resources and potentials. 
  It is a regrettable and painful fact that many of these 
problems were caused by the Africans themselves. Therefore, the 
way to rid ourselves of the evils of war and destruction is 
something that we, not others, have to find. Making and 
preserving peace is our responsibility, not that of other 
international organizations and outside powers. 
  The OAU has taken a large and remarkable stride toward 
adopting preventive diplomacy as a way to avoid perils, foresee 
crises, and settle disputes. Among our accomplishments in the 
past year was the agreement by African leaders in Cairo OAU 
summit last June to set up a central mechanism of preventing, 
managing, and settling conflicts. This was followed by a meeting 
in Cairo last September at the level of heads of state. This 
meeting succeeded in formulating the principles and determining 
the framework for the mechanism's operation through its central 
body. 
  The OAU took this great achievement to a higher plateau with 
its decision to set up a peace fund to finance the mechanism's 
activities and enable it to deal effectively with a number of 
African problems. This will give the entire OAU the credibility 
it needs. There is a mounting international tendency to try to 
resolve disputes through regional organizations before resorting 
to external powers, the aim being to prevent these disputes from 
assuming an international dimension that might lead to further 
complications. 
  In order to preempt crises and curb fledgling disputes, an 
African minisummit was held in Harare in March, and it was a 
success. It involved in-depth discussions of the situation in 
South Africa on the eve of the elections that led to the birth 
of a new government. 
  Within this context, on the basis of experience and events, 
as I hand over the chairmanship of the OAU, I call for great 
attention to be paid in the coming period to preventive 
diplomacy and to establishing an early-warning system that 
anticipates disputes before they turn into military showdowns. 
The OAU Secretariat General must provide a data base for the 
current and expected disputes on the continent. 
  As we view this historic achievement, we must not forget 
that 
the wisdom of the leaders, the vigilance of the African people, 
and response of all forces to the call to discard violence and 
maintain the unity of South Africa resulted in the call I made 
in the name of the OAU to a number of heads of state and 
government in major Western capitals. This undoubtedly enabled 
the OAU to spare the people of South Africa further violence and 
confrontation and to maintain that country's unity and the 
integration of its components. 
  Brothers and sisters: Our African continent has adopted 
these two big steps, which are considered the most prominent 
indications of wisdom and political pragmatism, whether in 
achieving national detente through the democratic choice in 
South Africa or in maintaining unanimity in establishing a 
watertight system and a mechanism to settle its disputes by 
peaceful means. An our organization has taken a third daring 
step by its correct realization and understanding of the new 
economic facts of the modern world. 
  The organization discovered that the phenomenon of blocs, 
groupings, and mutual reliance is the hallmark of economic 
relations among the countries of the North, whether in Europe, 
North America, or the Asian Far East. Our organization felt the 
long-term effects of its relations with the states of the North 
and the sum total of international economic relations. From 
this premise, brothers and sisters, and realizing the need for 
integration between the North and South, right after our 
previous summit and in the name of all you, I addressed the 
leaders of the major industrial powers on the occasion of last 
July's Tokyo summit [of the G-7]. I explained the nature of the 
economic problems in Africa and submitted our just and realistic 
demands, especially the easing of the heavy burdens of our 
countries' debts within the framework of a relationship based on 
constructive dialogue and mutual understanding among the states 
of the North and South. Within the same framework, the brother 
leaders in Africa responded brilliantly--not only to the needs 
dictated by the international economic situation but also out of 
a real desire by the continent's states and peoples--when they 
each approved the African Economic Group agreement. Thus, the 
necessary approvals have been received for this important 
agreement to legally take effect. 
  With that, Africa will enter a new phase of integration 
involving its various economies. We hope that this integration 
will reflect positively on its relations and dialogue with the 
states of the North. We also hope that this integration will 
positively affect the development of its energies and wealth and 
will achieve higher growth rates and greater prosperity for the 
African nations. 
  I have no doubt that this accomplishment and the successful 
efforts of the African continent to forge ahead along this road 
will guarantee a good position for Africa on the world's 
economic map. They will also enable the African states to 
benefit from the various privileges of economic integration, 
such as lessening the cost of production, increasing the number 
of markets, and ensuring better transportation and communication 
facilities. Economic integration will also enable the continent 
to have negotiating power vis-a-vis the other world blocs. 
  Brothers and sisters, this step was very important for us in 
Africa after the introduction of the new GATT Agreement and the 
impending establishment of the World Trade Organization. These 
developments could bring positive and negative results that 
might affect the developing countries in general and the African 
states, which produce raw materials, in particular. Such 
developments could also dictate the lifting of restrictions and 
barriers hindering international trade, especially the exports 
of the advanced industrial countries. 
  Accordingly, the African Economic Group Agreement will 
provide a protective umbrella for our interests and a strong 
guarantee against any effects that could harm our economic 
conditions if we are not well prepared for it. What 
consolidates the role of this Economic Group and gives it 
impetus is that the Group's states agreed last year to establish 
the first African import-export bank. They also agreed on Cairo 
as site of the bank's headquarters. 
  We are also confident that this vital economic establishment 
will open up broad horizons for inter-African trade and will 
achieve the desired integration. It will also create new fields 
for balanced trade relations with the rest of the world. 
  We recorded undeniably positive aspects in the economic 
field 
thanks to a sound awareness of the economic facts and changes. 
We must never forget that advancing the wheel of economic 
development in Africa can only be achieved by effectively and 
wisely confronting Africa's chronic and persistent 
problems--drought and desertification and the accompanying 
famine and refugees. We witnessed one of its painful chapters 
in the Horn of Africa 10 years ago. 
  We must also not forget that pushing forward the wheel of 
economic development in Africa requires that we always maintain 
the delicate balance between population and resources or between 
land and people. No matter how great the resources, they are 
liable to be depleted due to the constant increase in 
population. This poses a social and economic challenge to the 
continent's people, who must face it with wisdom and reason. 
  Finally, we must not forget that economic growth cannot be 
achieved without a comprehensive and balanced infrastructure and 
without human development that raises the standard of the 
individual, maintains his dignity, and releases his potential 
and energy. I will continue to call for a climate of political 
and social security and stability as a necessary and vital need 
for the economic development process. Security is the main 
pillar of stability, and stability is the guarantee for the 
success of development. Africa urgently needs these three 
components together. 
  Brothers and sisters, Africa has emerged cohesive and strong 
from the era of colonialism and foreign domination. Its groups 
and tribes have coexisted as brothers and neighbors across 
borders and within the same homeland. Loyalty to the homeland 
has remained above any other loyalty. Our affiliation to the 
African continent and to its civilization and interests has 
superseded all other affiliations. Africa has respected its 
borders, enshrined its territorial unity and integrity, and 
safeguarded its states' sovereignty, independence, and freedom 
in accordance with its charter, which was adopted by its 
founding leaders 30 years ago. Therefore, the recent aspects of 
struggle that have divided the sons of the same homeland and 
threatened security and stability in some parts of the continent 
do not conform with the genuine African spirit. They must not 
be interpreted as representing an African phenomenon or a 
permanent fixture in Africa with which we have to coexist and 
accept as part of the new continental reality. On the contrary, 
it must be viewed as a passing and temporary phenomenon that 
does not conform with firm African traditions and does not agree 
with our long history and rich heritage. 
  An example of this deteriorating situation, on which we must 
not remain silent, is the situation in fraternal Somalia. 
Despite the honest and sincere efforts undertaken by 
neighboring countries, the OAU, the United Nations, and several 
friendly states, the Somali people continue to pay a heavy price 
for the power struggles and rivalries at the expense of the 
country's unity and its social fabric and at the expense of its 
stability and the security of its citizens. 
  I have taken it upon myself to do my utmost to put an end to 
this destructive crisis by virtue of my responsibility as OAU 
chairman and by virtue of my capacity as president of Egypt, 
which has strong historical and cultural relations with Somalia. 
  The efforts, which we coordinated with the brothers and 
presidents, who played a special role in this regard, focussed 
on closing ranks and calling on all factions without exception 
to agree to a national reconciliation formula. The efforts 
resulted in the issuance of the Cairo Declaration, which 
constituted a solid base and a common ground for all factions to 
get out of the current crisis. We are renewing our call to all 
sides to place Somalia above ambitions, and to restore unity to 
the country and security and reassurance to the people. We urge 
them to start a sincere and determined march toward unity and 
national reconciliation so that this fraternal country can 
continue its development and message. 
  If we are to learn a lesson from this tragedy, it is that 
Africa is most capable of solving its problems by itself. 
Assistance from friendly countries and international 
organizations, no matter how necessary, cannot replace the 
African role but only support it. The responsibility lies 
primarily with the people of Africa, because they know best the 
problems of their countries and societies. 
  In central Africa, that strategically important region 
thanks 
to its unique location where the great Nile starts and many 
friendly countries share borders, heavy blood was shed on the 
soil of two friendly countries, Rwanda and Burundi. The vicious 
fighting pained our hearts because it bordered on genocide, 
where hundreds of thousands of people were killed, resources 
that we urgently need were wasted, and hundreds of thousands of 
people were turned into refugees burdening the neighboring 
countries and depleting their resources, let alone the war's 
negative reflections on Africa's image and culture. 
  These tragic situations, brothers and sisters, place on the 
shoulders of our organization, the world community, and the 
United Nations a common humanitarian duty and a moral obligation 
to move to stop this bleeding so that its aftermath and 
consequences do not extend to the heart of the continent and to 
this spot, which is vital to its own peoples and to the 
neighboring peoples. 
  In Burundi, the OAU's swift moves to control the situation 
prevented further deterioration. These moves constituted one of 
the first successful trials of the conflict resolution mechanism 
which the OAU has established. The OAU envoy contacted all 
forces in the government and the opposition, and this set the 
appropriate stage for containing the situation and easing 
tension. 
  Another lesson to be learned from our experience in this 
central African region is that the presence of peace-keeping 
forces, although undeniably important, is not an alternative to 
a genuine peace among the sons of the nation, whether in the 
government or the opposition, within the framework of 
legitimacy, law, respect for man's dignity, and the use of the 
language of dialogue and reconciliation. 
  Perhaps the real dilemma facing African countries in 
certain areas is that of maintaining internal stability and 
national cohesion. Unity should be preserved through pluralism. 
The time is right for the OAU, with all its agencies, to turn 
its utmost attention to this issue, among others. 
  Against this background, the OAU continued its efforts to 
restore stability, consolidate national cohesion, and unify 
national forces in Angola, Liberia, and Mozambique. I had 
urgent exchanges with the influential forces in these countries 
with a view to probing the problems there and resolving them. 
  In the same context, the OAU is in touch with the brothers 
in 
Cameroon and Nigeria in an effort to resolve their dispute. We 
hope that our efforts there will succeed in defusing tensions 
and finding an acceptable solution. Both sides have exhibited a 
desire to reach an understanding and begin a dialogue. 
  Brothers and sisters, solidarity among African and Arab 
nations both inside and outside Africa has been instrumental in 
many great achievements concerning African liberation, the 
liquidation of imperialism, and the achievement of 
self-determination. 
  The firm backing by African nations of just Arab causes in 
various international forums has been remarkable. African 
support of the Palestinian issue and the rights of the 
Palestinian people has always been courageous and impressive. 
  Brothers and sisters, I am pleased to tell you that, 
following daunting negotiations, our efforts have been crowned 
with great success in the signing of the self-rule agreement in 
Gaza and Jericho. Israel and the Palestinians signed the 
agreement on 4 May 1994. The self-rule agreement is merely a 
first step toward fulfilling the rights and aspirations of the 
Palestinian people for self-determination. We hope that it will 
be followed by similar steps on other tracks of the Arab-Israeli 
peace talks and that a just and comprehensive peace will be 
achieved by all the nations of the Middle East. 
  Brothers and sisters, seen from a political and strategic 
overview, African and Middle East security are linked. This is 
why we made an initiative, which we are trying to promote in 
various forums. This initiative calls for turning the Middle 
East and Africa into zones that are free from nuclear weapons 
and weapons of mass destruction. 
  Today, Africa and the Middle East face new horizons as the 
21st century approaches. Our nations need to preserve their 
resources and potentials, elevate their standards of living, and 
achieve development and prosperity. The only way to attain 
these noble objectives is by maintaining security and stability 
throughout Africa and the Middle East. The threat of mass 
destruction should disappear from Africa, the birthplace of the 
oldest civilizations, and the Middle East, the birthplace of 
major religions and the ancient cultures of the East. Our 
nations look with hope and confidence to reaping together the 
fruits of the great seeds sown by our founding fathers 30 years 
ago in the black African soil. 
  Brothers and sisters, during the past year you gave me the 
honor of being OAU chairman for the second time in five years. 
You laid on me the responsibility of representing it and 
speaking with the leaders of the outside world on your behalf. 
I hope that my efforts in this connection were adequate to the 
task. 
  On this occasion, I feel it is necessary for me to offer my 
thanks to all the brother presidents for the sincere fraternal 
cooperation they have shown me. This helped me to accomplish 
the chairman's tasks. Throughout my period of responsibility I 
did not feel I was alone but was always surrounded by your 
sincere support. None of you hesitated to carry out what I asked 
them to do for the good of our mutual interests and united 
destiny. This gave me additional pride in your comradeship and 
fraternity and in belonging with you to the greater African 
entity and its splendid civilization. Furthermore, your 
objective attitude, frankness, truthfulness to yourselves, and 
putting the general interest above other considerations have 
given me fresh confidence in this young continent's future and 
the ability of its future generations to confront new problems 
and challenges with total fortitude. In this task they will 
rely on their unshakeable faith in the principles of African 
unity and their firm commitment to strengthening solidarity and 
cooperation among the continent's nations until their noble 
objectives are attained. 
  Brothers and sisters, I must not forget to offer my thanks 
to 
OAU Secretary General Salim Ahmed Salim for his sincere 
cooperation and perseverance which decisively helped us to carry 
out the achievements of the past year. 
  Long live our African continent in security and stability. 
Long live its nations, united and strong. Long live the 
African nations' struggle for economic development and progress. 
Long live the memory of Africa's devout martyrs. 
  Let the torches of liberty burn everywhere in Africa. Let 
the light of learning and civilization spread in the corners of 
this glorious continent. 
  Long live the OAU. Long live the memory of its pioneers and 
founding leaders. May God give us all success. Peace and the 
mercy of God be with you. [applause] 

