BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Burnt-out Case"] </F>
  [Text] India must be an extremely rich country to be able 
to afford that curiously labelled `technology demonstrator' 
programme Agni, and then jettison it on a flight of whimsy. 
Countries with far greater affluence and a more experienced 
technical base have not been able to take that step. If they 
have invested countless man-hours and valuable resources, it has 
been with the sole aim of cashing in on the returns. And returns 
in the business of missiles is national security. A long-range 
missile means that the country which possesses it is capable of 
striking at enemy targets which are outside the range of its 
aircraft. As such, when countries develop missile systems, or 
demonstrate the technology as the Government of India would like 
the world to believe, they take the next logical step of 
deploying them. To contemplate any other step is tantamount to 
squandering the investment and, worse, taking a casual view of 
national security. But if the Narasimha Rao Government is to be 
believed, India is a land where money grows on trees and threats 
are the stuff of comic books. 
  The dilly-dallying on the Agni programme came to a rest with 
the Minister of State for Defence contradicting himself, the 
Project Director, scientists within the DRDO [Defense Research 
Development Organization] and above all else the Government's 
own threat scenarios. Agni is not going to fly any more because 
the funds to make it soar will not be made available. It is 
really as simple as turning the tap, and which the Government 
has finally admitted to having done to the Agni. The Agni saga 
now resembles a child's boredom with a toy, with the Government 
having satiated its attraction for high-technology gadgetry. It 
is a different matter that the boredom was occasioned by 
external pressure. And on that score the people of India have 
been doubly cheated. First by the wastage, and then by auxiliary 
considerations influencing decisions on the nation's security. 
Agni was developed for a purpose which in simple terms meant a 
platform for an Indian long-range missile system. The 
technologies demonstrated by Agni, to paraphrase the 
Government's curious expression, have little application for any 
other role but long-range missiles. They are now going to waste. 
  If some inspired regime in Washington considers India's 
missile programme akin to that of some third-world scoundrel the 
task of explaining the reality lies with Delhi. However, if 
Delhi itself has a pauperised vision why find faults elsewhere? 
By extinguishing Agni India has once again demonstrated that its 
vision rarely stretches beyond the Indus or, at least, the 
Khyber Pass. The continuation of the Prithvi programme, as a 
swap for Agni, is an indication of this abbreviated sense of 
security. Prithvi cannot make the Himalayas cease to exist, as 
the Agni can. And as the only nation with an ocean named after 
it, India's interests stretch at least that far. Servicing those 
interests obligates calls for purposeful leadership. But when 
the rulers run shy of greatness, it is nationhood that gets 
short-changed. 

