BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xiao Wu: "Needs Grow Down on the Farm"] </F>
  [Text] Despite the wider use of scientific products on 
Chinese farms, domestic supplies of agricultural production 
materials should generally meet demands this year, agricultural 
officials say. 
  Sources in the ministries of Agriculture and Internal Trade 
disclosed a string of figures on domestic demand this year for 
chemical fertilizers, pesticides, insecticides, herbicides and 
plastic film for farm use. 
  In 1994, farmers may need 125 million tons of chemical 
fertilizers, for which officials have fully prepared by stocking 
ample reserves. 
  But the officials predict that the prices of various 
fertilizers will climb marginally in the autumn, when most of 
the country's grain and cash crops are harvested and farmers are 
likely to be in a buying mood. 
  To prevent severe damage to crops by pests and insects, the 
domestic demand for pesticides will stand at around 210,000 tons 
this year. Of this, insecticides will account for 150,000 tons. 
  Animal husbandry is the major customer of the herbicide 
industry, which predicts demand of at least 30,000 tons. 
  Agricultural officials say that this year the supply of 
domestically made pesticides will still exceed demand, as it did 
last year. 
  But the supply of imported high quality pesticides -- which 
are highly effective, less poisonous to humans and more 
degradable once used -- will lag behind the strong domestic 
need, they added. 
  The demand for plastic film for all-season agricultural 
production, along with greenhouses, has increased steadily. 
This year demand for such film should remain at 520,000 tons, 
the same as in 1993. 
  The central government has vowed to give strong support to 
the domestic trade and the importers of agricultural production 
materials. 
  It intends to relieve farmers' anxiety about the supply, 
prices and quality of production materials. 
  The government will also allow more dealers to trade in 
fertilizers, a business traditionally monopolized by government. 
  Last year, gross domestic sales of agricultural production 
materials amounted to 69.3 billion yuan ($8 billion), down 4.09 
percent from 1992. 
  Farmers are encouraged by the government's support, and are 
determined to have a more productive year than 1993. 
  Last December, a traditionally sluggish time for 
agricultural 
production, sales of fertilizer, pesticide and plastic film all 
rose more than 50 per cent from the same period in 1992. 

