CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dieter Mueller: "Cautious Change of </F>
Course on Recycling of Plastic Waste Materials"; Subhead: "BASF 
Bets on Raw-Material Recycling of Packaging Polymers"] 
  [Text]Ludwigshafen, 25 February 1994 -- Stricter 
anti-pollution regulations in the future may make the 
incineration of plastic waste as expensive as raw-material 
recycling. In this context, the Ludwigshafen BASF AG plans to 
expand its new pilot plant for the raw-material processing of 
used plastic packaging materials into a large-scale complex by 
1997 at the latest. 
  A change of course is in the offing at BASF for the 
incineration of plastic waste. Dr. Albert Hauss, head of the 
plastics and environmental department explained recently, for 
example, at the inauguration of a new technological processing 
facility in Ludwigshafen: "Aside from the fact that society 
views incineration as 'annihilation of matter' and therefore 
disapproves of it, that form of disposal, even in terms of cost 
now, no longer has any supporting argument." 
  The basis for this assessment is a cost accounting in the 
context of the seventeenth ordinance of the federal 
anti-pollution law for waste incinerators. In Hauss' words, its 
strict requirements in emission limiting values by now "call for 
a tripling of capital commitment" for plant investments compared 
with plants for raw-material recycling. On his estimate, 
incineration of plastic waste costs DM1200 per ton, including 
additional costs, sorting and transportation, plus the disposal 
of the inert residue. "In net terms, therefore, the burning of 
the packagings remaining in a ton of waste residue is just about 
as costly as raw-material recycling through separate sorting and 
recycling." 
  Recycling burdens, therefore, are no longer an obstacle to a 
cautious change of attitude toward the production of plastic 
that is already, in fact, beginning to emerge. Hauss mentioned 
the inauguration of a pilot plant for raw-material, that is, 
petrochemical, recycling of waste plastic packaging at the 
Ludwigshafen location. In that process, plastics (polymers) are 
again reconverted into their source products (monomers) in such 
a way that part of them can then again be incorporated in the 
fresh production of plastics or other petrochemical processes. 
By 1997 at the latest, BASF plans to expand the pilot plant into 
a large-scale recycling facility with an annual capacity of 
300,000 t. Hourly throughput at that time is likely to be nearly 
40 t, meaning that even the appropriate general conditions, 
logistics, for instance, will have to be in place. 
  It was also evident in Ludwigshafen that the undertaking now 
not only postulates the trio of material, raw material and 
thermal recycling, but also steadily supports and strategically 
tackles it. It is in these terms, therefore, that the operation 
of the new 600 m[.sup]2[/] large technological processing 
facility has to be viewed. On the basis of specific pilot 
projects, the material processing of old plastics is supposed to 
be analyzed at it. 
  In the words of degreed engineer Volker Hammes, the head of 
the new technological facility, one of the principal tasks of 
the technological facility will consist of "providing the 
cleanest possible, pure or at least free of foreign substances 
and extrudable bulk material." Furthermore, the plant, that has 
a maximum capacity of 500 kg/h, is supposed to be used to search 
for new areas of application for "old plastics from a defined 
source." 
  Although it is only in the offing, the introduction of the 
new technological facility did make it plain that BASF intends 
to safeguard and expand its applied technological know-how in 
the field of plastics recycling with this investment totaling 
nearly DM3 million (excluding physical plant). Ultimately, the 
goal is recycled materials having a defined and guaranteed 
properties profile for which a "certificate of quality" can be 
issued to the processors. In the future that will be important 
in terms of producer liability and should not be underestimated. 
BASF's recycling expert anticipates that, using materials 
recycling methods, in the future approximately 15-20 percent of 
the total amount of old plastic "can be converted into 
worthwhile new applications from an economical and ecological 
point of view." 

