BFN 

  [Text] Guangzhou, May 16 (XINHUA) -- South China's 
Guangdong Province, an economically developed area in the 
country, still has about one million poor people in the 
mountainous areas and is now accelerating its pace of helping 
these people to eliminate poverty. 
  Guangdong has 50 mountainous counties, with an accumulated 
territory of 116,000 sq km and a combined population of 26.5 
million people, respectively making up 65 and 42 percent of the 
total of the province. Most of the 14 million poor peasants 
lived in these counties. 
  Thanks to the local government's poverty-relief efforts, 
from 
1985 to 1993 the population living under the poverty line was 
reduced from 14 million to one million while the total annual 
financial revenue of these counties has increased from 450 
million yuan to 2.3 billion yuan, and the average income per 
capita has increased from 418 yuan to 1,250 yuan. 
  However, as the coastal areas of the province have developed 
remarkably since the country implemented the reform and opening 
policies ten years ago, the gap has been widened between the 
poor areas and the developed areas. 
  Ou Guangyuan, deputy governor of the province, said that 
although some areas have become well off through tremendous 
efforts, more than 30 counties are still backward. 
  He said that poverty-relief work in the province started in 
1985. The provincial government and departments have all worked 
out favorable policies to support the mountainous counties. 
  As most of the poor people live in the mountainous areas, 
the 
local government has encouraged and supported them to plant 
trees to improve the ecological environment. 
  By 1992, forest-covered areas had increased to 51.5 percent 
of the total territory of the province, compared with 22.7 
percent in 1985. Erosion-prone areas of 1.33 million hectares 
were also brought under control. 
  Meanwhile, the peasants in the mountainous areas are 
encouraged to plant fruit trees and vegetables. 
  The local government also is helping peasants to set up 
enterprises which can make use of mountain resources, such as 
hydropower stations, building materials, minerals and forest 
products. 
  As the Pearl River delta in the province is one of the 
richest areas of China, the province has called upon it to 
assist the poor mountainous areas, helping them to establish 
sister relationships. 
  The rich area assists the poor through four ways: first, it 
allocates funds for infrastructural construction in the poor 
area; second, it helps establish enterprises which can make use 
of the laborers in the poor area and bring in income; third, it 
helps the poor area to improve agricultural efficiency by 
spreading new technologies; fourth, it also helps to build 
welfare and public facilities in the poor areas. 
  In the past few years, the rich coastal areas have poured 
nearly 500 million yuan into the poor areas and completed more 
than 300 projects in the areas. 
  The province has also sent officials and technicians to the 
poor counties to help these counties shake off poverty. 
  In 1993 alone, the provincial government sent 220 officials 
to 30 poor counties. These officials and technicians are 
welcome because they helped the locals to set up more than 200 
projects and trained many technicians. 
  The poorest area of the province is located in its northern 
part, where the ground is covered with limestone and the natural 
conditions are adverse and even unsuitable for human life. Half 
of the poor peasants who have not enough clothes and food lived 
in this area in 1993. 
  Since 1985, the province has been relocating the area's 
residents in the suburbs of the cities. The provincial 
government has fashioned a program to move 100,000 people from 
the limestone area in the coming two years. 
  Ou Guangyuan said that the province will help all the poor 
people shake off poverty in two years. 

