Superconducting   Power Transmission Cable To Be Available in 21st 
Century 

<F P=102> 94FE0283C Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO in Japanese 3 Dec 93 p 12 
--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0283C </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] The likelihood is increasing that superconducting 
cables will be used for power transmission around the beginning 
of the 21st Century. This is because it has become impossible to 
avoid the establishment of nuclear power plants in more distant 
locations and this has substantially increased transmission 
power loss. The Society of Non-Traditional Technology predicts 
that it will be possible to to build superconducting 
transmission cables in a loop around a city for the cost of 
building one nuclear power plant. Development of superconducting 
power transmission is proceeding apace, and the application of 
superconductivity to power transmission is of as much interest 
as superconductive power generation and power storage. 
  Superconductivity technology has advanced from just direct 
current to alternating current as well; with wire materials such 
as niobium-titanium and niobium-tin(III), technological 
development for passage of high density current has been 
realized; and rapid progress is being made on the development of 
peripheral equipment as well. 
  As for power transmission technology, however, although 
practical application of the very high pressure of 1 million 
volts has been realized with existing technology, nuclear power 
plants, the main source of electric power, are gradually being 
located farther from points of consumption, and transmission 
loss is expected to become a serious problem from the viewpoint 
of energy conservation. 
  Thus the interest in using superconductivity in transmission 
lines. The Society of Non-Traditional Technology and others have 
estimated that superconducting transmission line loops around 
Tokyo, Osaka and Nagoya can be built at the same cost as one 
nuclear power plant. There is no loss whatsoever when 
superconductivity is used in power transmission, unlike 
conventional power transmission, and it is hoped that this will 
be realized along with the use of superconductivity in power 
generation and storage. 
  With regard to long-term energy outlook, there is the view 
that around the year 2000, when delays in construction of 
nuclear power plants will grow conspicuous, we will be forced to 
increase our dependence on oil, coal and liquefied natural gas 
(LNG). Thus superconductive power transmission, in combination 
with the extension of technological development, is starting to 
look more practical. 

