BFN 

<F P=106> ["Letter From Beijing" by Bao Xin (7637 0207): "Further on </F>
Qiandao Lake Pleasure Boat Case"] 
  [Text] Dear Brother: 
  The dust kicked up by the Qiandao Lake pleasure boat case 
will soon settle because the case has been cracked, the 
offenders have been arrested, and the truth of the case has been 
clarified. The nature of the case is now very clear: It is a 
robbery, arson, and murder case. The mainland department 
concerned is stepping up relevant interrogation and 
investigations. Relatives of the victims will be invited to 
attend the open trial. After three phone invitations by the 
Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait, the Straits 
Exchange Foundation will send its members and relevant experts 
to Hangzhou to listen to a detailed report on the case. 
  The Qiandao Lake pleasure boat case, which caused trouble 
for 
a month, left behind many problems which warrant careful 
consideration. In my view, when there are increasingly frequent 
contacts and exchanges between the two sides of the strait, 
certain incidents are hardly avoidable. What we must bear in 
mind is that when there is an incident, the departments 
concerned of the two sides should handle the case in a timely 
and proper manner with a view to maintaining and developing 
their good relationship, which has not come about easily. We 
must especially watch out for a few evil-minded people who will 
take advantage of the incident to sow discord between the two 
sides. 
  The Qiandao Lake pleasure boat case is a tragedy, which the 
compatriots on both sides of the strait are loath to see. 
However, we should say that the mainland authorities concerned 
have devoted great efforts to identifying the criminals and 
dealing with the aftermath of the accident. The fact that this 
exceptionally big, vicious case was cracked in no time and that 
the offenders were arrested bears evidence to this. The media 
at home and abroad will make their own fair judgment. 
Naturally, we should derive experience from this incident as 
well as any lessons it provides. 
  All who are concerned about the overall interests of the 
cross-strait relationship should approach the case from every 
angle, in which case they will admit that the Qiandao Lake 
pleasure boat case is like a mirror showing that there are some 
negative, destabilizing factors hindering the expansion of 
cross-strait relations. In Taiwan, there are some people who, 
under the pretense of reflecting the popular will, have taken 
advantage of the case to incite hostility against the mainland, 
calling for the Taiwan Government "to give up the one-China 
policy," thus creating an argument for "Taiwan independence." 
The grief and indignation of the victims' relatives is 
understandable; in fact, the people on both sides of the strait 
feel the same. But some people in Taiwan, who have an axe to 
grind and wish to stir up trouble, added fuel to the fire by 
initiating unreasonable attacks and spreading venomous slander 
against the mainland. They used such abusive language that it 
suggested that they had lost their reason. For a brief period, 
they showered attacks, slander, and invective upon the mainland 
as if the latter might crumble under the mass of dark clouds. 
  Nevertheless, all these attacks and this slander and 
invective have contributed nothing to the solution of the case; 
instead, they have created greater difficulties and jeopardized 
the mutual affection of the people on both sides of the strait. 
In fact there are quite a lot of people with insight on the 
island. They did not agree with the Taiwan authorities' 
emotional statements on the case or with their practice of 
politicizing such a criminal case. They were also greatly 
dissatisfied with the pro-independence forces that used the 
occasion as an opportunity to create a nuisance. Certain 
overseas media warned that in the Qiandao Lake pleasure boat 
case, some among the Taiwan authorities would use the 
"pro-independence forces" as a bargaining chip to "contend with" 
the mainland. Such a trend deserves consideration. 
  It is generally believed that with the trial of the case, 
punishment of the offenders, and further disclosure of the 
details of the case, the dust kicked up will finally settle. We 
hope both sides will draw a lesson from the case, work together 
to increase their mutual trust, and look forward so as to 
promote the development of cross-strait relations. 
  [Signed] Bao Xin 
  [Dated] 2 May 

