BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" article by Miguel Lozano: "Death Trafficking in </F>
Guantanamo, Another Tragic Incident of the Cuban-U.S. Conflict] 
  [Text] Havana [no date as received] -- Ernesto Porte and 
Gleidis Pena thought that the road to paradise existed and 
agreed to pay two guides to lead them through marshes to the 
U.S. Naval Base in Guantanamo -- but they found only death. 
  Although that territory is known to be surrounded by mines 
on 
one side and by a fence on the other, they were not torn to 
pieces by an explosion. Their bodies had numerous knife wounds, 
revealing that their last minutes on earth were pure hell. 
  Initial investigations indicate that their murderers were 
Eglis Rojas and Diorbis Rodriguez, who promised to lead the 
couple in May to the military enclave through a safe route in 
order to emigrate with all the advantages that the U.S. 
Government grants to "illegal" Cubans. 
  The Cuban population now awaits the trial and suspects that 
this is not the only incident of its type within the context of 
the abnormal relations between Cuba and the United States that 
promote human tragedies ranging from family separations to even 
death due to maritime journeys aboard inappropriate vessels. 
  Official U.S. sources reported that in 1993 some 3,000 
people 
left Cuba illegally to reach the U.S., risking their lives in 
the treacherous gulf currents, because they knew they would be 
well received and would obtain legal residence, as opposed to 
citizens from other countries. 
  Paradoxically, the U.S. Interests Section in Havana has 
become a tight filter through which it is difficult to pass 
Cubans wanting to travel to the U.S. (for temporary or permanent 
stay). Local sources said that in 1993 only 1,600 island 
residents were granted U.S. visas, although an agreement allows, 
since 1987, the legal entrance of up to 20,000 Cubans each year. 
  A simple look at the surroundings of the Interests Section 
here shows that there is no shortage of candidates to fill that 
quota. Visa seekers wait for days in a nearby park, known as 
"the park of laments," where the most common phrase heard is 
"they rejected me." 
  In practice, U.S. immigration policy has led to a 
progressive 
increase in the number of illegal emigres, especially since 1989 
when the island started to feel the effects of the U.S. blockade 
with even greater force because Cuba lost the traditional 
support of the now defunct European Socialist bloc. 
  The Cuban economic crisis, the privileges granted to Cubans 
in the U.S., and the limited revenues through legal means 
produced an explosive but attractive mixture [coctel] for 
thousands of people who risked their lives (and may have lost 
them) in the past years, traveling on improvised vessels, the 
so-called "rafters." 
  In the case of the double murder in Guantanamo, there is an 
additional factor: the existence of 117.5 square km controlled 
by U.S. soldiers by virtue of an agreement, which will be 91 
years old on 3 July 1994, that is repudiated by local 
authorities. 
  This naval base was rented as a result of the occupation by 
U.S. forces in the past century. It is today one of the main 
trouble spots between Cuba and the United States. 
  Cuban sources reported more than 12,500 provocations since 
1962 ranging from shootings (some of them mortal for Cubans), 
the movement of armored vehicles a few centimeters from the 
borderline, and naval and airspace violations 
  Out of the total territory occupied by the United States, a 
scant 94.4 sq km are on firm land, 38.8 on water, and 29.4 on 
swamps. They are, however, well guarded and protected by the 
Armed Forces of two countries, which have virtually been at war 
for the past three decades. This makes it almost suicidal to 
try to enter this territory. 
  The United States, which maintains the enclave on the basis 
of a treaty signed in 1903, does not comply with the provisions 
of this same document; for example, the provision that 
establishes that Cubans who illegally cross the demarcation 
boundary must be returned. 
  Media sources in Miami have estimated that approximately 
4,000 Cubans have risked their lives since the victory of the 
revolution by crossing the boundaries to savor all the benefits 
offered by U.S. authorities to all "illegal" Cubans. 
  The [U.S.] Congress approved the Cuban Adjustment Law in 
1966, which allows all Cubans "under oath" to enter, obtain work 
permits and other benefits, including the obtainment of their 
permanent residence, one year and a day after they arrive. 
  They do not have to be sponsored by any relative, nor do 
they 
have to request political asylum, for which most would not 
qualify because their reasons are eminently economic or based on 
their desire to rejoin their relatives. 
  Ernesto Porte's and Gleidis Pena's unfortunate demise is not 
unique. Until now, no Cuban or U.S. source has attempted to 
give an exact report on how many Cubans have died in the journey. 
  In the Guantanamo crime's case, the murderers were 
discovered 
because the 20,000 pesos (equivalent to dollars at the official 
exchange rate) were given to the alleged guides by one of the 
murdered man's brothers after his [brother's] driver's license 
was presented as evidence that the operation had been successful. 
  But a question still remains unanswered: How many of those 
who have disappeared have really been victims of unscrupulous 
traffickers? 
  Probably the answer will never be known. However, it is 
quite clear that illegal departures are a lucrative business and 
that criminals from both countries are involved in it. 
  The Ricky Robert Hoddynott case is proof of this. Hoddynott 
is a U.S. citizen who resides in Key West, Florida. He was 
injured and arrested at the Cojimar fishing town near Havana, 
last year, when a border patrol foiled his attempt to illegally 
take people out of the country on his yacht called "Midnight 
Express." 
  Hoddynott confessed that he was in the business of smuggling 
people and that he charged between $5,000 and $10,000 per 
person. Cuban authorities have asserted that he is not the only 
one to make profits from the difficult Cuban-U.S. relations by 
offering a trip to paradise that many times ends up in hell. 

