BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug-related crimes, investigations, trials, 
sentencings, and other activities in the PRC monitored by Hong 
Kong Bureau during the period 17-31 May. The source and mode of 
processing are given in parentheses at the end of each item. 

<H5>    Provincial </H5>
<H5>  Guangdong </H5>
<H5>  Public Security Ministry Commends Zhaoqing, Guangdong Police </H5>
  China's Public Security Ministry has recently issued an 
order 
conferring a Merit Citation, First Class, on the Zhaoqing City 
Public Security Bureau's special group for investigating the "3 
October drug trafficking case" and on a special team organized 
by the Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau's Fenghuang Street 
Police Station for cracking the "20 February drug trafficking 
case." 
  In early October, 1993, after being tipped off on a 
forthcoming big drug deal between domestic and overseas 
criminals, the Zhaoqing City Public Security Bureau successfully 
captured 19 overseas and domestic criminals on 3 October. After 
more than one month of hard work, the Zhaoqing police arrested 
another seven drug traffickers, thereby thoroughly smashing a 
notorious drug-trafficking gang composed of overseas and 
domestic criminals. 
  On the evening of 19 February, 1993, tipped off on 
whereabouts of Li Guoding, an armed robber wanted by police, the 
Fenghuang Street Police Station under the Haizhu District Public 
Security Sub-bureau of the Guangzhou City Public Security Bureau 
set up a special team for tracking down the criminal. As a 
result, Li was captured in the small hours of 20 February. 
After being interrogated, Li confessed to having bought and 
sold drugs in collaboration with criminals from Hong Kong and 
the hinterland. Soon afterwards, the police successfully 
captured six other drug-traffickers, thus smashing another 
notorious drug-trafficking gang. (Summary) (Guangzhou Guangdong 
People's Radio Network in Mandarin 1000 GMT 20 May 94) 
<H5>  Kunming </H5>
<H5>  Drug Addicts From Hong Kong, Taiwan Receive Treatment in </H5>
Kunming 
  Since July 1991, the PLA-run Drug-Dependent Rehabilitation 
and Prevention Research Institute of the Kunming General 
Hospital has helped the rehabilitation of some 1,300 drug 
addicts including 48 from Hong Kong and Taiwan. At the 
institute, drug addicts usually can quit their habits in less 
than 10 days. Professor Sha Lijun of the research institute 
said they used Western and Chinese medical methods to help 
reduce pain in the process of quitting drug addiction. She said 
that the institute is currently researching with the Beijing 
Military School of Medicine and Science a new medication which 
is expected to be more effective in helping drug addicts quit 
their drug-taking habit. (Summary) (Beijing ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE 
in Chinese 1131 GMT 26 May 94) 
<H5>  Shanghai </H5>
<H5>  Shanghai Procuratorate Prosecutes 26 Drug Criminals </H5>
  Shanghai Municipal Procuratorate has recently instituted 
proceedings against 26 drug-related criminals, among them most 
were unemployed or had previously served in reform-through-labor 
camps. A total of 558 grams of heroin has been seized. A person 
in charge of the procuratorate has given assurances that 
forceful measures will be taken to crack down on drug-related 
crimes. (Summary) (Hong Kong ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE in Chinese 
1252 GMT 22 May 94) 
<H5>  Yunnan </H5>
<H5>  Courts Severely Punish Drug Criminals </H5>
  In 1993, courts in the whole province conducted first 
hearings of 2,391 drug-related cases and completed 2,316 of the 
cases, sentencing 3,940 persons. 
  Last year, Yunnan's law courts three times organized 
province-wide large-scale unified campaigns against drug-related 
crimes, convened verdict-reading meetings in 71 counties and 
cities, and executed a number of extremely vicious drug-related 
criminals. When the Dehong Dai-Jingpo Autonomous Prefecture 
Intermediate Court held a drug-banning, verdict-reading meeting 
in Wanding City, it also invited local officials from Burma's 
Muse, Jiugu, and Namhkam areas to attend; at the meeting, 17 
drug-related criminals were executed, and 300,000 grams of drugs 
were destroyed, witnessed by 5,000 people of various 
nationalities from inside and outside the border. 
  The town of Pingyuan held a verdict-reading meeting, which 
was attended by some 10,000 people; at the meeting, verdicts 
were read to 20 drug-related criminals, seven of whom were 
executed. At the same time, law courts in Wenshan Prefecture 
confiscated houses built by 54 drug-related criminals with 
illegal income from drug trafficking. 
  Among the verdicts which became effective in 1993, 3,122 
were 
handed down to drug-related criminals, including 1,039 death 
sentences, death sentences with a suspension period, and life 
imprisonment, thus dealing a severe blow to the arrogance of 
drug-related criminals. (Summary) (Beijing FAZHI RIBAO in 
Chinese 12 May 94 p 3) 

