Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Caridad Lafita Navarro--For related reporting on </F>
this issue see FBIS-LAT-94-011] 
  [Text] Is there a proposal to eliminate subsidies when a 
worker gets sick? Hesitantly, a reader asked me this question 
last Tuesday, conveying her coworker's concern to me. 
  I think that in the process arranged by the CTC [Cuban 
Workers Federation] for workers to discuss and offer their ideas 
for solutions to ease the nation's present financial situation, 
some i's need to be dotted. One of these is precisely the issue 
of subsidies. 
  Recently, and not just in my conversation with Josefa, but 
also in comments overheard while waiting in lines, on buses, and 
in some workplaces, I have found signs of confusion between the 
subsidies granted to enterprises and social security subsidies. 
  For the sake of clarity, and without going too deeply into 
the issue, I think we should clarify the differences between the 
two concepts. 
<H5>  Subsidies To Cover Losses </H5>
  Subsidies to cover losses are financial resources from the 
state budget. They are granted to state enterprises to defray 
operating losses and to offset reduced prices. 
  In his speech to the National Assembly of the People's 
Government, Jose Luis Rodriguez, minister-chairman of the State 
Committee for Finance, said that subsidies to cover losses in 
which the consequences of the adverse economic situation are 
factors--by creating substantial declines in efficiency and 
productivity--have risen more than projected, reaching 4.6 
billion pesos in 1993, 73 percent more than in 1989. 
  This impacts heavily on the budget which has a deficit, that 
is, an imbalance between income and spending, which must be 
covered. 
  We have products that need to be subsidized, as their 
production cost is high, so that the population can obtain them 
at a minimum and affordable price. Milk is an example of this; 
it sells at 25 centavos per liter, while its actual cost is much 
higher. 
<H5>  Social Security Subsidies </H5>
  Subsidies for social security purposes are another matter. 
  They are defined as monetary compensation granted until a 
worker's recovery or rehabilitation when he or she is unable to 
work due to ordinary illnesses and accidents and job-related 
illnesses or accidents. The absence is either temporary or 
partial in nature. 
  For each type of cause the magnitude of the subsidy ranges 
between 50 and 90 percent of the worker's average daily salary. 
  These subsidies come from social security funds, and have 
become a major drain on the budget. 
  Last year Cuba spent somewhat over 1.6 billion pesos for 
social security, the highest figure ever. 
  It is true that some illnesses have appeared, like optic 
neuritis, causing numerous workers to receive appropriate 
medical treatment and rest. 
  But there have also been abuses concealed by some doctors' 
complacency and kindness, allowing people to get subsidies and 
time off work that they did not need. By not producing or 
providing any service, nothing was given in exchange, and that 
burdened our social funds even more heavily. 
  The final point is, in my view, the most disturbing factor 
about compensation for illnesses or accidents: that we may lose 
control of their use and drain the already overloaded social 
protection system. We need to keep these costs within reasonable 
and necessary limits, for it would be an abuse and negligence, 
especially now, to waste what we have for situations that are 
difficult for anyone. 
  But it needs to be made quite clear, both to Josefa and her 
coworker and other people as well, that there will be no 
elimination of social security subsidies here. This guarantee 
arises from the human essence of our socialist system. It was an 
old aspiration of generations of workers and was made a reality 
by the revolution. 

