Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" of speech by Comrade Xie Fei (6200 7236), </F>
Guangdong CPC secretary, at Second Plenary Session of Seventh 
Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee on 9 December 1993; place not 
given: "Quicken the Pace of Reform, Promote Modernization"] 
  [Text] The main task of this current session is to: 
Convey and study the spirit of the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee; study how to implement the "Decision 
By the CPC Central Committee on Several Questions Concerning the 
Establishment of a Socialist Market Economic Structure" in the 
light of Guangdong's actual conditions; speed up the pace of 
reform; and to maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy economic 
development. In accordance with the decision by the provincial 
party committee standing committee, let me discuss the 
province's present situation and how to study and implement the 
"Decision" adopted by the 14th CPC National Congress at its 
Third Plenary Session. 
<H5>  I. Guangdong's Current Reform and Development Situation </H5>
  Since the beginning of this year, the provincial party 
committee's line of thinking on its work has been: Actively and 
steadily carry forward reforms in various fields of endeavor, 
centering on the reform goal of establishing the socialist 
market economic structure and the strategic task of basically 
achieving modernization within 20 years, with Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's important southern tour talks and the spirit of the 
14th CPC National Congress as the guide; earnestly implement the 
central instructions on tightening macroregulation and control, 
strengthening infrastructures, basic industries, new, high-tech 
industries, and agriculture, and promoting the province's 
sustained, rapid, and healthy economic development, with 
deepening reform as the only way out to solve difficulties and 
problems cropping up in the course of development; and improve 
party style and strengthening the building of clean government 
and promoting the formation of sound social practices, with the 
stress on establishing an anticorruption mechanism and doing a 
good job of comprehensive management of public security. For 
this purpose, the provincial party committee held several 
important meetings one after another and made corresponding 
decisions, which have been conscientiously implemented by the 
party committees at all levels. The strategic objective of 
striving to basically achieve modernization within 20 years and 
the line of thinking and major measures for work set by the 
seventh party congress, which was held in May and served as a 
link between the past and future, has always been to encourage 
the party members and masses of people throughout the province 
to overcome difficulties and forge ahead while breaking new 
ground. Thanks to the creative and hard work of the party 
organizations at various levels and the broad masses of cadres 
and people, the province has a good expansion momentum in reform 
and development, whose main manifestations are as follows: 
  -- Reform has made new advances. Further progress 
has been made in changing the way enterprises operate. The 218 
provincial enterprises conducting comprehensive reform 
experiments have achieved marked results in changing operational 
mechanisms and played a leading role in this regard. The reform 
of three enterprise systems has been extended to all enterprises 
from selected ones. Joint-stock system reform has been 
conducted on a larger scale and some cities have made innovative 
advances where the joint-stock system is being gradually 
standardized. Localities have organized a number of joint-stock 
limited companies and strengthened management of joint-stock 
companies and securities markets, ensuring the sound and lively 
operation of securities businesses. A joint-stock cooperation 
system has been comprehensively introduced in the rural areas 
and the number of rural enterprises under the various forms of 
joint-stock cooperation system is now 30,000 or so, with their 
operations expanding from township and town industries to 
agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fishery, 
communications, and service trades. A rural socialized service 
system is gradually taking shape. The province has made further 
efforts to energetically develop specialized commodity trading 
markets and actively and steadily fostered the futures market, 
first in China in transaction volume terms. The markets for 
talent, labor, and scientific and technological research 
achievements are being operated on a more regular and standard 
basis. Social insurance system reform is moving toward 
establishing a system characterized by separation of government 
and administrative powers, unified leadership, management at 
different levels, and better supervision. Governments at all 
levels have conducted useful explorations in changing functions 
and institutional reform is being accelerated. 
  -- Fresh achievements have been scored in opening up to 
the outside world. The open regions and areas have further 
expanded. The three special economic zones, four economic and 
technological development zones, six new high-tech development 
zones, and over 100 approved economic development experimental 
zones have achieved quite good results in promoting development 
by opening up to the outside world. On the basis of the big 
growth achieved last year, the utilization of foreign capital 
has maintained its strong growth momentum. In foreign capital 
utilization the amount of direct foreign investment has 
increased, investment fields have been expanded, composition of 
investment has been optimized, projects using foreign investment 
have been extended in scale, and the number of years set for 
cooperation has been increased, as has the number of big 
financial groups and transnational corporations investing in the 
province. The foreign capital which has been utilized this year 
is expected to grow by 65 percent over last year, another 
historical best level. The growth momentum of exports has 
weakened and export trade is expected to increase by 10 percent 
over last year. 
  -- The economy has developed at an accelerated rate and 
with better efficiency. As the external environment has 
undergone quite big changes and the difficulties cropping up in 
the course of advance have multiplied, the province has 
continued to maintain its high economic growth rate and improved 
efficiency by deepening reform and opening up wider to the 
outside world. The GDP is expected to grow by 21 percent over 
last year. On the basis of a relatively big increase last year, 
industrial production has continued to maintain its rapid growth 
momentum, with steady increases in production and sales and an 
improvement in efficiency. In the first 10 months of this year, 
the sales income of industrial enterprises with independent 
accounting increased by 45 percent over last year. Profits 
increased while losses decreased. 
  Industrial output value is expected to increase by 35 
percent over last year with a sales rate of 95 percent or so. 
As agricultural production suffered from serious natural 
disasters, grain and sugar production dropped but township and 
town enterprises maintained their growth. It is anticipated 
that total agricultural output value will increase by 3 percent. 
The production composition of agriculture has been further 
optimized, "three highs" agriculture has developed at an 
accelerated rate, with its overall efficiency improving 
remarkably. The targets of greening work have been roughly 
attained and the task of greening Guangdong has been 
accomplished two years ahead of schedule. 
  -- Innovative advances have been made in infrastructure 
construction. The construction in the power, 
communications, and telecommunications industries has developed 
quite quickly, boosting the staying power for further economic 
development. The additional installed capacity is expected to 
amount to 35 to 40 million kwh. The increased installed capacity 
in a year exceeded the province's total additional capacity 
before the reform and opening up to the outside world drive was 
launched. The province has an additional 150 km of expressways, 
300 km of first-grade roads, and over 1,600 km of other roads 
and an additional 158 km of railroad. The telephone system has 
a capacity of 2.2 million sets. Localities in the province, be 
they coastal or mountainous, have undertaken communications 
projects as of top importance. The communications projects 
which have been carried out, are unprecedentedly large in scale, 
high in standard, and rapid in speed. 
  -- Financial revenues have increased, the people's 
incomes have gone up, and markets feature brisk buying and 
selling. The province's financial revenue is expected to 
grow by 35 percent and achieve a rough balance between revenue 
and expenditure with a small surplus. The per capita income for 
living costs of urban dwellers and the per capita cash income of 
the peasants have increased by 14 percent and 10 percent 
respectively, after deducting the price factor. The total 
retail sales volume of social commodities is expected to rise by 
30 percent from the previous year. 
  -- Comprehensive public security management has been 
carried out in a more down-to-earth manner. Since the 
beginning of this year, in view of the outstanding problems in 
social order, the province has launched special struggles to 
crack down on holdups on trains and buses and road robberies; 
triad criminal gangs; and prostitution and carried out an 
"antidrug and antigambling month" campaign and social-order 
improvement in selected areas and places, effectively checking 
the spread of criminal activities and ugly social phenomena. 
The measures, such as establishing an urban police patrol 
system, strengthening the building of grass-roots public 
security organizations, and combining "human, material, and 
technological resources" for security purposes have promoted the 
formation of a public security control system under which the 
masses are involved in public security control and management. 
  -- Party building and building clean government have 
been further strengthened. The provincial party committee 
has repeatedly stressed working hard to establish an effective 
mechanism to combat corruption and maintain incorruptibility. 
Party committees at all levels and discipline inspection and 
procuratorial organs have strengthened investigations, study, 
inspection, and supervision, actively strengthening this work. 
The provincial party committee standing committee held an 
expanded session in the middle of November to implement the 
central instruction and the spirit of the Second Plenary Session 
of the Central Discipline Commission and launched a struggle 
against corruption. Phased results have been achieved in the 
struggle since then. The anticorruption work has three 
distinctive characteristics: 1) principal party and government 
leaders personally take charge of the work; 2) phased objectives 
were combined with long-term objectives and temporary solutions 
with permanent solutions; and 3) the struggle against corruption 
within the party was combined with that to eliminate ugly 
phenomena in society at large. The struggle against corruption 
was carried out in a down-to-earth and healthy manner. Party 
organizations at all levels universally organized their members 
to study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, in particular, Volume 3 of the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, the new party 
Constitution, and knowledge about the socialist market economy 
to improve their quality in the light of practical work. In 
connection with the new leadership elections, leading bodies at 
various levels readjusted and substantiated themselves becoming 
more revolutionary, younger in average age, and more 
knowledgeable and professional. 
  There were still weak links in work last year. We must face 
reality and the future, affirm what we have achieved, face 
problems squarely, and accomplish greater things so that 
Guangdong can advance with bigger strides in its reform and 
development. 
<H3>  II. Conscientiously Study the "Decision" by the Party's 
Third Plenary Session </H3>
  The Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
which was held when China's economic structural reform was 
developed in depth, had great and profound historic 
significance. The "Decision" adopted systematized and made 
concrete the objective of economic structural reform and the 
basic principles set by the 14th CPC National Congress. It is a 
program of action to quicken the pace of reform and development 
and carry on modernization under the great banner of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. We must conscientiously study and 
comprehensively implement it and accelerate the establishment of 
the socialist market economic structure. We must combine the 
study of the "Decision" with study of Volume 3 of Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping; and study of rudimentary knowledge 
about the market economy with the summary of practical 
experience in reform and opening up over the last 15 years and 
with the absorption and use for reference of foreign advanced 
experiences. Through the study, we can acquire a profound 
understanding of the essence of the "Decision," master it as a 
theoretical and ideological weapon, unify our thinking, enhance 
our awareness in implementing the "Decision," and bring our 
initiative and creativity into play in our work. 
  Does socialism need a market economy? Can socialism 
pursue a market economy? This is the question we must fully 
understand above all else. Guangdong's 15 years of reform and 
opening up have proven that to develop the economy, it is 
necessary to pursue a market economy. The economic structural 
reform we have carried out in the last 10 years or so is, in 
fact, a gradual transition from the planned economy to a 
socialist market economic structure. This is precisely where 
the dynamic force of the province's sustained, rapid, and 
healthy economic development lies. The "Decision" points out: 
The socialist market economic structure is integrated with the 
basic system of socialism. In my view, it has two meanings: 
One is that the market economy is not the essential difference 
between socialism and capitalism and socialism must and can 
practice market economy; the other is that practicing market 
economy under socialism has its own characteristics. In 
establishing the socialist market economic structure, it is 
necessary to follow the general laws governing the market 
economy. Different states with different socialist systems 
differ from one another and have their own strong points in 
pursuing the market economic structure. Establishing the 
socialist market economic structure is part and parcel of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. In the Volume 3 of his selected works, 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping has incisive and systematic expositions on 
this issue. In early 1992, Comrade Deng Xiaoping delivered 
important talks during his inspection tour of south China and 
once again showed great foresight and made brilliant judgments, 
which constitute the theoretical basis for us to establish the 
socialist market economic structure. 
  In the final analysis, what kind of socialist market 
economic 
structure are we going to establish? This is a question which 
we should fully understand. The "Decision" has systematically 
and incisively expounded on the question. The purpose in 
establishing a socialist market economic structure is to enable 
the market to play a basic role in the disposition of resources 
under macroregulation and control by the state. To achieve 
this, it is necessary to form the market main bodies, market 
system, regulation and control system, distribution system, 
security system, science and education structure, and the legal 
system as an integral whole. We must start with these basic 
issues, deepen our understanding of the socialist market 
economic structure, and carry out reform with greater 
willingness and initiative so that all work will become 
congruous with the operation of the market economy and 
Guangdong's economy will develop more rapidly and with better 
results. 
  How has Guangdong fared in establishing the socialist market 
economy? In the 15 years of reform and opening up, thanks to 
favorable social conditions, Guangdong introduced reform before 
others, conducted bold explorations with market economics as the 
orientation and made innovative advances. In the province's 
disposition of resources, the market has played an ever 
increasing great role and people's understanding of the laws 
governing the market economy has been gradually deepening. 
Compared with the requirements of the "Decision," we notice 
that the results Guangdong has achieved in reform formed only an 
initial foundation for establishing a socialist market economic 
structure. Our task in the days to come is still very arduous. 
Guangdong's initial experience still needs to undergo a 
practice again -- knowledge again -- improve again process. 
Therefore, we must not be satisfied with the existing state of 
affairs and stand still and refuse to make progress. We must 
arm our minds with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, further emancipate our 
minds with the "Decision" as the guide, and push the province's 
reform to a new goal and a new height and deepen it in the 
spirit of boldly conducting explorations. This is the key to 
the basic realization of modernization within 20 years. 
<H3>  III. Accelerate the Establishment of a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure </H3>
  In accordance with the requirements of the "Decision" by the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and the 
province's realities, in the days ahead, we must speed the pace 
of establishing and improving the socialist market economic 
structure. For this purpose, the provincial party committee 
standing committee studied and worked out "Suggestions for 
Solving Some Issues Concerning the Acceleration of the 
Establishment of the Socialist Market Economic Structure (Draft 
for Discussion)" and submitted it to the current session for 
examination and approval. The general purpose is to set the 
objectives and tasks of establishing the socialist market 
economic structure, carry them out in an orderly way and step by 
step in the light of the realities in Guangdong, make 
breakthroughs at selected points, gradually improve them, and 
strive to set up the basic framework of the socialist market 
economic structure within five years. Let me now focus my 
discussion on five issues concerning the current work. 
  First, there should be great breakthroughs made in 
enterprise system reform. Overall, the province's existing 
enterprises still cannot meet the requirements of the market 
economy. As the market economy develops, this problem will 
become more pronounced. A modern enterprise system is the 
foundation of the market economic structure and the backing of 
local economic development. We must pay close attention to 
enterprise system reform and make breakthroughs at selected 
points to promote the reform as a whole. Attention should be 
paid to the following issues: 1) we must correctly assess 
enterprise assets, be clear about the relations of property 
rights, and ensure the value of public assets will be maintained 
and increased; 2) we must concentrate our efforts on 
establishing a modern enterprise system, with the stress on 
developing joint-stock enterprises, solve the problems such as 
that property rights are confused, no distinction is made 
between government and enterprise functions, the practice is 
pursued whereby everybody eats from the same big pot of the 
government, state-owned assets are used for other than public 
purposes, and enterprises are riddled with debts and 
overstaffing, mobilize the enthusiasm of enterprise cadres and 
employees, and enhance the vitality of enterprises; 3) We must 
form a number of enterprise group companies and make them 
competitive "dragon's head" enterprises; 4) we must carry out 
reform in the light of the different conditions of enterprises, 
with well conceived plans, steady steps, and adequate support 
measures, and do a good job of ideological work to win the 
support of the cadres and employees; and 5) we must establish a 
new system for the newly established enterprises so that they 
operate from the very outset in line with the requirements of 
the market economy and of the "Decision." 
  Second, there should be a great change in the 
government's function to manage the economy. Along with 
the reform in the enterprise system, financial and taxation 
systems, and banking structure and the establishment of the 
market economic structure as a whole, it has obviously become 
more imperative to change the government functions. The 
functions of governments at all levels are different and so are 
their economic management functions. However, as local 
governments, they have many common points. Therefore, the 
overall demand is that while continuing to carry reform forward 
energetically, they must strengthen macroregulation and control, 
change their regulation and control measures, energize their 
service functions, improve work efficiency, change the 
management methods of the traditional planned economy, focus 
their attention mainly on overall planning, make good use of 
policies, use organizational coordination with information as 
the guide, provide adequate services as well as inspection and 
supervision. For the government to manage the economy, first of 
all, it must pay keen attention to planning and work out plans 
for social and economic development, and also urban and rural 
construction, whose implementation should be ensured by laws and 
regulations. For the government to develop the economy, it must 
promote economic development through reform and opening up and 
pay close attention to such issues as infrastructure 
construction, optimization and readjustment of industrial 
structure, construction and management of the investment 
environment, coordinated development of different regions, 
training qualified personnel, control of population growth, and 
environmental protection. The government must promote the 
development of the other economic entities by means of policy 
guidance, organizational coordination, and adequate services. 
It is necessary to bring into full play the roles of the 
banking, financial and taxation, auditing, industrial and 
commercial, judicial, and other functional departments to manage 
and develop the economy. It is also necessary to give play to 
the role of large group companies as the dragon heads in 
developing the economy and the servicing and guiding roles of 
intermediary organizations. The change of the government's 
function to manage the economy must be combined with enterprise 
system reform and institutional reform. 
  Third, we must pay close attention to financial and 
taxation structural reform. The central authorities have 
decided to carry out a tax sharing system next year and we must 
carry out the reform conscientiously. The contract system, 
which Guangdong has practiced for many years, has played a very 
great role in smashing the pattern of total control over revenue 
and expenditure under the highly centralized planned economy, 
mobilizing the enthusiasm of localities in increasing revenues 
and cutting expenditures, striking a balanced budget, and 
developing their economies, and in "breeding fish by retaining 
water the [xu shui yang yu 5552 3055 7402 7625]" and "enlarging 
the cake [zuo da dan gao 0976 1129 7551 4741]." Its development 
direction will surely be in line with the tax sharing system 
commensurate with China's national conditions. The priority for 
the financial and taxation reform in the short term set by the 
"Decision" is to turn the existing local financial contract 
system into a tax sharing system based on a rational definition 
of central and local administrative powers and establish central 
and local taxation systems. For this purpose, we must do our 
work well, submit ourselves to the overall situation of reform 
and the interests of the state, ensure the smooth implementation 
of the financial and taxation reform, and protect the enthusiasm 
of governments at all levels in developing the economy, opening 
up more financial avenues, and increasing revenues and cutting 
expenditures. In accordance with this principle, we must 
continue to improve the province's current financial structure 
so that it will converge with the state financial and taxation 
structural reform and implement the plan to improve it as 
quickly as possible. Governments and departments at all levels 
must ensure in an active and responsible way that the province's 
current financial structure will converge with the state 
financial and taxation structural reform. They must 
particularly improve taxation means, increase revenues and cut 
expenditures, control financial expenditures, strengthen tax 
collection according to law, improve tax collection methods, 
tighten supervision, and plug loopholes. In the days to come, 
governments at all levels must display the spirit of hard work 
and thrift, make careful calculations and strictly budget 
financial spending, save what can be saved, and guard against 
extravagance, waste, and extravagant spending. Developing the 
economy and increasing tax funds are fundamental to financial 
reform. We must make sure that introducing tax reform will help 
better promote rather than hamper the province's economic 
development and financial revenues. All localities must 
conscientiously solve this problem in the light of their own 
realities. 
  Fourth, we must continue to open up wider to the 
outside world and promote reform and development by opening 
up. Opening up wider to the outside world is a strong point 
in the province. We must develop new avenues of opening up and 
uplift it to a new height. We must strive for breakthroughs in 
the days ahead in diversifying the market, importing high-tech 
projects, and inviting large international financial groups to 
invest in China. We must make earnest efforts to run the 
state-approved 13 economic zones of various types and a number 
of the province-approved economic and technological development 
zones and promote the development of the rest of the province 
with these zones serving as windows and bases for reform. We 
must absorb foreign capital to transform a number of existing 
enterprises, develop new industries, build infrastructure, 
further open domestic markets to the outside world, import 
hardware and, even more, software, and attach importance to 
talent, advanced management methods, and expertise. We must run 
properly the existing tens of thousands of foreign- invested 
enterprises, enterprises engaged in processing with supplied 
materials and samples, assembling with supplied parts, and 
compensation trade; give play to their positive role in 
developing the province's economy; and expand their positive 
influence abroad. We must step up our efforts to promptly solve 
the problems of neglecting the employees' safety and interests. 
We must improve the investment-seeking work, set up special 
organs, expand the current staff to handle the work extensively 
and meticulously, combine going abroad to seek investment and 
introducing investment from abroad, and combine introduction of 
large foreign investment on a comprehensive basis and regular 
introduction of investment on an item-by-item basis. While 
inviting foreign investment, we must actively open up 
international markets, export more goods, and strive to earn 
more foreign exchange. We must further develop and run 
enterprises overseas and raise construction funds abroad through 
many channels and methods. We must continue to make full use of 
the strong points of the Hong Kong and Macao region and, at the 
same time, absorb the achievements of all civilizations of human 
society from other countries, extensively introduce other 
countries' strong points, and make them serve our own purposes. 
We must energetically train qualified people engaged in foreign 
trade, further improve the investment environment, and create 
better conditions for opening up wider to the outside world. 
  Fifth, we must strengthen party leadership and ensure 
that work in all fields is carried out properly. The task 
of reform for the coming year is arduous. Party committees at 
all levels must enhance their awareness of reform, give emphasis 
to the priorities of reform, strengthen leadership over reform, 
and ensure the implementation of various reform measures. 
Reform is the driving force for economic development. We must 
be good at mobilizing people's enthusiasm and promoting economic 
development through reform. Reform is bound to involve the 
adjustment of interests of all sides concerned and cause some 
new contradictions. Therefore, we must be good at handling 
those contradictions well and ensure social stability and unity 
and the smooth progress of reform. It is a difficult and 
complex social systems engineering undertaking to establish the 
socialist market economic structure. Leaders at all levels must 
make overall planning, coordinate the forces of all side 
concerned, and make concerted efforts to accomplish the task. 
To be able to shoulder the heavy task of reform, leaders at all 
levels must take the lead in studying well Volume 3 of 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping and the "Decision," 
raise their ideological level and professional competence, 
improve their work style, go deep into the realities of life to 
conduct thorough investigation and study, and do their work in a 
creative way. 
  As far as the economic work in the coming year is concerned, 
we must continue to implement the spirit of the seventh 
provincial party congress, which was held in May this year, and 
implement the plans and decisions adopted by the several 
important meetings the provincial authorities held this year. 
Particular stress should be placed on continuing to devote 
great efforts to the construction of infrastructure and the 
development of "three highs" agriculture, township and town 
enterprises, and the tertiary industry. In the overall economic 
work, attention should be paid to tapping potential, improving 
economic efficiency and product quality, and opening up more 
markets. In construction undertakings, we must proceed from 
actual conditions, act according to both our capability and 
modern standards, make good plans, and implement them step by 
step. In both urban and rural areas, we must guard against 
arbitrary and unplanned construction and unnecessary 
reconstruction to avoid waste. Importance should be attached to 
the protection, development, and utilization of water resources 
and to environmental protection. 
  In reform and opening up, as well as economic construction, 
we must strengthen the building of spiritual civilization. We 
must continue to implement the plan of the provincial party 
committee standing committee meeting, held this September, to 
struggle against corruption and conscientiously carry out the 
spirit of the provincial meeting on spiritual civilization work, 
which was held this November. Leading cadres at all levels must 
be strict with themselves and honest in performing official 
duties, pay keen attention to the struggle against corruption, 
and ensure the completion of the three tasks in the short term. 
We must continue to strengthen the comprehensive management of 
public security, severely punish criminals whose cases are 
serious, wipe out "seven evils," and create a safe and sound 
social environment for the work, study, and lives of the masses 
of people. We must strengthen ideological and political work, 
encourage a correct outlook on life and civilized lifestyles, 
and foster lofty professional ethics and social morality. We 
are firmly convinced that so long as we make unremitting efforts 
in this regard, we will be able to uplift the province's 
building of spiritual civilization to a new level every year. 
We firmly believe that after this session, party organizations 
at all levels will lead the people throughout the province in 
implementing the spirit of the "Decision" and Guangdong's 
reform, opening up, and modernization will surely take on a new 
look and be uplifted to a new level in the new year. 

