Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Wang Yonghong: "State Loans To Help </F>
Spark Rural Power Plan"] 
  [Text] The government plans to increase investment in its 
ambitious rural electrification programme. 
  The ongoing second phase of the scheme, which will supply 
electricity to 90 per cent of households in 200 counties 
nationwide, will get a big help from loans. 
  In 1991 the State began annually allocating 200 million yuan 
($23 million) from its fiscal budget to the project. 
  This year the loans will be increased, said Vice-Minister 
Chen Yaobang of the State Planning Commission. 
  Chen made the statement at the opening meeting yesterday of 
the national conference on rural electrification. 
  The loans from the China Agricultural Bank and other 
domestic 
banks will increase from last year's 1 billion yuan ($115 
million) to 1.7 billion yuan ($181 million), said Zhang 
Chunyuan, Vice-Minister of Water Resources. 
  China launched the project in 1991, aiming to develop 
hydroelectric power. 
  Most of the counties covered by the programme are in the 
South. 
  The State has targeted 200 counties in 24 provinces and 
autonomous regions -- most on the government's list of 
underdeveloped areas. 
  It is part of the national bid to lay a solid foundation for 
rural social and economic development. 
  In the past three years, machinery capable of generating 
3.77 
million kilowatts of electricity has been installed. They can 
now generate 594 million kilowatt-hours in electricity. 
  More than 18 million farmers from 5 million families in 
programme-covered counties now have electricity as a result. 
  At the conference, which ends tomorrow, 14 counties were 
awarded for meeting the programme's electricity target. 
  Under the scheme, the annual electricity consumption of 
households in the counties is expected to be more than 200 kwh 
-- the national average for rural areas. 
  And industry and agriculture in these areas will be assured 
of electricity for at least 330 days a year. 
  Zhang said machinery capable of generating 15 million 
kilowatts in electricity needs to be completed by 1995 to meet 
the project's goals. 
  At the meeting Zhang said the programme will be extended to 
another 300 counties for the Ninth Five-year Plan period 
(1996-2000). 

