Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Zhang Shanbin (4545 0810 2430), Research Office, </F>
Anhui Provincial Superior People's Court: "Critique of Taiwan's 
Import-Export Control Laws"] 
  [Text] I 
  In the course of trading with foreign countries over a long 
period of time, the fiscal and legislative authorities in Taiwan 
have gradually formulated and perfected basic laws and 
regulations for the control of imports and exports. The most 
important of these are the "Draft Trade Law," the "Commodity 
Export Examination Regulations," the "Commodity Import 
Examination Regulations, "Import-Export Classification, 
Examination and Control Methods" and applicable rules and 
regulations. Standards for imports and exports are found in the 
"Classification Table for Imports and Exports," which prescribes 
methods for controlling imports and exports of all categories of 
commodities. Using these laws and regulations as a basic 
framework, a fairly complete and integrated legal system for the 
control of imports and exports has been fashioned. These laws 
play an extremely important role in promoting the development of 
Taiwan's externally oriented economy. 
  The purpose of this article is to explore the pros and cons 
of Taiwan's import-export trade control laws, summarizing how 
well they have succeeded or failed in developing Taiwan's 
foreign trade economy to provide lessons that we might use. 
  1. Import Trade Legal System 
  Article 3 of Taiwan's Import-Export Classification, 
Examination, and Control Methods" divides imports into three 
types, namely prohibited imports, controlled imports, and 
permitted imports. 
  Prohibited Imports. This applies mostly to the 
prohibition of imports to safeguard social order or public 
health. It applies specifically to 14 harmful substances 
including narcotics and toxic drugs. 
  Controlled Imports. This category includes mostly 
things in which Taiwan Province is self-sufficient or luxury 
goods that need not be imported. In principle, traders may not 
import them. However, should an enterprise have a genuinely 
special need for them application may be made to import them 
within certain limits. The purpose of controlled imports -- 
conservation of the province's foreign exchange aside -- is to 
protect the development of Taiwan's industry. In general, the 
control period for controlled imports is two years. If the 
original reason for control has not been eliminated by the time 
the control period expires, the control period must be extended. 
Special regulations also apply to methods for certification of 
this category of commodities: First, Taiwan's "International 
Trade Bureau" must approve. After obtaining an import license, 
certification procedures are completed at a designated bank. At 
the present time, Taiwan's controlled imports consist mostly of 
weapons and ammunition, explosives, ships and boats, radioactive 
isotopes, gold and gold alloys, camcorders, electronic game 
machines, gambling equipment, and some goods that Taiwan can 
itself produce. 
  Permitted Imports. All commodities that Taiwan 
cannot manufacture or produce in sufficient amounts may be 
imported (prohibited and controlled imports excepted). In 
general, certification procedures for such goods may be handled 
directly at designated banks. However, for the importation of 
specially designated commodities, one may complete certification 
procedures at a designated bank only after having obtained an 
import license from the "International Trade Bureau." For the 
importation of certification-exempt commodities, a firm need 
only request a development credit application from the 
certifying bank. Following bank examination and approval, it may 
then make foreign exchange conversions for importation. 
  Taiwan also places certain restrictions on the areas from 
which goods may be imported. For economic and diplomatic 
reasons, the Taiwan authorities have designated the following 
areas as permitted import areas, terming them trading partners. 
They are: Hong Kong and Macao, Malaysia, Singapore, Japan, 
Europe, Australia, New Zealand, North America, and other areas. 
  Taiwan law also contains special provisions about who is 
qualified to import. Import applicants must be one of the 
following: a national enterprise such as the "Central Trust," 
and the Taiwan "Materials Bureau"; a nongovernment production 
enterprise; direct users of fishing industry machinery and 
equipment; a factory in an export processing zone; or a trader. 
A nongovernment production enterprise is a firm that produces 
goods or provides labor services that is capitalized at more 
than NT [New Taiwan] $500,000, that is registered with the 
"international Trade Bureau," and that engages in the 
import-export business. A trader is an import-export corporation 
with a capital of more than NT$2 million whose exports total 
more than $200,000 per year. 
  Pertinent data show 26,751 different commodity categories in 
Taiwan, 14, or 0.05 percent, of which are prohibited imports; 
649, or 2.43 percent, of which are controlled imports; and 21, 
or 0.08 percent, of which are suspended imports. This is a total 
of 684 different imports in the enumerated three categories, or 
2.56 percent of the total. Thus, the number of Taiwan 
prohibited, controlled, or suspended imports is not large. Among 
the permitted imports, 331 may be imported only by certain 
applicants. This is 1.24 percent of the total number. 
Ninety-eight, or 0.37 percent may be purchased only from certain 
areas; and 2,156, or 8.06 percent, require inspection documents. 
Clearly, a fairly large number of permitted Taiwan imports carry 
restrictions of other kinds. 
  To summarize, the licensing system is the import control 
system used in Taiwan today. In principle, licenses are required 
for imports, only a small number excepted. Although, for the 
sake of simplifying procedures, Taiwan no longer requires that 
import license documents be presented for half of products, 
since bank procedures are so complex, importing firms rarely use 
such licenses. Consequently, in order to balance imports and 
exports, and change the steadily rising favorable balance of 
trade, the Taiwan authorities have changed import controls to 
"freedom in principle, restrictions being the exception" in the 
course of amending trade laws in recent years. In principle, no 
import license is required for any goods. Gone are the strict 
controls of the period when trade was first being developed. 
This was necessitated by Taiwan's import expansion and export 
expansion strategy. However, restrictions have not been relaxed 
on rare farm products, rare animals, and toxic substances. Under 
these circumstances, Taiwan will employ a negative schedule 
method by which prohibited imports, imports requiring 
application for certification (including imports covered by 
place of origin restrictions and restricted imports), and 
imports requiring customs clearance documents are specifically 
listed. Commodities not listed on the schedule may be imported 
freely, no formalities required other than presenting the goods 
to the Customs. If these regulations can be put into effect 
smoothly, they will be bound to help firms expand imports. They 
will also help change American attitudes about Taiwan being a 
high trade barrier "country." 
  2. Export Control System 
  In order to encourage exports and help get goods into 
international markets, Taiwan had no strict limitations on 
exports during the 1950s and 1960s. The law provided that so 
long as one applied to the "International Trade Bureau" as an 
exporter, a firm had authority to export. Taiwan's import-export 
legal requirement to register as an exporting firm was a capital 
of NT$500,000, annual exports of $200,000 or more following 
registration, and possession of a card showing the filing with 
agencies concerned of an imprint of the firm's official seal. 
Firms whose annual exports fell short of $50,000 were to lose 
their foreign trader status. However, since this provision was 
not strictly enforced, for a time Taiwan import-export firms 
were both too numerous and too freewheeling. Firms too small in 
size, and products that did not measure up, the international 
competitiveness of Taiwan's exports was impaired and Taiwan's 
foreign trade was chaotic. In recent years, Taiwan has been 
generally subjected to the import restrictions of developed 
western countries. In order to diversify markets and improve the 
reputation of Taiwan's exports, the Taiwan authorities have 
realized the urgent need to decrease the number and increase the 
size of trading firms. They have gradually adopted stricter 
export controls. 
  In accordance with provisions of Article of "Import-Export 
Classification, Examination and Control Methods, "exports are 
divided into three categories as follows: 
  Prohibited exports: All commodities not approved 
for export by Taiwan authorities in charge such as the 
"International Trade Bureau" may not be exported. 
  Controlled exports: This applies mostly to 
commodities for which Taiwan is not fully self-sufficient. The 
Taiwan authorities fear soaring prices that might trigger social 
disorder thereby impairing implementation of the set economic 
policy of "development with stability"; thus, they strictly 
control exports of commodities for which Taiwan is not fully 
self-sufficient. One specific category of commodities concerned 
is agricultural products, livestock products, fishing industry 
products, minerals, and industrial products. Another is 
strategic materials. Should the export of strategic materials be 
necessary, application must be made to the "International Trade 
Bureau," export permitted only after obtaining an export license. 
  Permitted exports: Except for commodities on 
which the United States, Canada, and the EC countries set 
quotas, and commodities for which the "International Trade 
Bureau" specially requires an export license, all products that 
Taiwan produces in abundance, and products geared for the export 
market may be freely exported upon completion of certification 
procedures with designated banks. 
  Firms that may apply for export rights in accordance with 
provisions of Taiwan law are principally the following: 
government-owned trading organs, public and private production 
enterprises that export, specially designated traders, 
industrial plants in export processing zones, and other 
designated organizations. 
  Applicable data show that Taiwan has no commodities whose 
export is prohibited. It has 499 commodities whose export is 
controlled, and it has eight commodities whose export has been 
suspended. The two categories cover 507, or 1.9 percent, of all 
commodities. Clearly, the number of commodities whose export is 
controlled or has been suspended is not great. Of the 
commodities permitted export, 234, or 0.87 percent, require 
"International Trade Bureau" certification. Commodities 
requiring bank certification number 23,292, or 87.07 percent. 
Commodities exempted from certification number 27.8 kinds, or 
10.16 of the total. Clearly an overwhelming majority of Taiwan's 
permitted exports must be certified by a certifying bank. 
  In short, Taiwan's commodity import-export control system is 
primarily a licensing system. The law divides imports and 
exports into permitted, controlled, and prohibited categories. 
Permitted imports and exports are further divided into those to 
which applicant or place of purchase restrictions apply, those 
requiring inspection documents, and those to which other 
provisions apply. Except for exempted commodities, firms 
applying to import or export must have required documents in 
hand to be presented with an import or export license 
application to the "international Trade Bureau" or a certifying 
bank for certification . Only after obtaining an import or 
export permit may they complete import or export procedures. 
<H6>  II. </H6>
  For the past more than 40 years, the Taiwan authorities have 
used the trade control laws as an important tool for spurring 
trade and economic development; however, quite a few problems 
exist, and some regulations even conflict with economic and 
trade strategy. 
  1. Problems in the Classification of Taiwan Commodities 
  At the present time, classification of Taiwan's import and 
export commodities is based on Taiwan commodity standards. The 
uniform commodity classification standards (STTC or HS) used 
internationally are not applied. Thus, statistics on Taiwan's 
imports and exports cannot be compared directly with applicable 
foreign import-export statistics. Furthermore, since Taiwan's 
commodity classifications are not sufficiently clear or 
complete, it is impossible to determine immediately the 
classification of many products -- particularly new products. 
They must be semt to the commodity classification committee for 
a determination, and this takes a fairly long time. Since 
application must be made and certification obtained for imports 
and exports, the category to which the import or export for 
which application is being made must be determined in advance in 
order to obtain approval. Should a commodity's classification 
not be easily determined, a fairly large amount of time must be 
spent on determining it, the importer or exporter possibly 
losing a fine opportunity in consequence. Additionally, the 
division of imports and exports into prohibited, controlled, and 
permitted categories, and the further limitations on applicants 
and place of purchase of imports or exports and the necessity 
for inspection documents makes import-export business procedures 
onerous. They increase the troubles of importers and exporters, 
and they are a greater bother for the "International Trade 
Bureau" or certifying banks, thereby impairing normal 
import-export trade activity. 
  2. Problems With the Certification System 
  Under existing Taiwan trade control laws, except for 
"International Trade Bureau" exempted commodities, application 
and certification is necessary to engage in the import-export 
business, and only after obtaining an import or export license 
can one export or import. This certification system violates 
modern free trade principles and increases business concerns' 
export procedures and expense. 
  3. Problems With Period of Validity of Import and Export 
Licenses 
  All Taiwan import and export licenses are valid for a 
certain 
period. When they expire, the concern must apply for an 
extension or renewal. For example, the period of validity for an 
export license is only 30 days, no extensions permitted. The 
period of validity for an import license is 4 months, and a 
multiple shipment license is valid for 1 year. Formerly, when 
Taiwan was short of foreign exchange, the period of validity 
provision made for rapid circulation and allocation of foreign 
exchange. It was genuinely necessary. Today, however, Taiwan's 
exchange reserves are fairly ample, and the allocation of 
foreign exchange is no longer a problem. In today's complex 
international trade climate, such a regulation appears 
inconsistent with reality. 
  4. Problems With Alteration of Import and Export Licenses 
  Applicable Taiwan trade regulations provide that import and 
export license applications must be stamped once, and may not be 
altered. This was originally intended to prevent abuses. 
However, in actual operation, this means an increase in 
processing fees that importers and exporters pay. 
  5. Problems With the Limitation of Place of Purchase 
  In order to even the bilateral balance of trade, diversify 
trading areas, and protect the island's industry, as well as for 
other reasons, the Taiwan authorities have set place of purchase 
restrictions on numerous commodities. Economically speaking, 
this is a violation of market rules of equal competition. It 
distorts the laws of resources allocation, and increases the 
operating costs of producers on the island. 

