Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 5 Jan (XINHUA) -- The State Council has 
decided to suitably lower customs duties on imported small 
automobiles effective 1 January 1994, as well as adjust policies 
on tariff reductions or exemptions for imported small 
automobiles. Replying to questions from a XINHUA NEWS AGENCY 
reporter, a spokesman of the General Administration of Customs 
said: The decrease in customs duties and the adjustment of 
tariff reduction policies covers sedans, station wagons, jeeps, 
vans, and pickup trucks. The tariff reductions for small 
automobiles include: for vehicles with gasoline and diesel 
engines smaller than three liters and 2.5 liters respectively, 
customs duties are lowered from 180 percent to 110 percent; for 
vehicles with gasoline engines and diesel engines larger than 
three liters and 2.5 liters respectively, customs duties are 
lowered from 220 percent to 150 percent. The tariff reduction 
margins of 38.8 percent and 31.8 percent [as received] 
respectively are very large. 
  The spokesman added: Apart from tax exemptions for 
organizations and personnel -- such as diplomatic organizations 
and diplomats stationed in China, including UN organizations and 
its personnel -- which enjoy tariff reductions because of our 
participation in international treaties or specifications in 
agreements signed between our government and governments of 
other countries, as well as small automobiles entirely donated 
by international organizations and foreign governments, customs 
duties, import value-added taxes, and other taxes shall be 
collected by customs without exception for small automobiles 
imported by any other organizations and personnel. The current 
customs duties for our country's imported small vehicles are 
rather high. The tariff is 220 percent for small vehicles with 
a capacity larger than 2.5 liters, and 180 percent for those 
smaller than 2.5 liters. If the import value-added tax (14 
percent) and vehicle purchase surtax are added, the total duties 
for importing a completely assembled vehicle will exceed 300 
percent. Consumers can afford to pay for vehicles, but not the 
taxes. On the other hand, the excessive number of policies on 
tariff reduction has seriously weakened the functions of 
macroeconomic control of customs duties, which is unfavorable to 
controlling the import of small automobiles and unsuitable for 
the requirement of the socialist market economic system. 
Meanwhile, it encourages smuggling and tax evasion in small 
vehicle imports. The State Council's decision to reduce customs 
duties for imported small automobiles and to abolish the 
excessive number of policies on tariff reduction or exemption is 
to create conditions for fair competition and to cut tariff 
burdens, a measure favorable to promoting the development of our 
automobile industry and improving our investment environment. 

