Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ma Kai (7456 0418), vice minister of the State </F>
Commission for Restructuring Economic System: "Speed up 
Fostering and Developing the Market System"] 
  [Text] The section "Fostering and Developing the Market 
System" in the "Decision by the CPC Central Committee Concerning 
Certain Issues on Building the Socialist Market Economic System" 
clarifies six interrelated issues. To study conscientiously and 
understand profoundly these important expositions in the 
"Decision" is of important guiding significance to promoting the 
growth of China's market system and speeding up the building of 
the new socialist market economic system. 
<H3>  The Market System -- The Core of the Socialist Market 
Economic System </H3>
  To foster and develop the market system is the essential 
requirement for building the socialist market economic system. 
The essence of the new system is to enable the market to play a 
basic role in allocating resources under state macroeconomic 
regulation and control. An improved market system is the 
operational carrier and operational basis for the market to play 
a basic role in allocating resources. The extent of the growth 
of the market system shows the extent of the role played by the 
market in allocating resources, and also marks the maturity of 
the market economic system. In this sense, the market system 
and its operational mechanism is the core of the socialist 
market economic system. 
  To foster and develop market economy is an important pillar 
in constructing the basic framework of the new system. The 
"Decision" of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee depicts the basic framework of the socialist market 
economic system, including: A modern enterprise system, a 
developed market system, an improved macroeconomic regulation 
and control system, a rational personal income and distribution 
system, and a multilevel social insurance system. These five 
major pillars, interrelated and interconstrained, together 
constitute the basic framework of the new system, maintain in 
common the normal operation of the new system, and realize 
jointly the basic role of the market in allocating resources 
under macroeconomic regulation and control. To build up a 
modern enterprise system, and enable enterprises to truly manage 
to "look for the market and not the mayor," it is necessary to 
take building a developed market system as the prerequisite. 
The macroeconomic regulation and control system is mainly 
applying economic levers and economic policies to guide 
enterprises by market regulation and control, and one cannot 
depart from an improved market system to exercise indirect 
management of enterprises. 
  The goal of fostering and developing the socialist market 
economic system is to realize the change in the circulation of 
commodities and productive factors from planned distribution 
relations to market exchange relations; to build up a unified, 
open, competitive, orderly, complete, and developed big market; 
and to ensure that the market mechanism plays a basic role in 
allocating resources. Here, the first thing I want to talk 
about is the essence of the new market system; the second is its 
content and characteristics; and the third is its purpose. 
These three together constitute the goal of the new market 
system. 
  At a superficial level, the market refers to sites of 
transactions, and essentially speaking it is the sum total of 
the exchange relations between commodities and money. 
Therefore, to foster and develop the market system is not 
simply to build so many market places, more importantly it is to 
build new-type market exchange relations, and to change the 
administrative distribution relations of commodities and factors 
under the planned economic system into market exchange relations 
built on the basis of equal opportunity, independent 
transactions, fair competition, and equal exchange. 
  A modern market system that meets the requirements of a 
socialist market economy must have at least six characteristics: 
First, it must be unified, and not divided. It breaks regional 
blockades, departmental monopolies, and barriers between 
departments and regions. It encourages free circulation of 
commodities and factors, and removes artificial restrictions, 
thus creating a nationwide unified market. Second, it must be 
open and not closed. It is open at home, open to other cities 
(counties) and provinces; and it is also open to foreign 
countries, and achieves links between domestic and foreign 
markets. Third, it must be competitive and not monopolistic. 
It should have full and fair competition, and oppose monopoly, 
especially administrative monopoly. Both commodity prices and 
factor prices should be formed through market competition. 
Fourth, it must be orderly and not chaotic. The market 
principals are correct in their behavior, and their transaction 
activities standardized and legalized. They carry out open 
transactions under fair competition, with laws to abide by and 
rules to follow, and a fine market order is built up. Fifth, it 
must be complete and not fragmentary. It should have both a 
consumer goods market and a means of production market, and it 
should have a commodity market and a productive factors market; 
it should have a spot market as well as a futures market; it 
should create a visible market and attach importance to the 
invisible market; it should have low-level markets and 
high-level markets; it should have regional markets and a 
nationwide market; it should develop domestic as well as foreign 
markets. Sixth, it must be developed and not backward. On the 
one hand, it should have a developed hardware system, including 
market facilities, communications, telecommunications, banking, 
godowns and storage, processing, and facilities for keeping food 
fresh; on the other hand, it should have a developed software 
system, including management, information, and rules and 
regulations. Market operations are highly efficient, and 
business costs are low. 
  We are not fostering the market for the sake of fostering 
the market. The fundamental purpose of fostering the market is 
to create necessary conditions for the market to play a basic 
role in allocating resources. As for the flow of commodities 
and factors, only when the change from administrative 
distribution relations to market exchange relations is 
completed, and an improved and developed big market is built up 
can a socialist market economy be operated normally and its role 
be effectively brought into play. 
<H5>  Pricing Reform -- The Key to Developing the Market System </H5>
  The core of market economy is the market, and the core of 
the 
market is prices. The basic role played by the market in 
allocating resources is realized with the aid of the formation 
mechanism and operational mechanism of market prices. Price 
reform and market growth constrain and promote each other. 
Freeing prices and changes in the price formation mechanism are 
basic prerequisites for developing the market, because where 
prices are set administratively, there can be no competition; 
without competition, you cannot begin to talk about developing a 
true market. Practice since reform has also proved that the 
commodities for which prices are freed earlier are the 
commodities for which the market develops faster; conversely, 
the commodities for which prices are kept under tight control 
are the commodities for which the market is not developed. 
  Before reform, China implemented a highly centralized system 
of administrative setting of prices, which brought about a 
distorted pricing structure over a long period of time, thus 
playing a reverse regulatory role in allocating resources. 
After 15 years of reform, price reform has made substantial 
progress, fundamental changes have taken place in the 
overcentralized planned price structure, and prices of the great 
majority of commodities and labor have been released. It can be 
said that in the sphere of commodities and labor, the mechanism 
under which prices are formed by the market occupies a leading 
position. However, the task of price reform is not yet 
finished; some prices suitable for freeing have not been freed; 
there is still a two-tier price system for certain basic 
products; prices within the plan are still somewhat low; the 
reform of the price regulation and control system is relatively 
delayed; in particular, the market does not yet play a dominant 
role in the formation of interest rates, exchange rates, wages, 
and land costs, and prices of productive factors do not yet 
truly reflect their degree of scarcity. 
  For a period of time to come, price reform will mainly 
include three interrelated tasks: 
  --To build up a price mechanism that takes prices 
formed by the market as the dominant factor. This is the 
core of price reform, and is also the basis on which the price 
structure can constantly tend to be and continue being 
relatively rational. It is necessary to continue expanding the 
range in which prices are regulated by the market, strive to 
create conditions before too long to basically free prices in 
the sphere of commodities and labor suitable for freeing, and 
abolish as soon as possible the two-tier price system for the 
means of production; and moreover stress pushing forward the 
reform of prices of productive factors, gradually strengthen the 
role of market regulation in the formation of interest rates, 
exchange rates, land costs, enterprise wages, and the cost of 
other factors, and finally realize the mechanism of factor 
prices formed by the market under government macroeconomic 
regulation and control. 
  --The purpose of pricing reform is to build up a 
pricing structure that can constantly tend to be and continue 
being relatively rational, so as to guide continuously the 
rational allocation of resources. For some time to come, 
it is necessary to basically solve the problem of price 
structure distortion in commodities and labor by combining 
regulation with freeing. Lay emphasis on pushing forward reform 
in three aspects: First, reform of the prices of agricultural 
products, with rationalizing the purchase and marketing prices 
of grain as the center. Release the purchase and marketing 
prices of grain, and correspondingly build up and improve a 
multilevel grain reserve system from the central authorities to 
localities, a grain risk regulatory fund system, and a system of 
a minimum purchase price for the protection of producers and, 
when necessary, a maximum selling price. For prices of cotton, 
flue-cured tobacco, silkworm cocoons, and other agricultural 
products which are at present still under state control, it is 
also necessary to judge the hour and size up the situation, and 
actively push forward reform. Second, the reform of prices of 
the means of production and of communications and transportation 
with solving the problem of somewhat low energy prices as the 
dragon-head. It is necessary to continue solving the problem of 
somewhat low prices of coal, oil, and other basic industries 
under state monopolistic distribution and the problem of 
enterprise losses of a policy nature by increasing prices or 
enlarging the proportion of price release year by year. Third, 
the reform of prices of consumer goods, with increasing the cost 
of publicly owned housing as the focal point. It is necessary to 
quicken the pace of housing merchandization, and increase year 
by year the rent for civilian housing owned by the government to 
a rational level, and various localities may decide separately 
on their own, and achieve this situation in different steps 
according to their own circumstances. For charges for publicly 
run medical services, publicly run vocational education, and 
higher educational undertakings, it is also necessary to make 
timely and rational readjustment. 
  --To build up an improved, complete, and effective 
price regulation and control system. This is an important 
guarantee for the normal operation of the market price formation 
mechanism and rationalizing of the pricing structure. It is 
necessary to build up and improve an effective overall price 
level monitoring, warning, and regulation and control system, 
continue to include control of the overall price level in the 
plans for the national economy, and realize this mainly by 
currency control and regulation of total supply and demand; 
build up and improve a government reserve system for important 
commodities, including grain, cotton, oil, and important raw and 
processed materials, as well as gold and foreign exchange, with 
which to regulate the market and curb prices; build up and 
improve a price regulation fund system, to be used as economic 
backing for supporting production, fostering the market, and 
putting into effect government price limits when necessary; and 
build up and improve the system of price rules and regulations, 
work out as soon as possible the "Prices Law" and complementary 
rules and regulations, and correspondingly improve the price 
supervision system. 
<H5>  The Commodity Market -- the Basis of the Market System </H5>
  The commodity market is the foundation of the whole market 
system edifice. In the 15 years since reform, there have been 
tremendous changes in the commodity market. For about 80 
percent of industrial and agricultural products there has been a 
change from planned appropriation and distribution to allocation 
through market circulation, the pattern of monopoly by 
state-owned commercial and materials departments has been 
broken, and a commodity market network of diversified economic 
sectors, multiple forms of operation, multiple circulation 
channels, and multiple levels has been initially built up, but 
compared with the goal put forward in the "Decision" made at the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, China 
still has quite a long way to go. It is necessary to continue 
carrying out in-depth reform of the circulation system, and 
developing the commodity market in seven aspects around market 
principals, market carriers [shi chang zai ti 1579 1034 6528 
7555], the market mechanism, market rules and regulations, 
market regulation and control, market supervision, and market 
links. 
  It is necessary to create qualified market circulation 
principals, and continue in-depth reform of circulation 
enterprises. It is necessary to carry out transformation of some 
of the state-owned circulation enterprises, such as those of 
commerce, grain, materials, foreign trade, tobacco, medicine, 
and aquatic products according to a modern enterprises system. 
Those enterprises with the conditions may develop in the 
directions of groups and conglomerate business corporations; 
others may withdraw from the state-owned and state-operated 
pattern, to be "shifted to other lines of production, leased, 
operated on a contract basis, or sold." It is necessary to carry 
out reform of supply and marketing cooperatives according to a 
collective and cooperative nature. Moreover, it is necessary to 
further develop circulation enterprises of diversified economic 
sectors and multiple forms of operation. 
  It is necessary to improve the organizational system of the 
commodity market. Improve the commodity market network with 
complete functions, in which large, small, and medium-sized 
organizations are combined, and in which various economic forms 
and methods of operation exist simultaneously, with primary 
markets as the foundation, regional wholesale markets as the 
backbone, and a nationwide standardized wholesale market as the 
dragon-head. What requires special attention is that when there 
is a certain degree of market building, we should all the more 
attach importance to raising quality, heightening service level, 
strengthening service functions, and increasing operational 
efficiency. As for the futures market, we should make clear 
that it is still in an experimental stage at present. It is 
necessary to uphold the principle of "starting according to 
standards, and everything undergoing experiment," control 
strictly, grasp seriously, guard against blind development, and 
promote the healthy development of futures transactions. 
  It should be especially pointed out that the government 
undertakes the important responsibility of fostering the 
commodity market. However, in the course of promoting the 
growth of the commodity market, various government departments 
should first of all have their eyes on ending departmental 
separation, regional blockades, trade monopolies and various 
other restrictions that hamper the formation of a unified 
market; make efforts to foster new market exchange relations 
that conform to the principles of a socialist market economy; 
and create an environment of equal competition for the market to 
play a regulatory role. They must not proceed from the narrow 
interests of their own departments and regions, blindly scramble 
for markets and compete for comparisons of scale, and pursue 
market "grade" one-sidedly according to the will of government 
officials or in disregard of need; or compel enterprises to 
enter the market or restrict them from entering by 
administrative means, and artificially restrict the flow of 
commodities into or out of localities. These methods, 
incompatible with the principles of the market economy, must be 
resolutely corrected. 
<H3>  The Productive Factors Market -- The Focal Point of 
Fostering the Market System </H3>
  The "Decision" points out clearly that the focal point of 
fostering the market system at present should be developing the 
productive factors market. This is a very important theme. If 
the commodity market is the basis of the market system, then the 
productive factors market is its core. To allocate resources by 
the market, in the final analysis, is to allocate productive 
factors to the links that yield good performance. Productive 
factors entering the market for circulation is the essential 
requirement and necessary condition for the market mechanism to 
play a basic role in resource allocation. When there is a 
certain degree of growth of the commodity market system, to 
speed up developing the productive factors market becomes a 
pressing requirement for developing a socialist market economy. 
In the whole process of the market allocation of resources, if 
there is ample competition in the commodity market and the 
commodity price signal changes with supply and demand, without a 
corresponding productive factors market, and with funds, labor, 
land, and other productive factors unable to flow in and out 
freely and flexibly between trades and enterprises, then it is 
difficult for the market to realize the function of resource 
allocation. Moreover, without an improved productive factors 
market, it would be impossible to create rational prices for 
productive factors. And if the prices of various productive 
factors are distorted and cannot truly reflect their degree of 
scarcity, you cannot begin to talk about rational utilization 
and optimum allocation of productive factors. At present, to 
develop the productive factors market, we should pay special 
attention to building the financial market, land market, and 
labor market, and further develop the markets of technology, 
information, and property rights. 
--To develop and improve the financial market with bank 
financing as the key link. In a market economy which is a 
money economy, funds are the most important resource. The 
financial market is the pivot of the whole market system. 
However, there is a very big gap between the building of the 
financial market and the requirements of a socialist market 
economy. The main problem lies in low degree of growth of the 
financial market, lack of effective supervision and control, and 
chaotic market order. The basic goal of developing and 
improving the financial market is to build up a unified and 
open, competitive and orderly financial market system under 
strict control. Specifically: In the money market, it is 
necessary to standardize the interbank borrowing market, so as 
to make it truly become a money market, and so various types of 
financial organizations can accommodate funds and make up one 
another's money deficiencies from their own surpluses in the 
overnight borrowing market, but there must be a strict time 
limit. It is necessary to promote the development of the note 
market, make great efforts to develop the note discount 
business, and allow banks to discount each other's notes and 
make up others' funds deficiencies from their own surpluses. 
The key to developing the financial market is to push forward 
actively and safely the reform of the interest rate formation 
mechanism. The People's Bank works out a standard interest rate 
for deposits and loans, and the upper and lower intervention 
limits that allow fluctuation; and various interest rates should 
reflect differences in time limit, cost, and risk, and maintain 
a rational profit difference. Gradually build up a market 
interest rate system with the interest rate of the central bank 
as the basis to enable interest rates to change flexibly and 
truly reflect the supply and demand situation in the funds 
market. In the capital market, it is necessary to develop 
actively and safely the bond market and the stock market. It is 
necessary to improve the national debt market, and legislate to 
prevent the financial sector from borrowing from the central 
bank, and financial deficits should be covered by issuing 
national bonds. Banks of a policy nature may issue financial 
bonds. National commercial banks may accommodate funds from the 
central bank with national bonds and financial bonds as 
mortgages, and other financial organizations may also 
accommodate funds from each other with bonds as mortgages, thus 
creating conditions for the central bank to develop open market 
business. It is necessary to improve the stock market, 
standardize the issue and listing of stocks, and gradually 
expand its scale; and improve the stock exchange and the 
management of the exchange departments and affiliated 
organizations. 
  --Reform the labor system, and gradually build up the 
labor market. Labor is the only dynamic factor among the 
productive factors. The development of the market economy 
requires that such an important productive factor as labor 
should also be brought into the operational track of the market 
economy. The goal of the new labor market is to build up a new 
labor market pattern in which, under state macroeconomic 
regulation and control, labor can flow freely, wages are mainly 
decided by labor productivity and the supply and demand of the 
labor market, and the market mechanism plays a basic role in 
labor resources allocation. Specifically: First, it is 
necessary to speed up the reform of the labor and personnel 
system, the graduate assignment system, and the personnel system 
of government organizations and public undertakings. Gradually 
abolish the management system of planned assignment of labor, 
the state no longer being the principal employer of labor, 
implement the decisionmaking power of enterprises in the use of 
labor, and build up a competitive employment mechanism in which 
staff and workers can enter and leave enterprises freely, a 
two-way selection by staff and workers and by organizations that 
use labor is carried out, and there is a rational flow of labor. 
Implement the public servant system in government 
organizations; and universally popularize the recruitment system 
in public undertakings. Gradually change the system of overall 
assignment of university graduates by the state, and implement a 
new assignment system of two-way selection by organizations that 
use labor and by university graduates. Moreover, speed up the 
reform of the wage system and realize remuneration for labor by 
money and wages being mainly decided by labor productivity and 
the supply and demand of the labor market. The state regulates 
primarily by legislating for minimum wages and by tax 
collection. Moreover, it is also necessary to reform the 
household register management system. These reforms are 
prerequisites for developing the labor market. Second, build up 
and improve a multilevel and multiform labor market. China's 
labor force is multilevel, and its labor market should also be 
multilevel and multiform. There should be a nationwide as well 
as regional, an urban as well as a rural labor market; there 
should be general employment service centers, as well as a 
market for senior scientists and technicians. It is also 
necessary to build up a labor export market. Third, develop an 
employment service system. It is necessary to make vigorous 
efforts to develop intermediary organizations and service 
entities that serve the flow and allocation of labor; strengthen 
the employment services system, such as occupational 
recommendation, employment training, and labor arbitration; and 
build up a nationwide and unified labor supply and demand 
information network. Fourth, speed up the reform of the housing 
system, and build up and improve a social insurance system. This 
is an important guarantee of whether or not the labor market can 
develop and operate normally. If housing of staff and workers 
is still assigned by work units and not obtained through the 
market, and if medical care, pensions, and social insurance rely 
mainly on work units with a very low degree of socialization, 
then the flow of labor will meet with enormous obstacles, and it 
will be difficult for the labor market to develop. Fifth, it is 
necessary to build up and improve various labor rules and 
regulations, gradually standardize the labor market, increase 
the degree of civilization of the market, and protect the 
legitimate rights and interests of laborers and the 
organizations that use them. 
--Standardize and develop the real estate market. Land is 
a scarce and nonrenewable resource. With little arable land and 
a large population, China must treasure land resources highly 
and use them rationally. The core of reform of the land system 
in cities and towns is to foster and develop the land market and 
change the administrative appropriation system, under which land 
is free, is used indefinitely, and cannot flow, into a market 
allocation system under which land is paid for, is used for a 
limited duration, and can flow. In the city and town land 
market system, the Grade I land market is monopolized by the 
state, and the Grade II land market is released, but under 
regulation and control. The Grade I market, that is, the market 
for the sale of the right to use land, is under unified 
management by the state, and no one has the right to sell it. 
However, the method of sale by the state should be reformed, 
and the market mechanism introduced. According to the principle 
of separation of land ownership from the right to use land, 
under the premise that the state maintains land ownership, the 
right to use land is pushed into the market, thus widening the 
range of market allocation. All operational land is provided by 
the method of sale, and land ownership is sold by auction and 
public bidding to users at particular prices, for fixed numbers 
of years, and for fixed uses. In the Grade II land market, that 
is, the market where the right to use land is transferred, the 
land sold by the state can be re-transferred, rented, and 
mortgaged between users with prices regulated by the market and 
created through competition. However, the state should 
strengthen regulation and control and management. For instance, 
the nature of the use of land should be planned during land 
transfer, land registration formalities should be completed, the 
transferred amount declared, and value-added tax paid to guard 
against the loss of state land income in the transfers and 
transactions in the sale of the right to use land, and to crack 
down on illegal activities of land speculation, raising land 
costs by cheating, and seeking exorbitant profits. In rural 
areas, it is necessary to explore actively the reform of the 
land system. At present, it is necessary to appropriately 
lengthen the land contract period, stabilize land contract 
relations, encourage the peasants to increase input, and raise 
land productivity. Moreover, it is necessary to improve 
gradually the circulation mechanism of the right to use land 
and, under the premise of upholding collective land ownership 
without changing the use of land, the compensated transference 
of the right to use land is allowed with the consent of the 
contracting parties. It is necessary to protect cultivated land 
conscientiously, and strictly control the transfer of land for 
agricultural use to nonagricultural use. 
  In addition, it is necessary to further develop the 
technology market, introduce the competition mechanism, protect 
intellectual property rights, and put into practice the 
compensated transfer of technological results; further develop 
the information market, realize the merchandization and 
industrialization of information, and raise the extent of social 
enjoyment of information; further develop the property rights 
market; and promote the flow, reorganization, and optimum 
allocation of assets in stock. 
<H5>  Intermediary Organizations -- The Links of the Market System </H5>
  In market economy operations, as ties that link the 
government, the market, and enterprises, intermediary 
organizations play a role that cannot be replaced by government 
administrative management, and developed intermediary 
organizations are important expressions of a mature market 
system and a developed market economy. 
  Market intermediary organizations have four main functions: 
First, services, to provide market principals with information 
service, advisory service, distribution and delivery service, 
training service, brokerage service, and legal service. Second, 
communications, to link up the ties between various types of 
market principals, including between enterprises, between 
enterprises and the government, and between international 
activities. Third, notarization, to ensure fair market 
competition and impartial transactions; to develop financial 
accounting and auditing, assessment of assets and credibility, 
and quantity and quality inspection; and to arbitrate market 
disputes. Fourth, supervision, to work out pledges or trade 
rules for self-restraint according to market regulations, and 
supervise market transaction behavior. 
  Judged by the types of market intermediary organizations, 
the 
stress should be placed on developing the following types: 
First, self-disciplinary organizations for coordinating and 
constraining market principal behavior, such as various trade 
associations, trade councils, and chambers of commerce; second, 
notary organizations to ensure impartial transactions and fair 
competition, such as accountants' offices, lawyers' offices, 
auditors' offices, and assets and credibility assessment 
organizations; third, service organizations for promoting market 
growth and reducing transaction costs, such as information 
centers, advisory and research organizations, quotation systems, 
settlements centers, materials distribution and delivery 
centers, and warehouses; fourth, "bridge" organizations that 
render market direct services, such as various kinds of brokers, 
the pawn trade, the auction trade, occupation recommendation 
offices, human resources exchange centers, etc; and fifth, 
inspection and attestation organizations for supervising market 
activities and maintaining normal market order, such as quantity 
and quality control, production inspection, and other production 
service organizations. 
  Intermediary organizations should undergo qualification 
approval and be established according to law; a competition 
mechanism should be built up among market intermediary 
organizations, with the superior winning out and the inferior 
being eliminated; and intermediary organizations should 
undertake corresponding legal and economic responsibility for 
the consequences of their behavior, and accept management and 
supervision by the government departments concerned. 
<H3>  Legal and Supervisory and Management Systems--the Guarantee 
of Normal Operation of the Market System </H3>
  The core of the market legal system is to protect fair 
competition and enable market transactions to proceed in good 
order in an open, fair, and impartial competitive environment, 
thereby bringing into full play the basic functions of the 
market in allocating resources under legal protection and 
standardization. A complete market legal system should include 
at least the following aspects: Laws and regulations on market 
aspects, including laws and regulations that standardize 
different market aspects, such as a "company law," a "bank law," 
a "broker law," etc; laws and regulations on market 
organizations, such as regulations regarding open markets and 
wholesale markets, and stock exchanges and futures exchanges; 
laws and regulations on market entry, such as an "enterprise 
registration law" and certain special laws and regulations on 
market admission (such as on securities, futures, catering, and 
special trades); laws and regulations on market transactions, 
mainly a "law against illegitimate competition," a prices law, 
laws on commodity quality, etc; laws and regulations on 
protection of rights and interests to protect the legitimate 
rights and interests of producers, operators, and consumers, 
such as a "law on protection of the rights and interests of 
consumers," a "patent law," a "trademark law," and antidumping 
and antisubsidy laws and regulations regarding foreign economic 
relations; laws and regulations on market regulation and 
control, such as establishing laws and regulations on a reserve 
system, a market regulation funds system, and a state order 
system; and laws and regulations concerning market mediation, 
arbitration, and market supervision and management. 
  While paying special attention to improving the system of 
market laws and regulations, it is also necessary to build up an 
effective market supervisory and management system to ensure the 
implementation of various laws and regulations. A new market 
supervisory and management system should be one that operates in 
all directions, at different levels, and with a clear-cut 
division of labor. First, it is necessary to create and improve 
a self- supervisory and management system, including improvement 
in the management system within enterprises, strengthening 
occupational morality and legal system education, 
conscientiously observing discipline and abiding by the law, and 
self-disciplinary management within trades and places of various 
kinds of centralized transactions, such as open markets, 
commodity wholesale markets, stock exchanges, occupation 
exchanges, and technology exchange markets. It is also 
necessary to work out rules and regulations within organizations 
to standardize transaction behavior and constrain market 
principals to carry out operations according to law. Second, 
create and improve a social and public supervisory system. 
Bring into play the masses' supervisory functions of consumer 
associations and staff and worker price supervision 
organizations, and bring into play the public opinion 
supervisory functions of the mass media. Third, create and 
improve an administrative and judicial supervisory and 
management system. It is necessary to build up an authoritative 
market law enforcement and supervisory organization to carry out 
inspection and supervision of various types of market behavior, 
protect legitimate operations, ban illegal operations, maintain 
open, impartial and fair transactions, and protect the 
legitimate rights and interest of operators and consumers, so 
that laws shall be abided by and transgression of laws shall be 
punished. Criminal behavior that sabotages market order shall 
be dealt with by judicial departments according to law. 
Resolutely punish lawbreaking behavior of producing and selling 
forged and inferior commodities and despots that lord it over 
trades and market. 

