BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 24 (KCNA) -- A national meeting was 
held at the 6,000-seat theatre of the February 8 House of 
Culture today to mark the 62nd anniversary of the founding of 
the heroic Korean People's Army [KPA] (April 25, 1932). 
  A portrait of the great leader President Kim Il-song was 
placed on the platform of the meeting hall. 
  The meeting was attended by KPA Marshal O Chin-u, Presidium 
member of the Political Bureau of the C.C. [Central Committee], 
the Workers' Party of Korea [WPK], first vice-chairman of the 
National Defence Commission of the DPRK, member of the party 
Central Military Commission and minister of People's Armed 
Forces; Vice-President Pak Song-chol who is Politburo member of 
the C.C., the WPK; and other senior party and government 
officials and officers and men of the Korean People's Army and 
working people in the city. 
  Members of delegations and visiting groups of the General 
Association of Korean Residents in Japan [Chongnyon] staying in 
the socialist homeland were also present. 
  Military attaches of foreign embassies here were invited to 
the meeting. 
  Vice Marshal of the KPA Kim Kwang-chin, member of the 
National Defence Commission of the DPRK, made a report at the 
meeting. 
  The reporter recalled that the cause of building 
revolutionary Armed Forces in Korea was started [by] the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song and has been promoted constantly 
under the leadership of the party and the leader along with the 
victorious advance of the revolutionary cause of chuche. 
  When he was hewing the path of the Korean revolution, 
Comrade 
Kim Il-song deeply analysed the historical lessons of the 
anti-Japanese national-liberation movement of Korea and put 
forward the policy of organising an armed struggle against 
Japanese imperialism and building a genuine revolutionary Armed 
Forces to that end. 
  Basing himself on the solid political and military 
foundation 
he had laid through his energetic efforts to carry out the 
policy, he founded the Korean People's Revolutionary Army on 
April 25, 1932 and proclaimed the founding of the revolutionary 
Armed Forces of Korea to the world. 
  The reporter pointed out that over the past 60 odd years, 
the 
revolutionary Armed Forces of Korea have traversed a proud 
course of victory through a rigorous and arduous struggle and 
performed immortal feats which will shine long in the history of 
the country by their heroic struggle. 
  The reporter quoted Comrade Kim Chong-il, respected supreme 
commander, as saying: 
  "Our People's Army has waged a heroic struggle to safeguard 
the party and the leader and defend the motherland and gains of 
revolution and performed great exploits for the party and the 
revolution." 
  Comrade Kim Il-song strengthened the Korean People's 
Revolutionary Army into the regular Korean People's Army in a 
short period after the liberation of the country, drawing on the 
noble traditions of building revolutionary Armed Forces which 
had been established during the anti-Japanese revolutionary 
struggle. 
  The invincible might of the KPA was fully demonstrated in 
the 
fatherland liberation war. 
  In the great fatherland liberation war, the KPA officers and 
men inflicted a disgraceful defeat on the U.S. imperialist 
aggressors, who had boasted of being the "mightiest" in the 
world, and honorably defended the independence of the country 
and the sovereignty of the nation, giving full play to mass 
heroism and unexcelled self-sacrificing spirit. 
  The reporter noted that the KPA has entered a new historical 
period in its development under the outstanding and tested 
leadership of Supreme Commander Comrade Kim Chong-il and that a 
radical progress has taken place in all spheres of Army building. 
  The entire ranks of the KPA are filled with the 
death-defying 
resolution to remain loyal with a single heart to the party's 
leadership in whatever storm and stress and become a fortress 
and shield to defend the respected comrade supreme commander. 
  Under his leadership, the KPA has grown to be a unit of 
loyal 
combatants ready to dedicate their lives for the party and the 
leader and a strong Army equipped with powerful means of both 
attack and defence, each man of which is a match for a hundred 
foes. 
  Along with the KPA, the combat capabilities of the 
worker-peasant red guards and the young red guards have been 
strengthened considerably, all people are armed and the whole 
country has been consolidated as an impregnable fortress. 
  We can say confidently that as long as we have the 
invincible 
revolutionary Armed Forces and the all-people defence system 
with the KPA as the core, we can destroy any aggressors and 
firmly defend the cause of the party, the cause of socialism. 
  The noble achievements and imperishable exploits of our 
revolutionary Armed Forces are a brilliant victory of the 
chuche-based military idea of Comrade Kim Il-song and Comrade 
Kim Chong-il and results of the outstanding and tested guidance 
of the party and the leader. 
  Referring to the grave situation created on the Korean 
peninsula by the reckless military threats and war moves of the 
U.S. imperialists and the South Korean puppet clique, the 
reporter declared: 
  We will never look at it with folded arms. 
  Although the U.S. imperialists and the international 
reactionaries are desperately trying to isolate and stifle the 
DPRK and destroy Korean socialism over the "nuclear issue," no 
amount of pressure and threat can frighten our people and no 
strong arm and attempt to stifle the DPRK can work on us. 
  Our people are a people of decision who do not like an empty 
talk but mean what they say. 
  It is our unshakable position to answer dialogue with 
dialogue, and war with war. 
  Our people who cherish the independence of the nation and 
peace of the country do not want a war but will not beg for 
peace while leaving their dignity violated. 
  If the U.S. imperialists and their followers unleash a war 
in 
Korea, going against the trend of the times, our people and 
People's Army will fight it out for the party and the leader and 
for our socialist motherland which has been defended at the cost 
of blood, wipe out the aggressors to the last man and 
demonstrate the stamina of heroic Korea once again. 

