Language: <F P=105> German, </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by LUK] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Perfect Minimizers </H5>
  A team of scientists at the Trier University has analyzed 
170 
environmental engineering enterprises. The result: three recipes 
for success. 
  Everybody is familiar with performance indicators such as 
competitive prices, manufacturing flexibility, filling of market 
niches, reliability of delivery, or technical standard. But the 
FOKUM team (Simone Amann, Simone Schuemmelfeder, Dagmar 
Stupperich, Dirk Wolter, Martin Fontanari, Markus Keller) did 
not take it so easily. "analyzing over 50 performance indicators 
was found to be an extremely complex task" groans research 
director Fontanari. It has become obvious at first glance that 
no enterprise can successfully optimize all performance 
indicators. "We were therefore interested in which aspects of 
performance are being enhanced and also which groups of 
enterprises are focusing on the same combinations of performance 
indicators." 
  Using a special statistical evaluation process, the FOKUM 
team arrived at three types of strategy by which the leading 
contestants have entered the market. 
  FORMULAS FOR SUCCESS: Three splendid types of 
strategy 
  Type 1: 


    -  making products of high technical quality, 
  -  reducing production costs, 
  -  customer assistance, 
  -  volume expansion, 
  -  wholesale distribution, 
  -  , 
  -  Cost Leader. 

    Type 2: 


    -  filling market niches, 
  -  filling diverse market segments, 
  -  comprehensive customer assistance, 
  -  package deals, 
  -  engineering design of products, 
  -  image building, 
  -  , 
  -  Customer-Oriented Package Deal Designer 

    Type 3: 


    -  filling market niches and diverse market segments, 
  -  comprehensive customer assistance, 
  -  package deals, 
  -  image building and advertising, 
  -  securing technical advantage, 
  -  streamlining and optimization of production sector, 
  -  competitive pricing 
  - 
  -  Customer-Oriented Cost Minimizer 

    The first type of strategy surpasses the customer-oriented 
second and third types with competence in volume expansion and 
wholesale distribution. This suggest series production. Only a 
minority of enterprises can do the trick of holding their ground 
exclusively in price competition on a market oriented toward 
individual customers. These are mostly small medium-size 
enterprises and genuine providers of environmental engineering 
products, mainly to soil and waste treatment, clean air 
protection, and power technology sectors of industry. Half of 
them do not invest in new technologies but consider improvements 
only. They are not at all interested in collaboration with other 
enterprises. 
  The second type of strategy is entirely different. 
Characterized by an excellent production technology, it helps 
enterprises acquire an image of first-rate manufacturers. This 
type of strategy emphasizes customer assistance and individually 
designed high-value deals. It does not lead to a higher 
production efficiency in terms of neat cost reduction measures, 
neither does it contribute to competitive pricing. It will make 
a difference in quality and service only. Small to medium-size 
enterprises using this type of strategy are genuine providers of 
technical know-how in water treatment as well as in soil and 
waste treatment. They rely on uniquely high quality of products 
and close rapport with customer. Half of them invest in new 
technologies, mostly from net earnings, and expect to gain 
competitive advantages by collaboration with others. 
  The "customer-oriented cost minimizing" third type of 
strategy is perfect. Enterprises using it have achieved 
"quadrature of the circle", because they offer a difference in 
customer-orientation and product quality while being at the same 
time able to offer competitive prices. This type of strategy 
makes winners in the product quality contest. Enterprises using 
it have most modern production facilities and can afford to pass 
their cost advantage along to customers in terms of lower prices 
so as to thus gain latitude securing, say, investments in 
manufacturing technologies. Among them are large enterprises 
which diversify in the environmental market and fill niches in 
it. Customers for their products are first of all water 
treatment, clean air protection, and peripheral sectors of the 
environmental industry. Firms using this type of strategy invest 
mostly in improvement of technologies. Every second such 
enterprise expects to gain competitive advantages by 
collaboration. 

