Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Chamber of Deputies President Inocencio </F>
Oliveira, Liberal Front Party-Pernambuco State, by Joao Domingos 
in Brasilia; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [Domingos] Some of the 16 congressmen who will 
be stripped of their political rights by the budget CPI 
[Congressional Investigating Committee], like Ibsen Pinheiro, 
are your friends. Will you vote in favor of stripping him of his 
political rights? 
  [Oliveira] I will not have any misgivings in voting in favor 
of stripping anyone of his or her political rights. At this 
moment, not a single congressman can have this type of 
misgiving. A congressman must act according to his or her 
conscience, in keeping with the superior interests of the 
Brazilian nation. If the Constitution and Justice Committee 
decides a congressman is guilty, its judgment will be very 
important for the plenary's guidance. 
  [Domingos] Don't you fear that the Chamber of Deputies will 
take a corporatist attitude and save guilty congressmen from 
being stripped of their political rights? 
  [Oliveira] In my opinion, if the legislative branch's 
credibility is jeopardized we must take this jeopardy into 
account so that we vote in defense of the institution. I 
currently note that corporatism in the Chamber of Deputies, a 
weakness attributed to our branch to allegedly defend certain 
people, is not merely being aimed at a given congressman, but at 
our institution. 
  [Domingos] Concerning the approval of a pardon for the 
farmers who owe money to the Bank of Brazil, wasn't this a 
demonstration of corporatism, headed by the rural bloc? 
  [Oliveira] In my opinion, the pardon was an exceptional 
vote. When it was voted on, many voted without an in-depth 
discussion of this issue. Therefore, we took a position: Not a 
single bill scheduled for urgent discussion will be voted on 
during the same session, but within 24 hours so that all 
congressmen can become familiar with the issue they are 
discussing and voting on. Now it is up to the Senate to play 
its role, that is, to review the Chamber of Deputies' work. 
Therefore, we are calm because the legislative branch's work is 
not completed by merely voting. If any changes are made in the 
Senate, the bill will be returned to the Chamber of Deputies and 
then it will actually be discussed thoroughly. [passage omitted] 
  [Domingos] How would you describe the events experienced by 
the legislative branch in our country? 
  [Oliveira] I believe the legislative branch in Brazil is 
experiencing one of the most difficult periods in its history. 
Therefore, it is necessary to be aware that, at this moment, it 
is essential to place the institution's interests above party or 
personal interests or any other type of interests. We are 
making a huge effort to demonstrate to our fellow congressmen 
that this time requires everyone's sense of responsibility. The 
Chamber of Deputies president's or the Senate president's 
responsibility is even greater because, as branch heads, their 
contribution to democracy must be greater. 
  [Domingos] Why are you saying that this is the legislative 
branch's most difficult period? 
  [Oliveira] It is the most difficult period because the 
legislative branch, which is dissecting itself, investigating 
itself, and will punish itself, is a branch that is experiencing 
a huge trauma. The legislative branch may learn some lessons 
from this trauma and it may be strengthened in the end because 
it will become a branch with moral authority and credibility. 
During the three months of the budget CPI's operation the 
country was immobilized. Everything in this country revolves 
around the legislative branch. During the CPI's operation, the 
branch that discussed the major domestic problems was the branch 
that headed society's discussions. This branch cannot remain 
stagnant. We are acting in a different way than Italy, for 
example, where the Clean Hands Operation is being conducted by 
the Attorney General's Office and the judicial branch. In 
Brazil, this operation is being conducted by the legislative 
branch itself. 

