Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Direct Line" question and answer session with Yevhen </F>
Kyrylovych Marchuk, chairman of Ukraine's Security Service; 
organized by Olena Hubina, Anatoliy Martsynovskyy, and 
Vladyslava Hrechana: "Do We Have Our Spies in America?"] 
  [Excerpts] 
  [Volodymyr Bodenchuk, MOLOD UKRAYINY editor in chief] Yevhen 
Kyrylovych, they say that it is better to learn from other 
peoples' mistakes than from one's own. In recent years, there 
has been much talk in the press on the tremendous changes and 
effective work of the Russian special services. The 
Dzerzhinskiy monument was demolished and an edict was issued on 
reorganizing the security service into an intelligence agency. 
We recall a case when, after Kryuchkov [former KGB chief], 
there came a person who only stayed at his post for a few days. 
Against the backdrop of these "stormy events," it seems that 
everything is too quiet in Ukraine. However, we understand that 
things cannot remain the same and some evolution and 
restructuring must be under way in Ukraine's Security 
Service.... Please tell us about this. 
  [Marchuk] The thing is that in Ukraine, at the very 
beginning, the Security Service underwent something that has not 
been done in Russia. It is only now, after Yeltsin disbanded 
the Security Ministry, that they used the method for forming the 
service as had been employed in Ukraine. Ukraine's Supreme 
Council created a special commission for forming the Security 
Service and Counterintelligence. This commission is represented 
by the entire range of political forces. The commission, 
together with specialists, elaborated the structure of the 
Security Service, its functions, and the numerical strength. 
Then all of my deputies and other leaders (the head of the 
service was approved by the Supreme Council itself) had to pass 
through the scrutiny of the commission. Their files, past work 
in the KGB, and personal qualities were studied there. As a 
result, about one-third of the candidates did not pass the 
scrutiny. A strictly democratic principle was applied here in 
full. In Russia, it was not used. Everything has remained the 
same and only the name has changed. 
  The mechanism of control over the Security Service in 
Ukraine 
also differs from that in Russia. I reported several times at 
closed sessions of the aforementioned Supreme Council commission 
and at a closed meeting, which considered the questions of 
national security at the Supreme Council proper. There is 
control on the part of the Procurator's Office and presidential 
structures. In addition to that, at least once a week, the 
president himself meets with the head of the Security Service. 
Also, in accordance with the law, a written report on the work 
of the Security Service is submitted, once a year, to the 
Supreme Council and to the president. 
  Unlike in Russia, some subdivisions and rayon departments of 
the Security service have been reduced in numerical strength. 
The priorities, trends, and ideology of the Intelligence 
Service have completely changed. The Administration for the 
Protection of National Statehood and Territorial Integrity, even 
though it retains between 15 and 20 officers from among those, 
who used to work for the old 5th, or Ideological Directorate, 
but 120 others, who were there in the past, are no longer 
employed. At present, the formation of this directorate 
proceeds through trials and tribulations. However, certain 
principles of counterintelligence have remained unchanged. 
Because intelligence services of other states continue working 
in Ukraine as before and, in some directions, even more 
thoroughly and in greater depth.... Still, I cannot say that 
they resort to methods of sabotage -- we do not have any such 
information. 
  [Bodenchuk] If this is not a secret, could you tell us how 
the numerical strength of the Security Service has changed? 
  [Marchuk] As a matter of fact, Ukraine did not have its own 
Security Service. We did not have an independent 
infrastructure, such as exist in Romania, Poland, or the United 
States. Many components of this structure were stationed in 
Moscow. We had to create something here. The only thing that I 
will tell you is that the quantity of operational subdivisions 
and operational officers has not increased. However, we have 
incorporated those subdivisions that were recently referred to 
as "special departments" -- the military counterintelligence. 
We are presently restructuring them. 
  The former ideological department has no "consumer," and, 
therefore, the structure itself no longer exists. Instead, 
there emerge structures, which we did not have before. For 
example, governmental communications. In Ukraine, there were 
several regiments servicing governmental communications, but 
they were directly subordinated to Moscow. However, in the 
past, they were maintained for one purpose and now -- for a 
different one. For example, here in Ukraine, we have places 
where there is no high- frequency communication, especially in 
the eastern region. There were a few cases when some tragedy 
happened, such as an accident in a mine, and there was no 
reliable communication. 
  Take also the classified communications for the state 
leadership in the case of extraordinary events. This is what 
these forces are for. 
  [Passage omitted on Marchuk's religious convictions and 
moral 
principles]. 
  [LIBERALNA HAZETA columnist Heorhiy Bursov] We know from the 
press about the case when an officer of Ukraine's Security 
Service went to Poland on a private visit and was arrested, 
because the Polish side had not been notified on the trip and 
found it harmful. Caring about Ukraine's security, does 
Ukraine's Security Service detain Russian Security Service 
officers when they cross the Ukrainian "transparent" borders? 
Also when they arrive to the Crimea on private business. 
  [Marchuk] You referred to Major Lysenko from Lvov Oblast who 
was arrested in Poland. Court proceedings are now in progress, 
although they were postponed several times. From the very 
beginning, we officially informed the Polish side and the 
leadership of Polish special services, through the channels of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Embassy, and the state 
leadership, that this is nothing but a provocation on the part 
of some political forces in Poland that managed to put pressure 
upon the special services to arrest our officer. My adviser for 
legal issues, General Prystayko, is presently in Poland. 
Together with representatives of the Embassy, he is doing 
everything to settle the conflict [Lysenko has meanwhile been 
deported to Ukraine, see ld0803235694 Kiev Radio Ukraine World 
Service Ukrainian 0803190094 -- Official Calls Polish Sentence 
of `Spy' Provocation]. 
  As regards officers of the [Russian] Federal 
Counterintelligence Service.... You mean them? 
  [Bursov] Yes. 
  [Marchuk] The thing is that, when we are informed that 
somebody is arriving on private business or to visit parents 
(the Federal Service of Russian Counterintelligence employs many 
people of Ukrainian descent) and when this procedure is 
coordinated, there are no problems. However, with regard to 
strictly official matters, we have an agreement with the Russian 
special service. In those cases when there is mutual interest, 
we go to them and they come to us. Incidentally, a group from 
the Russian Counterintelligence Service is presently in Kiev, 
and we are jointly planning a complicated operation. We did not 
have to deal with cases of anybody from the Russian Federal 
Counterintelligence engaging in some secret subversive activity 
here. 
  [Bursov] However, one can expect that there may be such 
attempts precisely on the part of Russia -- we know about its 
internal political situation. 
  [Marchuk] There exist such principles in the cooperation 
with special services of other countries: Trust, but check. In 
other words, no matter with whom we cooperate, we have our own 
interests, national priorities, and priority interests of 
special services. That is why corresponding preventive measures 
are taken to foil activities of foreign special services on the 
territory of Ukraine. 
  [Bursov] Spies are being caught everywhere in the world, but 
we did not hear about your boys catching somebody. Or maybe 
such things are hushed up? 
  [Marchuk] We recently gave the mass media information to the 
effect that two persons, who had engaged in espionage on the 
territory of Ukraine, were not only arrested, but also 
sentenced. One of them is a person without citizenship and the 
other -- a Ukrainian citizen. We also revealed 11 persons, who 
passed intelligence information to foreign states. However, as 
they say, it is a tactical, technical, and legal matter -- how 
to conclude this whole case. 
  [Bursov] At least, there were no corresponding notes from 
Ukraine's Ministry of Foreign Affairs to governments of foreign 
countries. 
  [Marchuk] It is sometimes more advantageous not to issue 
notes, but to keep the situation under control. 
  [Bursov] I understand you: In order not to scare off bigger 
game? I thank you! 
  [Passage omitted on alleged corruption at a local factory, 
lack of discipline, alleged surveillance of stamp collector, 
violations in the election campaign, national symbols, problems 
of housing for security officers] 
  [Roman Volodymyrovych Lebedyn from Kiev] Tell me, please, 
whether there are Ukrainian spies in the United States. 
  [Marchuk] Not a single security service will say anything 
about this. We have what the state needs. Perhaps, not as much 
as necessary and not everywhere. 
  [Lebedyn] There should be more? Just express your opinion: 
Do we need more? 
  [Marchuk] If I had been a private person and answered your 
question, it would have been one matter. However, if I, as an 
official, say this publicly, tomorrow, there will already be a 
note from the U.S. Government, especially on the eve of the 
president's trip to the United States.... There are Russian 
spies there. There have recently been reports in the press 
about such a spy uncovered by the CIA. 
  [Lebedyn] What do you do in order to prevent the uncovering 
of Ukrainian spies? 
  [Marchuk] If they haven't been uncovered then they haven't 
been uncovered. I am joking. However, seriously speaking, this 
is a quite specific matter, which cannot be discussed in public. 
  [Lebedyn] One more thing. We want to elect honest and 
decent people as deputies. What X-rays do you have to check 
this? 
  [Marchuk] Fortunately, the Security Service is not the kind 
of institution that provides reports on whether a candidate for 
deputy is honest or not. This is up to the voters to decide. 
  [Lebedyn] However, when you employ people, you check them, 
don't you? 
  [Marchuk] We are authorized to do so by the law. Those 
people who come to us, consciously and voluntarily agree to 
certain restrictions of their rights. For example, they cannot 
engage in commercial activity and some other things. 
  [Lebedyn] In the United States, they have a lie detector. 
Do we also have it? 
  [Marchuk] The lie detector is not the main thing. The 
person must have scruples. No detector can sense a 
transformation in somebody's personality over time. 
  [Passage omitted on combating economic crime] 
  [Yuriy Kreminskyy, engineer from Kiev] There are 
increasingly frequent reports in the press about anti-Ukrainian 
actions in the Crimea. A procession was organized in Simferopol 
with a coffin bearing an inscription "Independent Ukraine," 
which was then burned in a public square and buried in a 
previously dug pit, and a person was thrown out of a trolleybus 
for speaking Ukrainian. Or a serviceman with a trident 
[Ukrainian national symbol] on his cockade is beaten up. Quite 
recently, it was reported that with Meshkov's coming to power, 
Russian chauvinists let themselves go: Journalists are dismissed 
from Ukrainian editorial boards and threatened with physical 
reprisals. On 28 February, the Ukrainian Radio "Novyny" [News] 
program carried information to the effect that a television 
correspondent in Yalta cannot appear in the street -- people 
spit on her for the only reason that she conducts her programs 
in Ukrainian. The main thing is that nobody is held answerable 
for these antistate actions. Once revolutionaries gathered in 
underground groupings, then they went to streets with calls to 
overthrow the power and carried out terrorist acts. Later they 
organized an armed uprising. I believe that all of this, with 
the exception, so far, of an armed uprising, is present in the 
Crimea. What are you waiting for, Mr. Marchuk? 
  [Marchuk] Everything you have just mentioned is scandalous. 
These are bad signs, which point to tension in the Crimea. 
However, all of these actions must be specifically identified 
and studied in each specific case from the point of view of 
taking particular measures. If, for example, a journalist is 
dismissed from his job, we must find out who, why, and on what 
grounds. However, on the whole, all of these signs are, in 
fact, political in character and are instigated by some 
political forces in the Crimea. As for measures that are taken 
by the Security Service.... Unfortunately, I cannot disclose 
publicly what methods we are using. I can only say one thing: 
The situation in the Crimea would have been much worse if we 
had not taken such measures. 
  Generally speaking, the threat of decentralizing our state 
is 
among those which occupy a major place on the list of priorities 
of Ukraine's national security. For various reasons -- 
historical, economic, and political -- elements of this threat 
are concentrated in the Crimea. However, on the other hand, I 
wouldn't overdramatize the situation in the Crimea, as sounded 
in the question on the "Yugoslav Variant." This will not 
happen. The situation is totally different. We have sufficient 
forces and possibilities to prevent the Yugoslav variant from 
happening. 
  At the same time, there are a number of political forces in 
the Crimea that conduct propaganda activity detrimental to 
Ukraine. However, I emphasize once again that there is political 
propaganda activity conducted by Crimean political structures 
and their leaders who are creating this atmosphere. From the 
point of view of the Criminal Code, there is nothing illegal 
about them. That is why methods to deal with this phenomenon 
must be of corresponding nature. For any propaganda there must 
be counter-propaganda -- more effective, resourceful, and 
meaningful. I understand the patriotic aspirations of some 
people's deputies and their desire to somehow improve the 
situation in the Crimea. Unfortunately, however, by some of 
their actions and even visits they further exacerbated the 
situation instead of easing it. Here we must reckon with the 
fact that 1.2 million residents of the peninsula voted for 
Crimean President Meshkov. In other words, he is a legitimate 
president. The majority of the Crimeans expressed their attitude 
toward the situation by voting for Meshkov. Would you want to 
take measures against 1.2 million citizens? History knows such 
cases and God forbid their recurrence! 
  We are doing everything that special services are supposed 
to 
do, and under appropriate control. What we are doing is within 
the framework of Ukrainian laws. However, I am absolutely 
convinced that it is only in a centralized way, with the help of 
a well weighed and strategically planned internal national 
policy, pursued with regard to all regions -- not just the 
Crimea, but also Donbass, Transcarpathia, and Bukovyna -- that 
we will be able to resolve such problems in good time and in a 
quiet and civilized manner. It goes without saying that a 
certain role must be assigned to the Security Service, the 
Procurator's Office, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
  Ukrainian legislation provides for the case of 
responsibility 
for stirring up interethnic hostility. However, the situation 
is such that the first person who is called to account for 
antistate activity could in a certain environment become a 
"national hero," or there will emerge a powerful concentration 
of problems around that person, something that is even more 
undesirable for Ukraine. Foreign-based defense funds will be 
created, hunger strikes will be held, and the press in 
neighboring countries will talk about this -- immediately 
various support committees will appear. Of course, if the law 
is violated, such people must be called to account no matter 
what. However, I give preference to political methods of 
neutralizing such phenomena. If one person says something, this 
is not yet politics, but when 1,200,000 persons have such 
sentiments, this is already politics. This means that it is 
necessary to look at the situation seriously and to analyze the 
shortcomings.... 
  I know that the new Crimean administration has encountered 
economic problems. As a result, holding rallies has become 
secondary or even minor, since it has become necessary to 
resolve specific economic problems on a daily basis. A 
delegation of the Crimean Council of Ministers arrived in Kiev 
to discuss its budget and correlate it with the general 
Ukrainian one. Kiev showed an example of tolerance and, at the 
same time, of principled policy regarding the Crimea. The 
Crimea is a part of Ukraine, and there is no doubt about it. 
However, those aspects of economic activity for which the 
Crimean leadership has assumed responsibility have been shifted 
to it in full. 
  Regarding Crimea, I would like to offer this conclusion. If 
we pursue a restrained but far-sighted internal national policy 
(work on this is in progress) and a restrained economic policy 
-- the Crimea and Ukraine, the Crimea in Ukraine, and the Crimea 
through Ukraine -- in our relations with foreign countries and 
when the economic situation in the state improves, I am 
absolutely convinced that many questions will be removed from 
the agenda in the Crimean situation. However paradoxical it may 
sound, the present situation in the Crimea is much quietier than 
it was two months ago. Because much had been done from a 
political point of view, and then it was the turn of economic 
issues. 
  My view of the problem: The situation in the Crimea will be 
complex. The point is that there are certain political 
structures in Russia -- not only Zhirinovskiy -- that advance 
great-power slogans. It would be naive to believe that this 
question can be removed from the agenda. However, Ukraine has a 
serious and powerful argument -- the tripartite statement by the 
presidents of Ukraine, Russia, and the United States whereby the 
latter two states guarantee Ukraine's integrity. This argument 
will work, because the world is not what it used to be 30 or 
even 10 years ago. More specifically, all of this will remain 
under serious international control. This will lead to a 
gradual stabilization of the situation in the Crimea. 
  [Passage omitted in which Marchuk condemns the sale of 
Hitler's "Mein Kampf" in Ukraine, but says that no legal action 
can be taken in this case] 
  [Bodenchuk] There are many letters where it is stressed 
that, in the past, our special service had no secrets from 
Moscow. Today, a part of the former Union service has become 
ours. Is something being done to create our own normal and 
independent special service? 
  [Marchuk] This problem has yet another aspect: Owing to 
those mutual relations, we also know much about what is going on 
in Moscow. Not as a result of some special actions. As regards 
our own secrets.... True, starting from 1991, our own state 
secrets began to form. I can assure you that they are already 
protected by our own methods. Today, Ukraine is within a single 
secret communication network -- the so-called high-frequency 
communication. It is now possible to make a phone call from Kiev 
to Ashgabat, Khabarovsk, St. Petersburg, or Minsk -- any place 
within the CIS. We also have closed communication with the 
Ukrainian Embassy in the United States. 
  State secrets are one thing, but there also exist secret 
methods used by special services. In some areas, we cooperate 
and exchange secrets, but where the secrets are strictly ours, 
they remain such. Regarding our operational possibilities, 
especially where this is associated with foreign countries, 
nobody is supposed to know them. This process is not developing 
smoothly in our country, and the Law on State Secrets was only 
recently adopted. The technology of its implementation has not 
yet been properly elaborated, but this does not apply to our 
institution. Our experience and technology of implementing it 
are more advanced than other state structures. There are 
especially many problems in the scientific and technological 
sphere. In the past, many scientific research institutes 
cooperated closely -- Novosibirsk, Dnipropetrovsk, Kiev, 
Moscow, and others, and the academicians have long worked on the 
same projects, which were classified.... 
  [Olena Hubina, head of the MOLOD UKRAYINY political section] 
Much has recently been written about relations between the law- 
enforcement bodies, including the security services, and the 
UNSO [Ukrainian National Self-Defense]. What can you say about 
this. 
  [Marchuk] We have no relations with the UNSO. There is the 
UNSO and there is Ukraine's Security Service. The relevant 
article of the Criminal Code that was adopted fairly recently 
falls under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs. That is why the Ministry recently initiated a criminal 
case against a group of UNSO members -- there were specific 
facts associated with weapons. The Ministry of Internal Affairs 
is conducting an investigation. Since this problem is not purely 
criminal, but involves political aspects and also contains 
certain nuances that are relevant to the problem of national 
security, mainly civic accord and social peace, we also assist 
in this work. 
  Regarding specific actions on the part of the UNSO, if there 
is at least one group action involving the use of force, no 
matter what article of the law is violated and in whose 
jurisdiction it is, all corresponding measures will be used. 
The law grants such rights to the Security Service, the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Procurator's Office, and the 
Ministry of Justice. By its actions, the UNSO may instigate a 
serious conflict, while earnestly believing that it is 
performing some highly patriotic deed. However, any political 
activity conducted by any organization that involves group 
actions and the use of force, not to mention weapons, must be 
removed from the political arena. This will undoubtedly take 
place in our society, with or without compliance on the part of 
such groups. 
  [Passage omitted on the KGB archives, which are now open] 
  [Bodenchuk] Yevhen Kyrylovych, the time assigned for 
telephone calls is up. Thank you for the conversation. 
Perhaps, you would like to take the opportunity to add 
something that was not touched upon today. 
  [Marchuk] I want to stress the following point. The money 
that we confiscate from criminals -- both in karbovantsi 
[Ukrainian coupons] [K] and in freely convertible currency -- 
would be enough to finance the Security Service. In last year's 
criminal cases alone, the amount of cash confiscated exceeded 
the Security Service's budget. As a result of examining about 
104 various departments, jointly with the tax inspection, but in 
accordance with our findings, tens of millions of dollars were 
confiscated and returned to the state. We prevented the use of 
counterfeit advice notes in the banking system and returned 
about K540 million to the state. Thanks to canceling contracts 
that might cause financial losses to Ukraine $523 million were 
saved. 
  By this I am stressing that the Security Service does not 
only spend money, but it also returns it to the state. We have 
administrations that could exist perfectly independently in 
conditions of profit and loss accounting. The "K" 
administration, the Intelligence directorate, and the Kiev, 
Donetsk, Lvov, and Khmelnytskyy administrations returned to the 
state more than was spent on running them. 
  I myself have said several times in the Supreme Council 
sessions that the Security Service must be financed solely by 
the state budget and should not depend upon any interest on 
profits. However, today, the situation is, unfortunately, such 
that we are raising the question of getting some interest (we 
are asking for 30 percent and will accept what we are offered) 
in order to at least temporarily finance specific types of 
activity. Mainly to finance the struggle against crime. 
  Second. We already have some indications that one of the 
political structures is unleashing an organized campaign against 
the Security Service. Our trouble lies in the fact that we know 
a lot but cannot say everything publicly. Well, we know who is 
doing this and for whose money. However, we can only talk about 
this after the court proceedings are over. There is still a 
very long way to the trial. Generally speaking, is it worth 
holding a trial at all? 
  God knows that we did not start this whole affair. Nor do we 
want to settle accounts. We react to criticism absolutely 
normally. However, when a person or a structure starts flinging 
mud at us at rallies, without having any arguments or idea about 
the work of the Security Service, this is already political 
activity and not criticism. 
  It is also known to us that some foreign structures are 
trying to interfere in the election campaign in Ukraine. Not to 
mention the fact that criminal capital is looking for ways to 
interfere in the election system. We know all of these cases in 
detail, as well as the amount of capital and personalities 
involved. When the necessary situation arises and when precise 
evidence is collected, we will inform the Central Electoral 
Commission and the media. Some people blame us for persecuting 
public organizations. However, we are beginning to unravel the 
chain from a different side, and it is not our fault where it is 
going to lead us. 
  Third. A strong potential for a fundamental work aimed at 
defending the state is being created within the Security 
Service. We are gaining experience. At our initiative, a 
corresponding legal foundation has also been created, although 
there is still much to be done there. We feel serious support 
on the part of the Supreme Council, its leadership, the 
president, and the government. I am convinced that all of these 
problems in the economic sphere and especially the political 
tension are a normal phenomenon from the point of view of 
political struggle. However, we have ways, equipment, and 
technology to put an end to all antistate activity. We are 
keeping antistate structures under control. This is our direct 
duty. I am sure that the people will support us in this. 
  [Hubina] If possible, one last question. Is there anything 
new in the case of Mykhaylo Boychyshyn [Rukh activist abducted 
in January 1994]? 
  [Marchuk] There are several well argumented versions. The 
investigation is being conducted by the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs with our active participation. A special group 
involving our officers has been created. I cannot say anything 
specific, because the investigation is in progress. There is 
some quite unexpected, if not sensational information. I think 
that some people would not like it to become public knowledge. 
  [Hubina] Can it be assumed that he is alive? 
  [Marchuk] Yes, of course. Incidentally, we also hope that 
he is alive. Because there are certain indications that.... In 
short, we hope that he is alive. 

