BFN 

  [Text] Lanzhou, April 17 (XINHUA) -- Chinese geologists 
believe that the bulging movement of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau 
affects the the global climate along with the formation of 
plateau monsoons. 
  Extensive investigations beginning last year on this highest 
plateau in the world by a team of Chinese scientists have shown 
that plateau monsoons have a strong influence on sand storm and 
precipitation distribution worldwide. 
  Before the formation of plateaus the global climate was mild 
and humid with little variation in different places, according 
to scientists at the Lanzhou Institute of Plateau Atmospheric 
Physics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in northwest 
China's Gansu Province. 
  In the tertiary period, the scientists said, the 
Qinghai-Tibet plateau began to rise. Consequently the global 
environment and climate started to change. 
  In other words, the swelling of the plateau led to the 
formation of hot low pressure in summer and cold high pressure 
in winter around the plateau, and plateau monsoons began to 
emerge. 
  The scientists estimated that the monsoon formation could be 
traced back as early as 37 million years ago, and it took its 
present form about one million years ago. 
  Such changes in atmospheric circulation in turn caused sharp 
temperature drops along the earth's medium and high latitudes, 
and the geological distribution of precipitation also began to 
take on monsoon traits. In summer, the land to the east of the 
plateau was humid while the land to the west was dry. 
  About 2.4 million years ago the plateau rose to 1,500 m 
above 
sea level on the average. Now the average elevation is 4,500 m. 
  The scientists said the intensification of circulating 
currents made the climate along the medium and high latitudes of 
the northern hemisphere turn cold, and glacial periods emerged. 
  Monsoons also strengthened the high-altitude subsidence 
airstream in the southwest of the plateau, which resulted in 
drought in northern Africa, with the original forest climate 
turning into a semi-arid climate. Man appeared at this time. 
  On the other hand, due to a strong wind belt two km over the 
land surface caused by the plateau monsoon, the yellow sand 
north of the plateau was stirred up and descended onto the 
northeast of the plateau to form a loess plateau covering 
600,000 sq km over the years. 
  In addition, intensified sunlight reflected on the plateau 
surface after the swelling movement led to abnormal air 
circulation in the entire northern hemisphere. In turn, the 
middle and eastern part of the American continent became humid 
and its western part turned warm and dry. 
  With the aid of satellite data, scientists at the Lanzhou 
Institute of Desert Research found that widespread snowfall and 
glaciers due to the swelling affected the global climate, too. 
  They also discovered that the plateau monsoon accelerated 
the 
speed of wind in spring in the central Asian region, and 
large-scale sand storms emerged in desert areas and places short 
of vegetation, between February and May in particular. 
  Sand particles can be carried as far as the waters of the 
Northern Pacific Ocean and Northwest Indian Ocean. 

