Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Professor Gong Yuzhi [7895 5148 0037] by </F>
staff reporter Gao Lu (7559 6424); date and place not given: 
"From Mao Zedong to Deng Xiaoping"] 
  [Text] I really did not know how to address Gong Yuzhi! 
He was once deputy director of the CPC Central Committee Mao 
Zedong Works Editing and Publication Committee General Office, 
deputy director of the CPC Central Committee Party Literature 
Research Center, and deputy head of the CPC Central Committee 
Propaganda Department. Currently, he is a member of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference National Committee, a 
member of the China Association for Science and Technology 
Standing Committee, a concurrent research fellow of the Central 
Party Literature Research Center, a part-time professor at 
Beijing University, and the instructor of a doctoral course. 
Since the content of the interview was confined to academic and 
theoretical areas, let me call him professor! 
  Professor Gong in his early years was committed to research 
on scientific and technological philosophy and scientific and 
technological policy. Later, he engaged himself in research on 
the works of such older generation proletarian revolutionaries 
as Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping and research on the party's 
current policy theory. His publications in these areas include: 
"Annotations on `The Resolution of Certain Questions in the 
History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People's Republic 
of China'" (principal author), "At the Turning Point of 
History," "From New Democracy to the Initial Stage of 
Socialism," "New Starting Point of Ideological Emancipation," 
"New Starting Point in the Study of Mao Zedong Thought," "Under 
the Banner of Socialism With Chinese Characteristics -- Notes on 
Reading Deng Xiaoping's Works," and "An Outline of a New 
Exposition on Mao Zedong Thought" (co-author). 
  On the centenary of Mao Zedong's birth, this reporter 
interviewed Gong Yuzhi on the relationship between the great 
men, Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, in terms of their thinking 
and theories. 
<H5>  Two Great Men: Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping </H5>
  [Gao] On Mao Zedong's birth centenary, a time to cherish the 
memory of his great contributions, Comrade Mao Zedong's status 
in history has once again become a topic commanding the interest 
of many people. 
  [Gong] Comrade Mao Zedong's status in history should be 
looked at from the broad perspective of China's modern and 
contemporary history. In the 20th century, the great struggle 
of the Chinese nation for liberation and national invigoration 
has produced three great men: Sun Yat-sen, Mao Zedong, and Deng 
Xiaoping. Sun Yat-sen led the 1911 Revolution and overthrew the 
feudal monarchy; Mao Zedong led the new-democratic revolution, 
founded the PRC, accomplished the transition toward socialism, 
and initiated the great cause of Chinese socialism; and now, 
under the guidance of Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, we are upholding the 
basic line of "one center, two basic points" and concentrating 
our energies on building a socialist, modernized, and powerful 
country which is prosperous, democratic, and civilized. Sun 
Yat-sen was the pioneer of the democratic revolution. In the 
context of the history of revolution and construction by the 
Chinese people under the leadership of the CPC, there have been 
two great men: Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. 
  [Gao] Does this mean that China's contemporary history and 
our party history can be divided into two chapters: Mao Zedong 
was the lead singer in the first chapter and Deng Xiaoping is 
the lead singer in the second chapter? 
  [Gong] A historical tragedy happened between the first and 
the second chapters, namely, the "Great Cultural Revolution." 
An important contribution Deng Xiaoping made was to safeguard 
Mao Zedong's status in history with a clear-cut stand and 
appraise Mao Zedong Thought in a scientific way, at the crucial 
historical turning point when the 10-year civil turmoil of the 
"Great Cultural Revolution" had ended and the mistake of the 
"Great Cultural Revolution" was denounced and redressed. This 
was an extraordinary thing to do. He required us to be aware of 
the following fact: Mao Zedong was closely bound up with the 
history of the CPC and the history of the Chinese people's 
revolution. Negating the "Great Cultural Revolution" in no way 
means that Mao Zedong should be, or can be, entirely negated. 
Completely negating Mao Zedong and Mao Zedong Thought is 
nothing short of completely negating the history of the CPC and 
the Chinese people's revolution. There are some people abroad 
who entirely negate the history of the CPC and the Chinese 
people's revolution. The influence of this ideological trend is 
present also within the country. Some people not only negate 
the history of China's socialist period but also the history of 
China's democratic revolution; and negate not only the history 
of the CPC and the Chinese revolution led by Mao Zedong but also 
the history of the Chinese revolution led by the Chinese 
Kuomintang and Sun Yat-sen. I heard a young person state at a 
forum that the most promising period for China's modernization 
was during the age of the Empress Dowager Cixi and Yuan Shikai 
and that, unfortunately, the 1911 Revolution messed up China. I 
was really shocked to hear that. 
  [Gao] It seems that you do have some specific reasons for 
naming the three great men, Sun Yat-sen, Mao Zedong, and Deng 
Xiaoping, from the broad perspective of China's modern and 
contemporary history. 
  [Gong] Comrade Xiaoping said: Without Mao Zedong, we 
probably would still be exploring in the dark. "Mao Zedong 
Thought fostered an entire generation." He put himself in this 
"generation." 
  [Gao] Mao Zedong praised Deng Xiaoping as a "rare talent" 
and spoke highly of him. I heard Mao Zedong once praised 
Comrade Xiaoping more specifically, saying that he was impartial 
and steady in his way of handling things and showed insight when 
tackling problems. Is that true? 
  [Gong] Yes. Mao Zedong made this remark when he was 
recommending Comrade Xiaoping as general secretary. At the 
discussion on the organizational and personnel arrangements for 
the Eighth CPC National Congress, Mao Zedong proposed 
establishing the office of general secretary and recommended 
Comrade Xiaoping to this position. On 13 September 1956, at the 
Seventh Plenary Session of the Seventh CPC Central Committee, 
Mao Zedong explained this arrangement. Comrade Xiaoping 
commented that he was quite content with the position of 
secretary general he was holding at the time. Mao Zedong took 
over and said: China's secretary general is equivalent to 
general secretary in other countries. He said: It is a bit 
awkward but let me do some propaganda and, if everybody agrees, 
it will not be awkward. He then praised Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
strong points. 
  [Gao] It is very necessary to do some propaganda on Mao 
Zedong's "propaganda" on Comrade Xiaoping. 
  [Gong] Mao Zedong said: In my opinion, Deng Xiaoping is 
quite an impartial person. Like me, he is not without 
shortcomings but he is relatively impartial. He is relatively 
talented and capable. If you say he does everything well, that 
is not true. He is like me and has done many wrong things and 
said many wrong things. However, comparatively speaking, he is 
capable. He is relatively careful and impartial. He is an 
honest and kind [hou dao 0624 6670] person and not frightening. 
He also said: He said he is not competent but I think he is. 
There will be people who are unsatisfied with him, just as 
there are people who are not satisfied with me. But, on the 
whole, he is relatively attentive to the overall interests, 
relatively honest and kind, relatively impartial when handling 
problems, and he is very strict with himself if he makes a 
mistake. 
  [Gao] Mao Zedong also made many positive comments on other 
leaders but there are not many who got such a high appraisal 
from him. What do you think are the common points between Mao 
Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. 
  [Gong] I think comparing and studying these two great men is 
very meaningful but one cannot do it with only a few words. As 
far as common points are concerned, I think the most significant 
lies in "seeking truth from facts." It is, first of all, due to 
this common point in their ideological approaches that they 
became the cores of the two generations of the central 
leadership collectives, led the two revolutions, achieved the 
two leaps in the integration of Marxism with China's reality, 
and founded two great theories: Mao Zedong Thought and the 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
  [Gao] This common point is very important and needs an 
extensive analysis. What about other common points? 
  [Gong] As strategists, a big common point with Mao Zedong 
and Deng Xiaoping is their attention to rural areas and the 
peasants. That is, proceeding from solving rural and 
peasant-related issues to solving the problems in China's 
revolution and reform. The revolutionary path of "rural areas 
encircling the cities" initiated by Mao Zedong was a new path, 
different from the revolutionary path followed in the Russian 
Revolution, namely, centering on cities. To establish 
revolutionary bases in rural areas was determined by China's 
national conditions and was a revolutionary path with Chinese 
characteristics. Strategically, and as far as the choice of 
breakthrough point for the reform is concerned, Deng Xiaoping 
also set his eye on rural areas when leading China's reform. 
First, the breakthrough in, and popularization of, the 
peasants' contract responsibility system with remuneration 
linked to output and the new force of township and town 
enterprises suddenly coming to the fore afterward, catalyzed the 
preparation and development of the market economy. In my 
opinion, grasping the issue of rural areas and the peasants in 
China's revolutionary strategy and reform strategy means taking 
hold of China's characteristics. Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping 
both grasped this basic point of strategy. 
  [Gao] Are there any other common points? 
  [Gong] As strategists, Mao Zedong set great store by the 
protracted nature and the imbalance in development of the 
Chinese revolution and Deng Xiaoping also pays close attention 
to the protracted nature and the imbalance in development of the 
Chinese modernization. 
  [Gao] Hoping that China will become rich and powerful as 
soon as possible is also a point shared by Mao Zedong and Deng 
Xiaoping. 
  [Gong] It is also the common point between them and Sun 
Yat-sen and represents the common wish of the Chinese nation. 
<H5>  Two Generations of Central Leadership Collectives </H5>
  [Gao] To my knowledge, the formulation of two-generation 
"central leadership collectives" seemed to have been invented by 
Comrade Xiaoping. Some people think that calling the central 
leadership collective, with Mao Zedong at the core, our party's 
"first-generation central leadership collective" needs some 
explanation. [Gong] That is in terms of the maturity of the 
central leadership. In the history of our party, from the 
founding of the party in 1921 up to the Zunyi Meeting in 1935, 
there were a number of terms of central leadership. In the 
course of exploring the road of Chinese revolution, though the 
earlier central leadership groups scored major pioneering 
achievements and their historic significance cannot be 
obliterated, they were not mature in terms of both revolutionary 
theory and revolutionary practice and struggle. The Zunyi 
Meeting was a great turning point in the history of our party. 
This meeting established Mao Zedong's leading position in the 
CPC Central Committee. Under the leadership of the central 
organ, with Mao Zedong at the core, on the basis of summing up 
the experiences of successes and setbacks in the past, our party 
gradually matured, making it possible for the revolutionary 
cause to move on relatively smoothly, deepened its understanding 
of the Chinese revolution progressively, and formed a set of 
relatively complete and correct theories, lines, principles, and 
policies. The success of the revolution and the maturing of the 
theory brought to the central leadership collective, with Mao 
Zedong at the core, a high prestige among the whole party and 
the people of the whole country. This generation of central 
leadership collective led our party for decades. The socialist 
New China emerging in the east was a great monument to the 
historic contributions made by this generation of the central 
leadership collective. 
  Considering the central leadership collective with Deng 
Xiaoping at the core as our party's "second-generation central 
leadership collective" was also in terms of maturity. This is 
because during the period from Mao Zedong's death in 1976 to the 
convening of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee in 1978, the chief leader of the party central 
committee was not mature. The Third Plenary Session of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee was another great turning point in the 
history of our party. This meeting established the leading 
position of the central leadership collective, with Deng 
Xiaoping at the core, in the whole party. The great practice in 
the past dozen years and the achievements of the reform, opening 
up, and modernization which have attracted worldwide attention, 
all testify to the maturity of the second-generation central 
leadership collective and the correctness of its theory and line. 
  [Gao] Could you please talk about the relationship between 
these two generations of central leadership collectives? 
  [Gong] From the perspective of theory and practice, I think 
one should mention three points, namely, correcting, inheriting, 
and developing, when discussing the relationship between the 
second- generation central leadership collective with Deng 
Xiaoping at the core and the first-generation central leadership 
collective with Mao Zedong at the core. One must mention all 
three points, not just one of them or two of them. 
  [Gao] One tends to be more used to the idea of inheriting 
and developing but, I am afraid, not everybody can accept that 
correcting is included and put in the first place! 
  [Gong] Inheriting and developing are very important. One 
can even say they are the fundamental aspects but, as far as the 
crux of the turn in history is concerned, correcting naturally 
has to come first. It means correcting the mistakes Mao Zedong 
made in theory and practice in his later years. There is a 
basic historical fact here. The civil turmoil of the "Great 
Cultural Revolution" inflicted very severe damage on the people 
of our country and cast the party and country into dire straits. 
Walking out of the shadow of the error of the "Cultural 
Revolution" was the premise of entering the new era. Smashing 
the "gang of four" marked the beginning of the historic turn 
but, in the first two years, the process of the historic turn 
met with difficulty. The problem was the lack of courage, 
resolution, and competence to face the mistakes made by Mao 
Zedong in his later years or to handle properly the matter of 
adhering to the scientific system of Mao Zedong Thought and 
correcting Mao Zedong's mistakes in his later years. How did 
the two "whatevers" and the two years of "progress in the midst 
of marking time" come to be? An important reason is the absence 
of the political and theoretical courage in solving this problem 
and the resolution and competence to reverse and control the 
historical steering wheel. Under these circumstances, Comrade 
Xiaoping, as a proletarian revolutionary, showed his courage, 
insight, resolution, and competence. Comrade Xiaoping was brave 
enough to clearly point out and firmly correct Mao Zedong's 
mistakes in his later years and emphasized that only by 
correcting these mistakes is it possible to truly hold up the 
banner of the scientific system of Mao Zedong Thought. 
Naturally, however, the depth of discussion on mistakes depends 
on the time and place. At the beginning, he said Mao Zedong 
Thought is a scientific system and a phrase or two does not 
represent Mao Zedong Thought; later he said the theory and 
practice of the "Cultural Revolution" were fundamentally wrong. 
This was not just an issue of a phrase or two. This not only 
shows a progression of understanding but is also the art of 
guidance. The new era began with redressing the mistakes of the 
"Cultural Revolution" and "dispelling chaos." Comrade Xiaoping 
defined the term "dispelling chaos and restoring order" as 
follows: "Dispelling the chaos created by Lin Biao and the 
`gang of four,' criticizing Comrade Mao Zedong's mistakes in his 
later years, and returning to the correct track of Mao Zedong 
Thought." 
  [Gao] Your analysis has given me a deeper understanding of 
the following remark made by Comrade Xiaoping: "In many senses, 
we should now start doing the things that Comrade Mao Zedong 
proposed, but did not do, rehabilitate the things that he was 
wrongly against, and make a good job of other things that he did 
not do well." 
  [Gong] The second-generation central leadership collective 
is to accomplish the causes unfulfilled by the first-generation 
leadership with Mao Zedong at the core. This includes 
correcting their mistakes. The second point is inheriting. 
"Restoring order" means inheriting. Dispelling chaos and 
correcting mistakes in no way means negating the past entirely. 
It is definitely wrong to negate what has been proved correct 
in practice. Soon after the Third Plenary Session of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee, Comrade Xiaoping set out the four 
cardinal principles that our party must adhere to. The fourth 
principle is "adhering to Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought." 
Today, we must inherit and adhere to Mao Zedong Thought that 
has been proved to be a scientific principle through China's 
revolutionary practice, including all the positive ideological 
fruit that Mao Zedong accumulated in the course of exploring 
China's own road of building socialism. Without this inheriting 
process, we would negate and disconnect history, lose our basic 
standpoint, and lose our bearings. 
  [Gao] Inheriting and developing are closely bound up with 
the "second revolution," "second leap," and the theoretical 
achievement of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
Could you please first talk about the "two revolutions?" 
<H5>  Two Great Revolutions </H5>
  [Gong] The 14th National CPC Congress report pointed out: 
In the history of our party, the first-generation central 
leadership collective, with Comrade Mao Zedong at the core, led 
the whole party and the people of all nationalities in the 
country, through protracted struggle to win the success of the 
New Democratic Revolution and, following that, in establishing a 
basic system of socialism, emancipating and developing the 
productive forces, and turning the semicolonial and semifeudal 
old China, which had been subjected to endless bullying and 
humiliation by foreign aggressors over the past 100 years or so, 
into an independent socialist New China where the people are the 
masters. This revolution, the greatest of all times in Chinese 
history, constituted a new epoch in the history of this country. 
The fresh round of great revolution that the whole party and 
the people of all nationalities in the country have embarked on 
under the leadership of the second- generation central 
leadership collective with Comrade Deng Xiaoping at the core, 
through the reform and opening up is aimed at fundamentally 
changing the economic system which restricts the development of 
China's productive forces, establishing a vigorous and vibrant 
new economic system of socialism, and, in the meantime, 
reforming the political system and other systems accordingly, to 
emancipate and develop the productive forces even further. The 
objective is to turn China from an underdeveloped socialist 
country into a rich and powerful, democratic, civilized, and 
modernized socialist country, through protracted struggle, 
letting the superiorities of socialism be fully manifested in 
China. 
  The two generations of central leadership collectives have 
led two great revolutions. This is a new summary of the history 
of the party over more than 70 years made by the 14th CPC 
National Congress. 
  [Gao] The notion that "reform is China's second revolution" 
was put forward by Comrade Xiaoping as early as in the 
mid-1980's. When he first mentioned it, I came to you for an 
explanation. 
  [Gong] The concept leading to this statement can be traced 
to an even earlier date. The communique of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee clearly pointed out: 
"The realization of the four modernizations requires 
significant strengthening of the productive forces. This 
naturally entails changes to the production relations and 
superstructures which do not conform to the development of the 
productive forces in many ways and changes to all the modes of 
management, modes of action, and ways of thinking that are 
inappropriate. Therefore, it is an extensive and profound 
revolution." Comrade Xiaoping's speech "Emancipate the Mind, 
Seek Truth From Facts, and Look Ahead in Unity" was actually the 
keynote report of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee. This speech also said: "The process of 
realizing the four modernizations is a profound and great 
revolution." On the eve of that plenary session, when speaking 
at the Ninth Representative Conference of the Federation of 
Trade Unions, he also said: "This is a great revolution that 
will fundamentally change the backwardness of our country's 
economy and technology and further consolidate the proletarian 
dictatorship. Since it must drastically change the existing 
backward productive forces, this revolution will naturally, in 
many ways, change the relations of production, change the 
superstructures, change the mode of management of industrial and 
agricultural enterprises as well as the mode of management of 
the state over industrial and agricultural enterprises, so that 
they can meet the needs of a modernized large economy." Thus, 
it can be seen that beginning around the Third Plenary Session 
of the 11th CPC Central Committee, Comrade Xiaoping and the 
central committee of our party put forward the issue of China's 
second revolution from the perspective of the integration of 
modernization and reform. The Third Plenary Session of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee was the starting point of China's second 
revolution. 
  Though Comrade Deng Xiaoping mentioned this subject many 
times in the past, it did not attract enough attention. In the 
talks he made during his south China tour in 1992, he further 
expanded on this. He pointed out: "Revolution is to emancipate 
the productive forces and so is reform." "In the past, we only 
talked about developing the productive forces in the context of 
socialism. We did not discuss emancipating the productive 
forces through reform. That was incomplete." This is a 
profound explanation of the notion that reform is a revolution 
and China's second revolution. That is how this issue attracted 
more attention. Later, it was included in the documents from 
the 14th PC National Congress. 
  [Gao] Since this is a scientific summary of the history of 
our party over the past more than 70 years, should it become the 
basic approach in the study and research of our party's history 
and China's contemporary history? 
  [Gong] Today, textbooks still divide the party history and 
the history of revolution and construction by the Chinese people 
led by the party into two sections: One is the period of 
democratic revolution and the other the period of socialism. I 
think we can probably consider dividing the party history into 
three periods or three chapters in future: The first chapter is 
that of democratic revolution. It deals with the mighty 
revolutionary struggle conducted by the people under the 
leadership of the party. This period covered two major 
setbacks, witnessed relatively smooth development after the 
Zunyi Meeting, and ended with the great victory of founding the 
PRC. The second chapter is the early chapter of socialism 
dealing with how the party, after the founding of New China, led 
the people to the socialist road and to the great achievements 
in socialist construction. It also covered two major setbacks 
and ended with the victory of smashing the "gang of four" and 
putting an end to the "Great Cultural Revolution." The third 
chapter is the new chapter of socialism, beginning from the 
Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee. When 
the book "70 Years of the CPC" was being written, Comrade Hu 
Sheng [5170 4939] suggested highlighting the historical 
importance of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee in dividing the historical periods of the party. 
Though "70 Years of the CPC" was not written in three such 
chapters, it did mention this viewpoint in its epilogue. I also 
talked about this viewpoint at the seminar held by the Society 
of Chinese Contemporary History in Zunyi and on some other 
occasions. 
<H5>  Two Historic Leaps </H5>
  [Gao] The "two-revolution" theory gives us a big perspective 
for reviewing history and seems to have offered a logical 
premise to the formulation of "two great leaps." 
  [Gong] This way, we can sum up our party's history over the 
past 70 years or so from a higher perspective and over a larger 
span: The two mature generations of central leadership 
collectives with two great men, Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping, at 
the core, led two great revolutions and achieved two historic 
leaps in integrating Marxism with China's practice. The first 
mature generation of central leadership collective with Mao 
Zedong at the core led us in overthrowing the three big 
mountains, founding the PRC, and accomplishing China's first 
revolution. The first historic leap in integrating Marxism with 
Chinese practice was achieved during this process. The 
theoretical achievement of this leap was Mao Zedong Thought. 
The second mature generation of central leadership collective, 
with Deng Xiaoping at the core, led us to begin China's second 
revolution, i.e., the profound reform aimed at modernization. We 
achieved the second historic leap in integrating Marxism with 
China's practice in this process. The theoretical achievement 
of this leap is Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics. 
  The "two great revolutions" are in terms of practice, while 
the "two historic leaps" are in terms of the formation and 
development of theories. The two formulations are of the same 
inherent meaning. 
  [Gao] I remember the notion of "two historic leaps" was 
put forward by the 13th CPC National Congress. 
  [Gong] Yes. The report of the 13th CPC National Congress 
said: "The first leap took place in the period of the New 
Democratic Revolution. The Chinese Communists, after repeated 
explorations and on the basis of summing up experiences of 
success and failure, found the revolutionary road with Chinese 
characteristics and led the revolution to victory. The second 
leap took place after the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee. The Chinese Communists, on the basis of 
summing up positive and negative experiences over the period of 
more than 30 years and studying international experiences and 
the world situation, began to find a road for building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics and initiated a new phase of 
socialist construction." 
  [Gao] This statement only points out the times when the "two 
leaps" "took place." But there should also be an appraisal of 
the period between the nationwide victory of the New Democratic 
Revolution and the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, which is what you call the "first chapter of 
socialism!" 
  [Gong] In terms of the formation and development of theory, 
the exploration made by our party in practice and theory during 
this period was the extension of the first leap and the 
preparation for the second leap. In terms of practice, it was 
one stage in the first great revolution led by the 
first-generation central collective. The first revolution was 
in two stages, namely, the New-Democratic Revolution and the 
transition toward socialism. This great theoretical achievement 
of Mao Zedong Thought was born out of the first historic leap 
during the period of the New Democratic Revolution. During the 
socialist period after the founding of New China, it saw major 
development but, in the meantime, there was also deviation and 
distortion. For nearly 30 years after the founding of New 
China, our party's achievements in both practice and theory 
alternated with mistakes, which complicated the relationship 
between the two generations of central leadership collectives in 
practice and theory. It was by summing up the positive and 
negative experiences since the founding of New China that our 
party restudied the meaning of Mao Zedong Thought in a 
scientific way and achieved the second historic leap during the 
great new revolutionary practice, enabling Mao Zedong Thought to 
experience major development once again into Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
<H5>  Two Great Theoretical Achievements </H5>
  [Gao] The "two leaps" are reflected in the "two major 
theoretical achievements." There is the question of a 
scientific and accurate approach in interpreting these two 
theoretical achievements. First, the definition and 
interpretation of "Mao Zedong Thought" seems to have experienced 
a deepening process in history. 
  [Gong] In April 1945, the "Resolution on Certain Questions 
in History" passed by the Seventh Plenary Session of the Sixth 
CPC Central Committee clearly defined Mao Zedong Thought as 
follows: Mao Zedong Thought is the thought which combines the 
universal principles of Marxism with the specific reality of the 
Chinese revolution. The resolution explained and enumerated the 
basic political, military, organizational, and ideological 
contents of Mao Zedong Thought by comparing it with the "left" 
and right opportunism in the history of the party, especially 
the erroneous "left" opportunist line during the period of the 
Agrarian Revolution. For the first time, it expounded on how 
Mao Zedong used Marxist stand, viewpoints, and methods to work 
out a complete set of theories, lines, principles, and policies 
conforming to the reality of China's democratic revolution. On 
the basis of this, the report made by Liu Shaoqi at the Seventh 
CPC National Congress on amendments to the party constitution 
further explained the historical status of Mao Zedong Thought as 
the party's guiding ideology and its basic contents. For a long 
time, this remained the scientific basis for our party to 
understand, study, and carry out propaganda on Mao Zedong 
Thought. 
  Because Mao Zedong later made mistakes in his exploration, 
because Lin Biao and the "gang of four" distorted and falsified 
Mao Zedong and, in particular, advocated the mistakes made by 
Mao Zedong in his later years as an important development of Mao 
Zedong Thought, and because the ideological trend of "two 
whatevers," which was in reality sticking to Mao Zedong's 
mistakes in his later years, was still present after the "gang 
of four" was smashed, we were faced with the solemn tasks of 
dispelling chaos, restoring order, and reevaluating Mao Zedong 
Thought. The question of understanding Mao Zedong Thought 
included two aspects, namely, dispelling chaos and restoring 
order. Dispelling chaos meant dispelling the distortion and 
sabotage by Lin Biao and the "gang of four," dispelling the 
chaos caused by the wrong attitude of "two whatevers," and 
criticizing Comrade Mao Zedong's mistakes in his later years." 
Restoring order meant "coming back to the correct track of Mao 
Zedong Thought" and "adhering to and developing Mao Zedong 
Thought." 
  As early as in 1975, when Deng Xiaoping was in charge of the 
CPC Central Committee's work and conducting rectification, he 
challenged the practice of Lin Biao and the "gang of four" and 
raised the issue of opposing "cutting apart Mao Zedong Thought." 
In 1977, he challenged the "two whatevers" and raised the issue 
of "understanding Mao Zedong Thought completely and accurately." 
The Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee 
held in 1978 genuinely started this process of dispelling chaos 
and restoring order. When giving guidance on the drafting of 
the "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party 
Since the Founding of the People's Republic of China," Comrade 
Xiaoping emphasized that the most central point in the overall 
guideline is to establish Mao Zedong's position in history and 
adhere to and develop Mao Zedong Thought. The "Resolution on 
Certain Questions in the History of Our Party" adopted in June 
1981 basically accomplished this task. The "Resolution" clearly 
and concretely pointed out the contents of the mistakes made by 
Mao Zedong in his later years, made a rigid distinction between 
them and the scientific system of Mao Zedong Thought, redefined 
the meaning of Mao Zedong Thought, and emphasized that Mao 
Zedong Thought is the product of integration between the 
universal principles of Marxism-Leninism and the concrete 
practice of Chinese revolution, a scientific achievement proven 
correct by practice and a precious spiritual asset of our party. 
By this definition, with the abovementioned distinction 
included, only the correct ideas of Mao Zedong are called Mao 
Zedong Thought and the mistakes made by him in his later years 
are not part of Mao Zedong Thought; adhering to Mao Zedong 
Thought does not mean adhering to such mistakes in any sense but 
means we should correct these mistakes. 
  While affirming that Mao Zedong's scientific works are the 
concentrated summary of Mao Zedong Thought, the "Resolution" 
pointed, in the form of a party resolution for the first time: 
"Many outstanding leaders of our party made important 
contributions to its formation and development." The 
"Resolution" also expounded in great detail on how Mao Zedong 
Thought has enriched and developed "many aspects" of 
Marxism-Leninism with its original theories and the three key 
points of the living soul of Mao Zedong Thought. 
  This "Resolution" is a scientific basis on which our party 
reevaluated the scientific achievements of Mao Zedong Thought 
and on which we can understand, study, and carry out propaganda 
on Mao Zedong Thought today. 
  [Gao] In recent years, you have suggested and repeatedly 
emphasized that the "Resolution" should be regarded as a new 
starting point for the study on Mao Zedong Thought and its 
authoritativeness should be protected. It seems to me that this 
was directed to some specific ideas. 
  [Gong] There are two ideological tendencies: One is aimed 
at shaking the affirmation of Mao Zedong Thought by the 
"Resolution" and the other at shaking the negation of Mao 
Zedong's mistakes in his later years by the "Resolution." These 
two ideological tendencies are from different sources, yet they 
have one thing in common, that is, they both aim at shaking the 
"Resolution." 
  [Gao] Some theorists maintain that if an ideology is named 
after Mao Zedong, then all his ideas must be included. They 
think it does not make sense if only correct ideas are included 
and the incorrect ones are left out. They suggest that we stop 
using the formulation of "Mao Zedong Thought." What do you 
think? 
  [Gong] I do not agree with this opinion. I think our party 
has been using the concept of Mao Zedong Thought for so many 
years and, if we stop using it, it poses a disadvantage 
politically and also is not faithful to history. One cannot 
call it a scientific attitude if it is not faithful to history. 
The fact of the history is: The integration of Marxism with 
China's revolutionary practice bore scientific theoretical 
fruit. Can one deny this fact? It is of secondary importance 
as to what name this theoretical fruit should be called by. 
Since we have always used "Mao Zedong Thought" for this 
theoretical fruit and Mao Zedong did make the great 
contributions to its creation, there is no need or reason for us 
to cancel this name. What we should do is to assess many 
viewpoints we had in the past according to practice to find out 
which have been proven scientific by practice and which have 
been proven wrong by practice; name the scientific theoretical 
fruit created by the central leadership collective with Mao 
Zedong as the main representative as Mao Zedong Thought; and 
distinguish it from the mistakes made by Mao Zedong in his later 
years. 
  [Gao] You emphasize the authoritativeness of the 
"Resolution." How should one view the authoritativeness of a 
resolution? 
  [Gong] In my opinion, the "Resolution" is a product of 
partywide discussion on the basis of democratic centralism and a 
product of scientific study and testing through practice. 
Naturally, however, this does not mean it has reached the acme 
of perfection and that it is unnecessary or impossible to 
further our understanding of the history of our party since the 
founding of New China. Nevertheless, in my personal opinion, 
this "Resolution" did treat issues of history in light of facts 
and with as scientific an attitude as possible. It was sincere 
and was in no way a product of any simplistic, temporary needs 
or political compromise. Therefore, we should protect its 
authoritativeness. 
  [Gao] By "authoritativeness," do you mean that it was an 
organizational resolution made through statutory organizational 
procedures and confirmed by the party's supreme power organ? 
  [Gong] It is organizational authority I was talking about. 
In my opinion, the authoritativeness of the "Resolution" should 
contain two aspects: One is organizational authority, the other 
scientific authority. Only the combination of the two types of 
authority constitutes the greatest authority. It is not enough 
to talk about organizational authority alone because our party 
is one that pursues and obeys scientific truth. Each resolution 
of the party has organizational authority. If inappropriate 
points or points that do not conform to scientific truth are 
found in a resolution after it is adopted, it will be corrected 
eventually. Organizational authority cannot guarantee all party 
resolutions are certainly scientific and correct. But even if a 
viewpoint established in a party resolution is wrong, or is 
wrong in your opinion, it cannot be changed until the party 
organization has made a new resolution through a certain 
organizational procedure. Expressing opinions that go against 
the party resolution irresponsibly and without going through the 
organizational procedure means a violation of discipline and 
organizational authority. Naturally, however, organizational 
authority should, in the final analysis, be backed by scientific 
authority. If it is not supported by scientific authority and 
does not conform to scientific truth, organizational authority 
will lose its footing in the end and the organizational 
resolution will have to change. In my opinion, the "Resolution" 
is one that has been proven correct by practice; it is an 
organizational authority supported by scientific authority and a 
scientific authority supported by organizational authority. 
Shaking this resolution is a violation of both organizational 
discipline and scientific truth. 
  [Gao] The relationship between the "two major theoretical 
achievements," namely, Mao Zedong Thought and Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, is a 
theoretical issue of immediate significance. Could you please 
comment on this? 
  [Gong] The correcting discussed earlier means correcting the 
mistakes made by Mao Zedong in his later years. As far as the 
relationship between Mao Zedong Thought and Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics is 
concerned, the key words are inheriting and developing. 
Correcting, inheriting, and developing are three components. 
The combination of the first two components means dispelling 
chaos and restoring order, whereas the combination of the second 
and third components means carrying forward the cause and 
forging ahead into the future. It means overall reform, forging 
ahead into the future, blazing new trails, making innovations, 
and developing. Dispelling chaos and restoring order alone 
means correcting erroneous things and inheriting correct things 
within the scope of Mao Zedong's theory and practice in 
accordance with practice as the touchstone. The new period 
requires innovations. There are many new problems emerging in 
the new period. Here, new problems means the many problems 
generated under the new circumstances which Mao Zedong did not 
face or that Mao Zedong came into contact with but failed to 
solve well. From internal affairs to diplomacy, the reform and 
opening up have run into many new problems which require us to 
solve them in a creative way. The issue of pioneering and 
innovating is far more complicated than distinguishing between 
right and wrong within the scope of Mao Zedong's theory and 
practice. To gain a correct understanding of and solve 
creatively the new problems under new circumstances requires new 
development of Mao Zedong Thought. 
  In May 1989, Comrade Xiaoping emphatically pointed out: "A 
true Marxist-Leninist must understand, inherit, and develop 
Marxism- Leninism in light of the current situation." "The 
world situation is fast changing and the modern science and 
technology, in particular, is developing at a high pace. One 
year today is equivalent to dozens of years, 100 years, or even 
longer in the ancient society. He who does not carry forward 
and develop Marxism with new ideas and viewpoints is not a true 
Marxist." He also said: "We must not demand that Marx offer 
ready answers to the questions appearing 100 years or hundreds 
of years after his death. Similarly, Lenin could not undertake 
the task of offering ready answers to the questions that emerged 
50 or 100 years after his death." "Mao Zedong, China's great 
Marxist-Leninist did not try to find the road to the victory of 
China's New Democratic Revolution in the books written by Marx 
and Lenin." By the same token, today, we should not rely on the 
books of our predecessors but, instead, use their scientific 
theories as the guide to make new creations in the face of new 
realities. 
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, our party has indeed made new progress in theory. 
Understanding and acknowledging this point is very important. 
It is not only a way to correct the mistakes made by Mao Zedong 
in his later years but also a continuation of the scientific 
system of Mao Zedong Thought. Meanwhile, there has been new 
progress in solving the new problems under the new circumstances 
in the new period. 
  [Gao] Can we say this new achievement in theory has 
developed into a theoretical framework and system? 
  [Gong] This process has started. This new theoretical 
achievement has been progressively expounded in depth and in 
width by the "Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of 
Our Party," the 12th CPC National Congress report, and the 14th 
CPC National Congress report, all in the dozen years' practice 
and development. The 13th CPC National COngress put forward 12 
scientific theoretical viewpoints and the 14th CPC National 
Congress summed up nine additional important aspects. Of 
course, there can be other ways to make conclusions and sum 
things up. There have indeed been many important developments 
in theory. 
  [Gao] After the 13th CPC National Congress, some people 
suggested calling these new developments in theory "Deng 
Xiaoping Thought [deng xiaoping sixiang 6772 1420 1627 1835 
1927]." Do you agree with this opinion? 
  [Gong] It is up to the central authorities to decide which 
formulation to sum them up. The formulation used by the 13th 
CPC National Congress was "the theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics." After Comrade Xiaoping made those 
remarks during his tour of southern China, I found in the 
literature of the CPC Central Committee such formulations as 
"the theory and line of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics initiated by Comrade Deng Xiaoping" and "Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's thinking on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics," which further highlighted Comrade Xiaoping's 
position in the founding of this theory. The formulation used 
by the 14th CPC National Congress was "Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics." In 
my opinion, this formulation is very good. The negative thing 
about it is that it is a bit too long as a term but its good 
point is that it highlights the theoretical theme of "building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics." Deng Xiaoping's theory 
of building socialism with Chinese characteristics is the 
continuation and development of Mao Zedong Thought in the new 
historical context. It is Marxism in today's China. Why do we 
use a separate concept to sum it up? Because it is not just the 
addition of some trivial points to the theoretical achievements 
of Comrade Mao Zedong but shows a considerably important step 
forward. It is a result of a series of new explorations, new 
innovations, and new creations. It has begun to form a new 
theory. Therefore, a new representation is necessary. 

