Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Decree No. 1348 of the Russian Federation Council of </F>
Ministers-Government "On Measures To Organize Information and 
Publicity Work in the Sphere of Science and Technology on the 
Basis of Russian Scientific and Cultural Centers Abroad," dated 
Moscow, 25 December 1993 and signed by O. Soskovets, first 
deputy chairman of the Russian Federation Council of 
Ministers-Government] 
  [Text] For the purposes of ensuring the implementation of 
the Russian Federation president's Edict No. 726 of 21 May 1993 
"On Russian Scientific and Cultural Centers Abroad," assisting 
the development of Russia's scientific and technical cooperation 
with foreign countries, widely familiarizing the foreign public 
with the contribution of Russian scientists to world science, 
shaping the innovative infrastructure of science, and also 
coordinating cooperation in these spheres between the Russian 
Agency for International Cooperation and Development and the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Science and Technical Policy and 
the Russian Federation Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Russian 
Federation Council of Ministers-Government decrees: 
  1. The Russian Federation Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy, the Russian Agency for International Cooperation and 
Development, and the Russian Federation Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs are to be entrusted with organizing information and 
publicity work in the sphere of science and technology on the 
basis of Russian scientific and cultural centers abroad. 
  2. Within the limits of its competence the Russian 
Federation Ministry of Science and Technical Policy is to: 
  draw up targeted programs and define priority areas of 
information and publicity work in the sphere of science and 
technology in the interests of developing the Russian 
Federation's international scientific and technical ties; 
  draw up and, by agreement with the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Russian Agency for 
International Cooperation and Development, approve collated 
plans for information support for Russian scientific and 
cultural centers abroad; 
  ensure, jointly with the Russian Agency for International 
Cooperation and Development, the introduction of automated 
reference-information systems, including data banks on 
scientific and technical developments proposed for export, into 
the work practice of Russian scientific and cultural centers 
abroad; 
  send materials on the development of Russian science and 
technology to Russian scientific and cultural centers abroad; 
  send scientists and specialists to Russian scientific and 
cultural centers abroad to participate in the organization of 
information work in the sphere of science and technology. 
  3. The Russian Agency for International Cooperation and 
Development is to ensure the conditions necessary for the 
organization of information and publicity work in the sphere of 
science and technology in Russian scientific and cultural 
centers abroad. 
  4. The Russian Federation Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy is to finance expenditure on the organization of 
information and publicity work in the sphere of science and 
technology on the basis of Russian scientific and cultural 
centers abroad out of the Russian Federation republic budget's 
funds envisaged for the development of the innovative 
infrastructure of science, as well as financing international 
scientific and technical cooperation programs and projects. 
  [Signed] O. Soskovets, first deputy chairman of the Russian 
Federation Council of Ministers-Government 
  [Dated] Moscow, 25 December 1993 

