Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 17 Mar (XINHUA) -- After examining the 
"Report on the Implementation of the 1993 State Budget and on 
the Draft 1994 State Budget" presented by Finance Minister Liu 
Zhongli on behalf of the State Council, the National People's 
Congress [NPC] Financial and Economic Committee held that, on 
the whole, the 1993 state budget had been properly implemented, 
and the guiding principle underlying the arrangement for the 
1994 state budget is correct. The Financial and Economic 
Committee proposed that the NPC approve the "Report on the 
Implementation of the 1993 State Budget and on the Draft 1994 
State Budget," as well as the 1994 state budget submitted by the 
State Council. At the same time, it proposed that the NPC 
Standing Committee be authorized to examine and approve the 1993 
state final accounts as soon as they are compiled. 
  The Financial and Economic Commission believed that in 1993 
the people of various nationalities across the country 
comprehensively implemented the guidelines set forth in the 
important talks made by Comrade Deng Xiaoping, as well as those 
of the 14th CPC National Congress; earnestly carried out the 
"Opinions Concerning the Current Economic Situation and 
Strengthening of Macroeconomic Regulation and Control" forwarded 
by the CPC Central Committee and the State Council; and 
significant achievements had been made in economic development 
and reform and opening up to the outside world. During the 
year, on the basis of increasing financial resources, finance 
and taxation departments made positive efforts to strengthen 
revenue collection and management and to strictly levy taxes 
according to the law, resulting in a relatively large growth in 
state revenues, ensuring that expenditures had basically met the 
needs of key construction projects and the needs for reform and 
opening up as well as the development of various undertakings. 
On the whole, the state budget was duly implemented. 
  The report pointed out: The major problems in implementing 
the 1993 budget were: central government revenues and 
expenditures were not in accord with the budgeted amounts, while 
the financial position in various localities was marked by a 
relative increase in revenues and excessive growth in 
expenditures, an overly rapid increase in investment in 
infrastructure in some localities, and defaults in salaries and 
wages for public servants and teaching staff in other 
localities. Steps should be taken to earnestly analyze these 
problems, sum up the experience, draw a lesson and improve work 
conscientiously. 
  The Financial and Economic Committee held that in respect of 
the guiding principles of the 1994 state budget, basically, 
conscious efforts were made to ensure spending on key projects 
and on meeting the needs for promoting national economy and 
social development. At the same time, efforts were also made to 
provide essential financial guarantees to smoothly push forward 
various major economic reforms, and to enhance and improve 
macroeconomic regulations and control. While arranging revenues, 
efforts were made to maintain a fairly rapid growth, and while 
arranging expenditures, attention was paid to increasing 
spending on key sectors including agriculture, education, 
science and technology, and infrastructure. Expenditures for 
defense and political and legal departments maintained essential 
growth, and attention was given to controlling investment in 
fixed assets. 
  The report held that the main problems in arranging the 1994 
state budget were: a relatively slow growth in revenues, a 
relatively rapid growth in expenditures, and an increase in 
deficits. This is due to relatively vigorous attempts to carry 
out economic restructuring in 1994. To facilitate the 
implementation of financial and tax reforms, and to ensure 
transformation of mechanisms, some important measures have been 
introduced; this is bound to increase the factors for reducing 
income and enlarging expenditure. 
  To ensure the smooth implementation of the 1994 state 
budget, 
the report proposed that continuous efforts be made to implement 
the measures forwarded by the CPC Central Committee and the 
State Council to enhance macroeconomic regulation and control, 
to further strengthen the collection and management of state 
revenues, duly control expenditures, and reduce the disparity 
between income and expenditures in a bid to create a favorable 
situation for economic development and implementation of various 
reform measures. In light of the opinions of the members 
examining the report, the Financial and Economic Committee 
forwarded the following proposals: (1) Strive to cut down 
deficits by all means. (2) Strive to increase state revenues. 
(3) Strictly control expenditures. And, (4) Inject more funds 
to support development of less economically advanced areas. 
  The Financial and Economic Committee hoped that governments 
at all levels, finance and tax departments, enterprises, and 
units of various undertakings would adopt an overall concept, 
strive to safeguard the national interest as a whole, treat the 
state budget with all seriousness, resolutely implement all laws 
and provisions governing finance and taxation, stringently 
enforce financial and economic discipline, and oppose all 
fraudulent practices and falsified reports. It is necessary to 
carry forward the fine tradition of hard work in building our 
country and in attending to all our undertakings. We must make 
concerted efforts, help each other like people in the same boat, 
and try in every possible way to increase revenues and curtail 
expenses and strive for even better results in our bid to 
fulfill the 1994 state budget. 

