Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lj.Z.: "There Is Still Enough Food"] </F>
  [Text] A surplus is expected in wheat, corn, oil, and some 
other basic staples. Minor seasonal shortages in sugar, 
potatoes, beans, meat, and eggs will be covered by imports. 
  This year nobody should go hungry. According to the 1994 
balance sheet prepared by the federal administration there will 
be surpluses of some basic commodities, while some shortages of 
meat, dairy products, and eggs, as well as the seasonal shortage 
of sugar and potatoes, could be covered by imports. In any case 
the federal government and two republic governments feel the 
food should be managed better than it was last year. Therefore, 
the government plans to make changes in its reserves of goods. 
Instead of three administrations there will be only one better 
organized and more reliable administration. 
  A projected daily consumer basket serving as the basis for 
this year's balance sheet contains a half-kilogram of bread 
(wheat), 40 grams of oil, 72 grams of sugar, 100 grams of 
potatoes, 14 grams of beans, 100 grams of meat, 350 grams of 
milk and dairy products, and 0.3 eggs per person. 
  It is not known whether the projected reserves were based on 
expected demand alone or whether the figures also include losses 
due to spoilage. The more important issue is how the projected 
quantities will be distributed. Economists and merchants have 
been asking the government for a long time to review the 
reserves and establish a rational mechanism for consumption. 
Last year's bad experience involving huge reserves of sugar that 
turned into shortages must not be repeated. 
  If one can rely on the federal administration's figures of 
annual consumption per person amounting to 180 kg of bread, 14 
liters of oil, 25.9 kg of sugar, 36 kg of potatoes, five kg of 
beans, 120 kg of meat, and 108 eggs, there will be significant 
surpluses in the government reserves at the end of this year. In 
fact, the expected surpluses amount to 3 million metric tons of 
wheat, 4.5 million tons of corn, 361,000 tons of oil, 288,000 
tons of sugar, 660,000 tons of potatoes, and 56,000 tons of 
beans. 
  All three governments will soon determine whether surplus 
food will be exported as a way of acquiring valuable hard 
currency and under what conditions. Of course, the answer to 
this question will depend on both economic and political 
conditions. If the sanctions are lifted, the food producers will 
doubtlessly be interested in making a profit on the 
international market. 

