Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Zhang Lei (1728 7191) and Zhou Jianmin (0719 </F>
1696 7044)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 12 Jan (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE) -- When 
delivering a 1993 yearend executive report before the directors 
of the Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Strait 
[ARATS], Tang Shubei, executive vice chairman of ARATS, said: 
In the past year there has been new progress in ARATS' contact 
with the Straits Exchange Foundation [SEF]. Apart from 
consultations, SEF personnel came to the mainland for 
observation, exchange, visiting relatives, and sightseeing in 17 
groups. Among them, there were six independently organized 
groups for sightseeing and cultural study. ARATS, together with 
other relevant departments, received the following groups which 
the SEF organized or participated in organizing: The "cultural 
observation group," "tourist environment study group," "Three 
Gorges cultural assets study group," and the "college youth 
delegation." ARATS and the SEF assisted the relevant 
departments and organizations in organizing children from both 
sides to express their understanding of Tang poetry in the form 
of paintings, and in sponsoring the sports exchange event of 
"race for the health of the Chinese." 
  Tang Shubei mentioned that, entrusted by relevant 
departments, the ARATS asked the SEF to assist in bringing 11 
exchange projects to Taiwan. The highlights included: Beijing 
People's Artistic and Theatrical Company and Beijing Youth Song 
and Dance Ensemble giving performances in Taiwan, and XINHUA 
News Agency and ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE reporters covering the 14th 
Kuomintang Congress in Taiwan. The study group comprising 
persons in charge of mainland media organizations organized by 
ARATS is visiting Taiwan at the moment. ARATS is now making 
active preparations for mainland youth and senior reporters to 
visit Taiwan, in accordance with the provisions of the "Joint 
Agreement of the Wang-Ku Meeting." It has repeatedly approached 
the SEF by letters expressing the wish that the latter would 
help make it possible for mainland industrial and commercial 
entrepreneurs to visit Taiwan for observation and study. We 
hope the relevant authorities in Taiwan will go with the tide 
and lift the ban on the exchange between industrial and 
commercial entrepreneurs across the strait at an early date. 
  In their routine contacts with the SEF, consulting each 
other 
on, and handling, the concrete affairs in the contact between 
the compatriots on the two sides has been an important aspect. 
Tang Shubei said: From January through December last year the 
two associations exchanged 1,249 letters (963 from the SEF to 
ARATS and 286 from the ARATS to SEF), which discussed 369 
issues. We have responded to almost all the letters from the 
SEF. Some of the matters are still being handled. With the 
expansion of ARATS's influence, relevant departments and 
localities have been coming to us, asking us to help promote 
cross-strait exchange activities or solve some specific problems 
arising from their contacts. Last year we were entrusted to 
carry out negotiations with the SEF in handling 70 matters, of 
which 56 have been handled by us. These include: Returning 
Taiwan soldier Tsai Cheng-ta [5591 2398 6671] who had been 
rescued from a dangerous situation, rescuing the crew of the 
mainland's "Zhong Yuan Fishing Boat No. 905," and assisting the 
relevant authorities in a successful mediation in the 
environmental dispute involving "Lu Ta Industries Incorporated," 
a Taiwan-funded enterprise in Xiamen. All those efforts 
generated a positive effect. 
  Tang Shubei finally said: Last year, ARATS assisted the 
relevant departments in handling some Taiwan-connected economic 
and trade disputes, negotiated with the SEF on the handling of 
Taiwan-bound hijackings by mainland criminals and economic 
criminals, and made timely and stern representations regarding 
the barbarous incident of Taiwan's troops stationed on outlying 
islands dispersing and firing at coastal fishermen. From last 
April to now our association has filed 21 incidents involving 
Taiwan businessmen's rights and interests for handling. So far, 
after consulting local Taiwan affairs offices and other relevant 
departments, we have finished handling 13 of them and given 
feedback to the SEF. Two other cases are being handled at the 
moment and local Taiwan affairs offices have been asked to 
continue investigating the remaining six cases. These incidents 
can be divided roughly into three categories. The first 
category covers various economic disputes between Taiwan 
businessmen who were making investments, setting up factories, 
or engaging in economic and trade activities in the mainland as 
one party and, as the other party, some local enterprises or 
institutions. The second category covers incidents in which 
some Taiwan businessmen were handled according to law by the 
competent authorities on the mainland side for practicing fraud 
or maltreating employees. The third category covers cases in 
which a small handful of Taiwan-funded enterprises had clashes 
with local public or were harassed or robbed by lawless persons, 
or the Taiwan investors themselves were beaten up, robbed, 
blackmailed, or, in one or two cases, murdered. When handling 
the above-mentioned incidents, ARATS approached and assisted the 
relevant departments in investigating and handling them in 
accordance with the applicable laws and policies of the state. 
Basically, they were all properly handled. Through these 
efforts, ARATS has accumulated experience in handling 
Taiwan-connected economic and trade disputes and protecting the 
rights and interests of Taiwan investors. Also, the influence 
of the association has been expanded. 

