Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed political commentary: "A Peace Based on </F>
Blood"] 
  [Text] This week saw a series of dramatic developments in 
the Palestinian arena. Israel has covered many phases in 
programing and organizing the Palestinian-Palestinian dispute 
and shifting it onto the stage of a military clash. It imported 
large quantities of arms to the Gaza Strip while discussing an 
imminent military withdrawal from the Strip after it became 
certain of the essence and security and political details of its 
successive accords with the PLO in Oslo, Cairo, Washington, 
Taba, Paris, Davos, and other capitals. 
  Rabin acknowledged this plan with disparagement and derision 
when he announced that the new situation creates a sense of 
mistrust, asking what will happen among the various Palestinian 
factions that might engage in a power struggle. He said: 
Wherever there is a thriving market, regrettably, there are 
Israelis who collaborate on smuggling arms from Israel to be 
sold to the Palestinians. He added: Nearly every day, a 
Palestinian is killed at the hands of his fellow Palestinians. 
  Doesn't this reveal Israel's persistent hostile intentions 
toward the Palestinians and its arming itself with the 
Gaza-Jericho Accord and its appendixes to express these 
intentions? We said before that the accord will generate an 
inter-Palestinian dispute stretching to the extent of an 
internal war that would destroy the intifadah and achieve 
Israel's old dream and goal, giving Israel a pretext for its 
strategy. In such an event, Israel will present itself as an 
advocate of peace and absolve itself of every condemnation to 
tell the world later, according to Rabin's statement, that it 
was not strict with the Palestinians and did not deal with them 
harshly, as they themselves deal with each other. At the same 
time, Israel will have paved the way for eliminating the 
Palestinian cause in terms of material and human resources by 
Palestinian hands after it has provided a political atmosphere 
for such a move through the Gaza- Jericho Accord. It will do it 
without relinquishing its right to participate in eliminating 
the cause if need be, according to the recently signed 
appendixes. 
  In this context, the Israeli Administration sowed new 
sedition. It withdrew the Jewish soldiers from the Gaza area and 
delegated the task of the blockade to Arab soldiers serving in 
the Israeli army to deepen political, denominational, and 
sectarian division and weaken the Palestinian fold from within 
so that it will have time to track down the symbols of the 
intifadah in the Hamas Movement, Fatah ranks, or other 
Palestinian organizations. 
  This does not seem enough according to the Israeli plan. 
The Hebron residents woke up today to a horrible massacre 
perpetrated by Israeli settlers inside a mosque in which scores 
of people were martyred or wounded. Who will ask Israel to 
arrest and punish these criminals? Isn't this act aimed against 
the peace process in the view of the United States and Israel? 
Are the resistance in south Lebanon and the intifadah in 
Palestine in defense of rights a hindrance to the region's peace 
process? Is the Hebron massacre today and are previous 
massacres positive signs and elements of strength and momentum 
for this peace process? 
  Why haven't we heard an American or international 
condemnation of this carnage? Why aren't sanctions imposed 
against Israel? Where do the dangers to Israel lie when it 
enters the peace process? Where is its adventure, as the 
Americans, who adopt the Israeli stance, say? 
  Is this carnage and are Israel's measures inside the 
occupied 
territories the preconditions that they mention for guaranteeing 
Israel's security and compensating her for engaging in the peace 
process? 
  What if the Arab Palestinians or non-Palestinians rose up 
and 
responded to Israel's acts? What would the American, Israeli, 
European, and international reaction be? What kind of peace is 
this that is based on annihilating a nation? What is this just 
and comprehensive peace when Israel's act of murder is 
collective and covers Palestinians everywhere, the Lebanese, and 
others? Where is the peace of nations against Israel's 
practices and massacres? 
  The United States has a major responsibility for what is 
happening. The argument that the United States is not involved 
because the issue is now between the two sides after it paved 
the way for them cannot be ignored or accepted. The Arab 
countries too are responsible and able to pressure the United 
States and Israel if they want to and sense their responsibility 
to halt their rush, their race, toward Israel and their haste to 
end the boycott of and be open to Israel. But the greatest 
responsibility is Palestinian, whether on the level of the PLO 
or other factions and forces. It is a responsibility to 
escalate the struggle against Israel, especially within Israel, 
to coordinate, cooperate, and integrate with Syria, and to stop 
this dialogue taking place at the expense of Palestinian blood 
in the blessed month of Ramadan and all year round to deter 
Israel and end the state of collapse and successive political, 
material, and human losses incurred by the Gaza-Jericho Accord. 

