Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Wan Xueyuan Calls For Striding Forward in Reform While </F>
Inspecting Southwest Zhejiang"] 
  [Excerpts] The Spring Festival is drawing near. How are 
veteran party members and former guerrillas and messengers in 
southwest Zhejiang's old revolutionary base area faring? Have 
cadres and people in impoverished mountainous areas adopted some 
new methods to shake off poverty and set out on the road to 
prosperity? In the past three years of reform [as published] 
have there been any new moves in the land of southern Zhejiang 
which is seething with activities? How fast is the 
Jinhua-Wenzhou Railroad, on which people across the province 
focus their attention, being built through high mountains? Wan 
Xueyuan, deputy secretary of the provincial party committee and 
governor of the province, called on people in southwest Zhejiang 
and offshore islands and conducted investigations there along 
with responsible persons of relevant provincial departments. 
[passage omitted] 
  At a discussion with leaders of Taishun and Wencheng, two 
poor counties, Wan Xueyuan said: To quicken their pace in 
shaking off poverty and setting out on the road to prosperity, 
people in poor counties should have a proper mentality; they 
should have a united leading body, a fighting will, a 
hardworking spirit, and a realistic work style. Judging from 
the practice of various localities, to develop agriculture, it 
is necessary to vigorously carry out reforms and readjust the 
structures of crop farming and aquaculture. There must be good 
systems, such as the cooperative shareholding system. At the 
same time, we should do research on the market. [passage omitted] 
  While in Ruian City, Wan Xueyuan invited leaders of nine 
enterprises practicing the shareholding system to a discussion 
on accelerating reform of property rights and promoting the 
establishment and development of a modern enterprise system by 
implementing the shareholding system. In Wenzhou city, he 
called a meeting of leaders of relevant departments and 
enterprises and representatives of individuals engaged in 
industrial and commercial businesses, at which they discussed 
questions about the establishment of a socialist security 
system. During the discussion, Wan Xueyuan fully affirmed the 
pioneering spirit displayed by cadres and people at the 
grass-roots levels in carrying out reforms and the achievements 
they had scored. He said: Judging from the current economic 
situation, Wenzhou has maintained a sustained, rapid, and 
healthy development of its economy as has the province. To 
promote development, we must deepen reforms, solve deep-seated 
problems, and instill fresh vitality into the economy. The Third 
Plenary Session of the Party's 14th Central Committee set the 
objectives and tasks for reform. People throughout the 
province, especially those in Wenzhou, should take bigger 
strides in reform and exploration, be daring to innovate, 
improve what they have done, and blaze new trails. [passage 
omitted] 
  As the backbone of southwest Zhejiang, the Jinhua-Wenzhou 
Railroad will be of great significance for local economic and 
social development. [passage omitted] Wan Xueyuan visited a 
tunnel construction site at Dongqiao Mountain in Wenzhou. He 
went down to a construction site 200 meters underground to call 
on workers of the Pingyang No. 2 Jingxiang Company who were 
tunneling there. He held a drilling machine for a while. Wan 
Xueyuan expressed satisfaction with the progress made last year 
in building the railroad. [passage omitted] 
  While engaging in investigation and study, Wan Xueyuan also 
called on teachers and family planning workers in impoverished 
mountainous areas and inspected Wenzhou's developing cultural 
market. 

