CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by C.S.: "Two Frenchmen Assassinated in Algiers </F>
After Protestors Demonstrate Against Islamists"] 
  [Text] Algerian authorities announced on Wednesday, 23 
March, that two Frenchmen, Roger-Michel Drouaier and his son 
Pascal-Valery, were assassinated Tuesday evening in an Algiers 
suburb. Several hours earlier, some tens of thousands of 
persons, a majority of them women, staged a demonstration 
against the Islamists. The demonstrators criticed authorities 
for failure to move more boldly against the Islamist movements 
and reaffirmed their rejection of any "dialogue" with those 
elements. 
  On Tuesday, 22 March, Roger-Michel Drouaier, a partner in a 
private enterprise, and his son Pascal-Valery, 24, were murdered 
"with weapons of cold steel by five terrorists" in their 
Birkhadem home on the southern outskirts of Algiers, the 
security services announced on Wednesday. The double 
assassination brings to 32--including eight Frenchmen--the 
number of foreigners who have fallen victim to terrorists in 
Algeria in the last six months. 
  On the very day of this latest attack, a march against 
Islamist terrorism was held in Algiers at the instigation of 
womens' associations. According to the most reliable estimates, 
20,000-50,000 people participated in the demonstration, although 
public-service national radio put the number of participants at 
150,000. Two party leaders--Said Sadi, secretary general of the 
Rally for Culture and Democracy (RCD), and Hachemi Cherif, 
secretary-general of the Ettahaddi (communist) party--were seen 
marching alongside other organizers of the event. 
  With shouts of, "Too much blood, too many tears, together 
let 
us save Algeria!," "Women deserve respect and reject 
subjugation!", and even "Free and democratic Algeria!", the 
demonstrators started at the Advanced College of Fine Arts 
(whose director was assassinated, along with his son, on 5 
March) and proceeded slowly up the boulevard leading to Addis 
Ababa Square, where the official National Human Rights 
Observation Post (ONDH) is situated. 
  Some groups of demonstrators chanted slogans that were even 
more policy-prescriptive: "No mercy or dialogue with killers!", 
"To negotiate with the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) is to 
negotiate the army's surrender!" 
  These latter slogans directly echoed the position taken by a 
part of the French-language press that is opposed to any 
dialogue with the Islamist movement and that is sounding the 
alarm, more and more openly, of the possible breakup of the 
Army. However, one of the demonstrators' posters appealed to the 
"state president," General Liamine Zeroual, for "a progressive, 
democratic, open, and tolerant Algeria" and proclaimed the 
rejection of "exile," "submission," and "compromise." Strict 
security precautions were taken to protect the demonstration, 
with several riot squad vans stationed nearby and policemen 
posted on rooftops overlooking the marchers to surveil the crowd 
and vicinity. Similar marches were held the same day in Oran 
(west), Constantine, Annaba (east), Tizi-Ouzou, and Bejaia 
(Kabylia). Although not explicitly endorsing the demonstrations, 
labor leaders with the General Union of Algerian Workers (UGTA) 
and the Union of Public-Sector Entrepreneurs (UNEP) called a 
work stoppage as a gesture of "mourning" and tribute to the 
victims of Islamist terrorism. Activity in most government 
offices, as well as in banks and the transport sector, was 
sharply reduced by the one-day strike. Algiers, for once, looked 
like a dead city. 
  It could be misleading to compare this womens' march with a 
similar event mounted just a year ago by UGTA, which drew 
100,000 participants. The reduced participation in the latest 
demonstration largely reflects the sharp escalation of violence 
over the last six months and the climate of terror that has 
reigned since early February. In a joint editorial entitled: 
"Three Questions to Our Leaders," 13 daily newspapers and 
periodicals have publicly demanded that the head of state answer 
such questions as: "Does `dialogue' apply to the fundamentalists 
or to the productive sectors of society? What is the social 
model our leaders are trying to realize? How far are they 
prepared to go in its pursuit? To the point of bloodbath?" They 
called for an "official response" from President Zeroual. The 
editors also decided to hold a strike next Saturday and Sunday 
to protest a Monday, 21 March, terrorist attack on HEBDO 
LIBERE's headquarters that killed two employees. 
<H5>  Death Toll </H5>
  The 22 March killing of two Frenchmen in the suburbs of 
Algiers has raised the toll of foreigners assassinated in 
Algeria over the last six months to 32, including eight 
Frenchmen. 
  Several incidents in the last few weeks have deepened 
anxiety 
among members of the French community still in the country. For 
example, a French gendarme out of uniform was recently attacked 
in downtown Annaba, miraculously escaping the bullets of his 
assailants. A Frenchwoman residing in Algiers was kidnapped and 
held prisoner for several hours before being released unharmed. 
Finally one of her attackers, who had not recognized her at 
first, introduced herself as "her neighbor" and released the 
Frenchwoman. 

