Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lidiya Ivchenko: ``The Water Is Becoming </F>
Dangerous''] 
  [Text] There was a time when water from 
the tap could be drunk in peace, even unboiled. Unfortunately 
today this is only an apparent state of well-being: Last year 16 
outbreaks of infections from which almost 2,500 persons suffered 
were registered in Russia at the fault of water supply 
systems. 
  What we are talking about in this case is only the mass 
outbreaks, in which the number of victims is in the tens and 
hundreds; this is not including the isolated cases, or ones 
which may be classified as causing minor unpleasantness, like 
water in Moscow in spring. However, water recently flowed from 
Moscow's taps with the obvious odor of manure. 
  ``This phenomenon has already become a tradition,'' said A. 
Rogovets, chief specialist on water supply problems of the State 
Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological Oversight. ``The moment 
spring begins, you have manure in the water sources.... The 
farms violate the procedures of applying organic fertilizers to 
fields: Rather than trucking them in in fall, before the snow 
falls, they do so in winter, applying them over the snow. The 
thaw begins, and everything flows into the water basin, rather 
than penetrating into the soil.'' 
  In order for the quality of drinking water to be high, the 
source itself must first correspond to sanitary requirements. 
But when it comes to our water basins, the question is, what 
isn't in them--toxic chemical compounds, heavy metal salts, 
phenols, viruses, agents of parasitic diseases.... Today one out 
of every eight samples of tap water is unsatisfactory with 
respect to bacteriological indicators, while one out of every 
five is unsatisfactory in its chemical indicators, due to 
incomplete treatment that is unable to cope with massive 
contamination of sources. Of the water pipelines taking water 
from open-air water basins in the country, 44.4 percent do not 
have the full complement of treatment facilities, while in 
Arkhangelsk Oblast, Karelia and the Volga region a third of the 
water supply facilities supply water without decontamination. 
  On the whole, around half of Russia's population is forced 
to 
use drinking water that fails the hygienic requirements in 
relation to a number of indicators. And the water supply nets 
are so worn that the number of accidents reaches 75,000 per 
year. Why should we be amazed if infections rise here and there, 
and the sanitary-epidemiological service has to quench the 
flames under emergency conditions? 
  ``The epidemiological danger of drinking water is growing,'' 
said Yevgeniy Belyayev, chairman of the State Committee for 
Sanitary-Epidemiological Oversight. ``Each year cubic kilometers 
of untreated or insufficiently treated liquid wastes are dumped 
into water basins. The Don has already transformed into a 
settling tank, and cholera is registered along its shores in 
population centers just about every year. Due to intestinal 
infections and hepatitis the Russian economy has suffered losses 
of 1 billion rubles annually in 1991 prices; today this is 
probably in the hundreds of billions. But infections are not the 
only problem. Drinking water now contains chemical and other 
toxic impurities in amounts dangerous to health. Were we to 
monitor water quality not on the basis of the 28 leading 
indicators of our All-Union State Standard, but by the 100 
recommended by WHO, which suggests stiffer norms for the 
concentrations of lead, arsenic, cyanides and other such 
impurities, I'm certain that drinking water would fail the 
standards in 90 percent of the cases. But in order to carry out 
deeper analysis, we need a dependable monitoring system, which 
we don't have.'' 
  As we can see, there are many problems in this area. A 
meeting of the presidium of the Russian Academy of Medical 
Sciences held jointly with the State Committee for 
Sanitary-Epidemiological Oversight was devoted--for the first 
time!--to the critical water supply situation. This meeting was 
held because, in the words of academy President V. Pokrovskiy, 
we are talking about the nation's future. 
`` Research by Russian and foreign scientists has now revealed 
the presence of a new class of biologically active compounds in 
contaminated water, called DV molecules,'' said Academician V. 
Pokrovskiy. ``These substances of microbial origin, which are 
released by natural acquatic inhabitants when conditions are 
unfavorable to their life--as defensive, adaptive reactions--are 
dangerous to human health, and have a deleterious effect upon 
the immune system and other body functions. And modern water 
treatment technology does not permit their complete removal.'' 
  Scientists will soon submit their recommendations on 
sanitary 
norms and rules, in accordance with which the All-Union State 
Standard will be reviewed. Twelve new monitoring indicators are 
to be introduced just for organic impurities in water. The State 
Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological Oversight, the State 
Standards Committee and the Committee for Housing and Municipal 
Management of the Russian Ministry of Construction have written 
a draft of the Russian Federation law ``On Providing Drinking 
Water to the Population,'' which was submitted to the Supreme 
Soviet for examination. 
  And until the law is enacted, and until the program is 
implemented, it would be worthwhile to acquire individual 
filters to purify tap water. 


