Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Discussion program entitled "A nonnuclear Ukraine -- </F>
Outcome of the Ukrainian-U.S.-Russian summit," the first program 
in a series, presented by correspondents Eduard Kotenko and Ihor 
Storozhuk, with Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy Mikolayovich 
Shmarov, Foreign Minister Anatoliy Maksymovych Zlenko, and 
Defense Minister Vitaliy Hryhorovych Radetskyy] 
  [Text] [First speaker] As we already reported, a trilateral 
Ukrainian-U.S.-Russian summit took place with the participation 
of Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk, U.S. President Bill 
Clinton, and Russian President Boris Yeltsin. A document of a 
history-making significance was signed. 
  Today, Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Valeriy Shmarov, 
Foreign Minister Anatoliy Zlenko, and Defense Minister Vitaliy 
Radetskyy are taking part in our television [as heard] program. 
  I think we will be able to talk about the significance of 
this document and analyze in detail the signing process [word 
indistinct] etc. Valeriy Mykolayovych [Shmarov], let us begin 
with the preceding events so as to understand how exactly we 
achieved the signing of the document. 
  [Shmarov] I think it will be interesting to tell you briefly 
a little bit more than those dry reports. The government 
entrusted me to head [words indistinct]. 
  First, what happened yesterday was, as a matter of fact, 
[words indistinct], the completion of a rather lengthy marathon, 
a political and diplomatic marathon which we have been running 
for a long time, for several months. Undoubtedly, it was 
preceded by very intensive and complicated work. That was the 
Massandra agreement and its achievements, as you know, although 
they were not final. That was also large-scope work on drafting 
the Supreme Council resolution on ratification of the START I 
Treaty. There was further work in line with this resolution as 
of 18 November [1993]. 
  I should say that the Ukrainian delegation was guided by 
that 
very document, because the Supreme Council resolution actually 
mapped out a plan of work to be done to put that resolution into 
effect, that is to say, to make international START I effective. 
So-called reservations or conditions, 13 conditions, were 
formulated. The resolution enables this document to come into 
force, in other words, it gave us the right to accede to START I 
on condition that these reservations are fulfilled. 
  You probably remember these conditions, the principal ones 
[words indistinct]. The first gives security guarantees to 
Ukraine in case [words indistinct]. The second issue deals with 
compensation for the value of the nuclear weapons, especially 
its nuclear part, i.e. nuclear ammunition. The issue of 
compensation deals with the issue of returning this value to 
Ukraine somehow. At the same time, [words indistinct] about 
compensation for those nuclear weapons which have already been 
transferred from Ukraine, the so-called tactical weapons which 
were transferred from Ukraine during 1991 and 1992 [passage 
indistinct]. 
  The third issue deals with rendering economic, financial, 
and 
technical assistance to Ukraine and implementing this 
complicated disarmament project. This is a rather [words 
indistinct] task, particularly in view of the present-day state 
of our economy. 
  Well, there is also the issue, as you remember, [words 
indistinct] deactivating, dismantling, and eliminating nuclear 
weapons in compliance with the agreement. These weapons, these 
facilities -- especially the nuclear warheads -- will have to be 
serviced by those who manufactured them, by those who are 
supposed to service them, who are responsible for guaranteeing 
this technology, these weapons. 
  These are probably the main points we focused on while 
elaborating the framework, I would say, of the agreement, which 
had to answer the questions posed by the resolution. 
  One of the new forms of work we offered at the end of last 
year was trilateral negotiations. Working on this problem, we 
have long proposed involving the United States as a party in the 
negotiations, as a guarantor, and as a source of expertise in 
these matters. I would say that this proposal of ours was a 
success and, beginning in December 1993, we started elaborating 
the set tasks and decisions on a trilateral basis. 
  The first such trilateral negotiations were held in Kiev on 
16 December. I must say that we were not used to this form of 
negotiation, and that round of the was rather complicated. 
However, we arrived at an understanding and realized that this 
was a very effective way of working. Having such a strong 
arbiter involved in a dispute on this issue speeded up the 
adoption of decisions to some extent and made them unbiased. We 
believe that this was a positive factor. 
  The second round of negotiations was held for several days 
in 
Washington from 3 December, where a documented basis was formed 
for the future statement, the trilateral agreement the 
presidents have just signed, as you know. I must say it was a 
rather difficult piece of work, which was already obvious in 
Washington, but all those involved were willing to solve the 
issue by taking into account the standpoint of each of the three 
sides. 
  Our work was a matter of principle. I would not say it was 
in any way idyllic. Solutions came hard, and there were 
continuous consultations. The presidents were constantly in 
touch; the vice presidents and foreign ministers, or the State 
Department, constantly exchanged information. In other words, 
it was not the work of three groups of experts or officials, but 
that of a colossal number of people, starting with the top 
leaders of the three countries. 
  I should also add that the U.S. President was directly 
involved in this matter, by way of his appraisal and his 
conduct, and this did a lot for the final outcome. He received 
our delegation, evaluated the situation, and heard out our 
proposals. I would say that his opinions made quite a 
contribution to the conduct of the U.S. delegation and the final 
agreement [words indistinct]. 
  Secretary of State Christopher was also actively and 
personally involved, as were many other U.S. officials. I 
believe the quality of the work at the stage I have described 
was probably appreciated yesterday in Moscow, because the text 
signed by the three presidents was almost identical with the 
text we drafted in three languages, except for a few minor 
technical or linguistic corrections. 
  I think this is only a chronological account of the 
developments. As for a comment on specific issues, my colleagues 
and I can now answer your questions. 
  [First speaker] Thus, following the summits in Kiev and 
Moscow, the process of Ukraine's nuclear disarmament is 
beginning to take real shape. Vitaliy Hryhorovych [Radetskyy], 
could you tell us in detail about the military-technical aspect 
of this process? 
  [Radetskyy] After the Supreme Council adopted the 
resolution, 
I was summoned to the president who gave me the task of 
reporting today's true situation with nuclear arms. I studied 
the resolution in the greatest of detail, and I would like to 
draw your attention to a few issues. 
  First, taking account of the fact that Ukraine was not 
directly involved in the negotiations on the preparation of the 
START treaty, Ukraine's president and government must be advised 
to hold negotiations with the relevant states and international 
organizations on the following issues: 
  1. On international guarantees of Ukraine's national 
security; 
  2. On the conditions of economic, financial, scientific, 
and technical aid toward the fulfillment of the treaty 
obligations; 
  3. On the manufacturer's servicing of nuclear warheads 
and combat missile systems under guarantee; 
  4. On the negotiation of conditions for the funding of 
the inspection envisaged by the treaty; 
  5. On the possibility of peaceful use of silos under 
fail-safe control; 
  6. On the conditions of using fissionable weapon 
materials released as a result of nuclear arms elimination; 
  7. On the guarantees of compensation for the material 
value of nuclear weapon components. 
  And, 12. [number as heard] the president of Ukraine must 
be advised to approve a schedule for the elimination of 
strategic offensive weapons specified in this resolution and 
ensure that it is adhered to. 
  I would also like to draw your attention to Clause 10 of 
this 
Supreme Council resolution. The conditions of compensation are 
extended to involve also tactical nuclear weapons transferred 
from the territory of Ukraine to Russia in 1992. 
  We went further and prepared a report for the president, 
saying that this clause should involve not only the tactical 
nuclear weapons withdrawn in 1992, but also those withdrawn in 
1991. And, second, I drew the president's attention to the 
issue concerning the possibility of peaceful use of silos under 
fail-safe control. Here, views differed as to the ways of 
implementing these clauses, since they concern our security. 
  [Shmarov] Excuse me, please. I would like to return to the 
issue of package No. 26. May I? 
  [Unidentified speakers] Yes, please. 
  [Shmarov] It has been proposed that we set up an alternative 
to the package. You heard them: Let's set up a button, and 
everything will be okay. 
  [Radetskyy] Yes, such views were expressed. 
  [Shmarov] I would like to respond to this with a final 
clarification. We did indeed give this task to our leading 
scientists in specialist design bureaus dealing with missile 
control systems who are highly qualified in this area and who 
worked on this before. They came to the conclusion that the 
development and manufacturing of what is primitively called a 
button, but what in fact is a special centralized missile and 
strategic force control system, would take about seven years. 
It is what will happen during those seven years what Vitaliy 
Hryhorovych [Radetskyy] was talking about: the guaranteed 
service life of the nuclear warheads will expire, and instead of 
working on what we planned, we would wind up in great trouble. 
As the army general has already said, the expiry of the 
guarantee can lead to uncontrolled developments and a situation 
of nuclear danger. What we are guided by during the 
implementation of these programs is first of all the need to 
avoid any nuclear danger in Ukraine. This is my answer to the 
issue of the button, and experts can provide their own. 
  [Radetskyy] Let me add to this. You know that I read an 
article about the silos. I reported to our president that we 
need the infrastructure currently available within the 43d 
Missile Army -- the people whose training, by the way, will take 
approximately 10-15 years -- in order to tackle other problems. 
Second, it is high-precision weapons that can be regarded today 
as advanced weapons which have prospects for the future. We 
should not forget about these, but I am not going to disclose 
here all the subtleties. 
  I reported to the president, and he agreed with me. 
Accordingly, we will consider this issue in the near future at 
the Defense Council, where I will deliver a full-scale report on 
that state, that condition of our armed forces which is to 
ensure and compensate for the withdrawal of the nuclear weapons. 
I would like the television audience to understand this 
correctly. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Vitaliy Hryhorovych, as a military 
man 
[words indistinct] your life, almost completely diverts you from 
tackling other problems. You are permanently thinking about 
this problem. In my turn, I would like to speak as a civilian, 
as a person who is immediately engaged in international 
politics. 
  I would like to say this: After Ukraine gained independence, 
the issue of nuclear weapons was a great obstacle to ensuring 
Ukraine's full accession to the system of international 
relations. I would say that we spend no less time than you do 
thinking day and night about how to prevent these very nuclear 
weapons from becoming an obstacle and putting our state in a 
very complicated situation. 
  I am not going to go back into history and dwell on the way 
we approached this issue, but I would like to say that it was 
created in a very complicated situation. It was only due to 
extraordinary efforts -- and, I would say, nonstandard 
approaches -- that we managed to avoid many of the consequences 
we were anticipating. If there is an opportunity and if we have 
enough time, I would also like to say how we were moved toward 
this, how we reached those trilateral negotiations, that 
trilateral agreement. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Anatoliy Maksymovych. Some people 
[word indistinct] believed, and I think this opinion still 
exists, that it is not just the possibility of defending 
ourselves that we have lost -- we did not lose it, as we now 
understand -- but also the international prestige which, in one 
way or another due to inertia since Soviet times, was attached 
to our being, supposedly, the world's third nuclear state since 
the Soviet Union's disintegration. How would you comment on our 
prestige today? 
  [Zlenko] First, I would like to say that we managed to save 
the state's prestige till yesterday's meeting in Moscow, until 
the signing of the documents. In this connection [pauses] 
  [Unidentified speaker] And after the meeting? 
  [Zlenko] And after the meeting, certainly. It was 
consolidated to an ever higher degree. Absolutely, 
indisputably. I would also like to say that after the Supreme 
Council ratified START and adopted a relevant resolution, the 
response of the Western world was openly negative. 
  This resolution was not recognized as an act of ratification 
by the United States, Russia, or by almost all the other nuclear 
states. Western countries reacted accordingly, and attempts 
were made to place Ukraine in international isolation. 
Immediately after the ratification, we used appropriate measures 
to prevent this happening. This included my personal 
correspondence with a number of ministers from NATO countries, 
first of all, and from the nuclear states. This included a 
statement to the UN secretary general, a statement to the NATO 
secretary general, and to other world and European structures. 
  Then, I would like to add, there followed an exchange of 
views between our president and the President of the United 
States in telephone conversations, and an exchange of relevant 
letters with the president of the Russian Federation. All this 
was done in order to prevent our being completely isolated, in 
order to check the brewing of an attitude in those circles which 
could bring Ukraine at once to its knees. 
  At the same time, the situation remained extremely 
difficult. 
Very difficult. I would like to say that from the very first 
moment the Supreme Council adopted this resolution, the 
president, as you remember, made his own statement. This very 
statement, saying that he would be forced to return to the issue 
and raise it once again at the Supreme Council, gave us a chance 
to continue our work. This gave us a chance to get our foot in 
the door; it enabled us to make contacts and carry out relevant 
work. It was a great political and diplomatic move. 
  Thus, after strenuous diplomatic efforts, we found the 
mechanism for a trilateral agreement, a trilateral summit, in 
which Valeriy Mykolayovych [Shmarov] took part, heading our 
delegation. And the climax of these efforts was the signing of 
the trilateral agreement. 
  [Shmarov] Excuse me, Anatoliy Maksymovych. It was asked 
whether the signing of the agreement leaves us in a state of 
future dependence and with a loss of authority. I would like to 
comment on this. Anatoliy Maksymovych [Zlenko] summed it up 
from a political point of view, and I would like to give some 
pragmatic information. 
  After we reached agreement on these issues in Washington, 
the 
U.S. Administration confirmed its intention of broad-based 
economic cooperation. It has already been determined that a 
large Ukrainian delegation of economists and financiers will go 
to Washington on 24 January to work at government level on the 
issues of broad-based economic and financial cooperation. 
  Also, I had contacts with many representatives of business 
and financial circles. They all make our future and our 
cooperation dependent on the agreement that has been signed. I 
do not think that Ukraine's future, its prestige, are in its 
stance of some nuclear monster, but I think it is in the way the 
people will live in Ukraine, in the way its economy and people's 
well-being will be shaped and developed, and these issues will, 
probably, be solved through broad international cooperation. 
  [Zlenko] This is an absolutely unequivocal fact. I would 
like to share this opinion completely. Moreover, as far as 
prestige is concerned, I would like to say that prestige, of 
course, is based on relevant authority of the state. This is an 
unequivocal fact. You know, if today the state found itself 
under pressure on all sides, of course, what authority of the 
state can we talk about? Then, the state's authority is based 
on a consistent, planned, balanced, and predictable nature of 
both its domestic and foreign policies. Here is the state's 
authority. 
  Referring to what took place in Moscow yesterday, to the 
preliminary negotiations, I would, first of all, like to say 
that we managed to achieve a certain compromise in real terms, 
i.e. to avert the threat of Ukraine's international isolation. 
It seems to me that this is the main factor. This is what 
future prestige will rest on. We managed to lead our relations 
with the United States of America out of the dead-end street. 
  Economic relations have just been mentioned by Valeriy 
Mykolayovych [Shmarov]. As far as economic issues are 
concerned, today, for example, we solve the problem of fuel 
elements supply. It means that we reduce our expenditures for 
buying these materials, which means that we will be able to curb 
further [word indistinct] prices. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Within the framework of the 
agreement. 
But I have in mind what broad cooperation will bring us -- 
investments. 
  [Zlenko] I understand this [words indistinct]. At present, 
the United States of America is setting up a foundation of 
entrepreneurship for small businesses. It will provide the 
first portion of capital to boost this process. You have 
mentioned the economic delegation that is to leave these days. 
It brings along specific programs, specific projects giving an 
opportunity for initiative. The financing of those 155 million 
[currency not specified] allocated by the U.S. Congress for 
economic reform in Ukraine is getting under way. This 
delegation will have a chance to unlock this money and there are 
assurances on the part of the U.S. President himself. The 
minimum sum of financial aid rendered to us for the purposes of 
nuclear disarmament is $175 million. We know what other 
reserves they are talking about and, of course, we will be able 
to get access to those reserves so as to increase this sum. 
  At present, we are elaborating a whole series of specific 
programs and projects that will allow us to use our financial 
resources accordingly. However, the nuclear armaments issue has 
always been an obstacle and this is why they ask: Why are there 
no investments? Well, they all say that the solution of our 
domestic problems is probably hampered by our legislation as 
well, whose elaboration has not yet been completed by our 
deputies, etc. But at the same time, nuclear weapons caused yet 
another problem, which created a negative political climate 
around Ukraine. We hope and, of course, we take under strict 
control the fulfillment of the agreements that we have achieved 
and this will be our determining policy in relations with the 
United States and Russia, and, of course, in an opposite 
direction as well. 
  This is what people must restore: It first of all concerns 
solutions to these economic issues, a range of economic issues. 
It will make it possible to improve people's living standards 
and check the incessant rise in prices for different goods. 
This will guarantee the economic well-being of both our state 
and of each individual therein. This is how I see it. This is 
where we should now focus our attention, and this is what we 
will continue working on. 
  [Radetskyy] Anatoliy Maksymovych, can I add something? You 
spoke about commitments. The Defense Ministry is drawing up 
proposals on the provision of housing for servicemen, which will 
be also taken into account in the United States, on adaptation 
to conversion, etc. You know the difficult situation servicemen 
are facing today. These problems will be solved. They will be 
solved not only by the United States, but also by other states 
as well. We heard today what the attitude is toward us on these 
issues. I consider this a priority. 
  [Zlenko] I would like to finish. When talking about 
prestige, or importance given to the results, we, and our 
delegation, were guided by Ukraine's national interests. 
However, I think that not everyone in Ukraine realizes the 
essence of these interests. Far from everyone does. Naturally, 
we were guided by the interests of (?stability) and security, 
not only in our state, but also in the whole of Europe and the 
entire world. This is what political pragmatism is all about, 
and this must be the determining factor for state policy, both 
domestic and foreign. 
  [Unidentified speaker] Anatoliy Maksymovych, one could 
hardly disagree with these comments, but do you not think that a 
lot about the implementation of this nuclear package of 
documents and the implementation of these programs, military, 
social, and technical, now depends on parliament, on whether it 
will ratify these documents? Does it have to ratify them? 
  [Zlenko] We must first of all sort out our terminology. 
Some call it a resolution, others an agreement, still others, a 
statement. First of all, this document is a trilateral 
statement. Parliament has just passed a law on international 
agreements. We know that it determines which documents qualify 
for international legal status and which do not. This document, 
naturally, does not qualify as such. One can later provide 
legal clarification in this respect, but in order to make it 
clear for everyone today, since there is no time, we are talking 
about a trilateral statement. I think the media, I mean the 
audio-visual media, have already reported this. The press has 
probably not done so yet, because there has indeed been very 
little time. Anyway, we proceed from the fact that it is a 
statement. 
  It is a statement that, in my view, takes account of all the 
reservations and takes the Supreme Council resolution further. 
We would not like to create the impression that the executive 
power went off and did something different from what the Supreme 
Council instructed it to do. You can compare the resolution and 
the statement, and you will see the relevant difference. There 
is a difference, but the main thing is, as Valeriy Mykolayovych 
[Shmarov] said at the very beginning, that a decision was made 
on political guarantees, reliable guarantees, of our national 
security. By whom? By the United States? We used to solve this 
problem on a bilateral basis. Remember, we had letters from 
Russia, the United States, Great Britain, and so on. Now it is 
done on a multilateral basis, as negotiations have been held 
with Great Britain, and Great Britain has stated its readiness, 
as the third depository of the [START] Treaty, to provide 
Ukraine with relevant guarantees. Thus, we are talking about a 
multilateral basis. 
  A meeting with the diplomatic corps recently ended in [word 
indistinct] where I was approached by French Ambassador Peissik, 
who said he had a letter for me from the French Government, 
again, concerning guarantees. Do you understand what we are 
talking about? What does it mean for our state, which is still 
unsteady on its feet of independence, to receive political 
guarantees from leading nuclear states? It is a guarantee for 
the further implementation of our economic reforms. That is 
what we must pay attention to. It is a guarantee protecting 
Ukraine's political sovereignty, and so on and so forth. 
  [Correspondent Ihor Storozhuk] When we say: Guarantees from 
a certain country, say, Great Britain, what is the meaning of 
the concept: guarantee? What do they guarantee? That they will 
not attack us? That we will not attack them? 
  [Zlenko] Let me, Ihor Anatoliyovych [Storozhuk], quote the 
statement, and make a few comments. The three presidents 
confirmed once again that: They will cooperate as full and 
equal partners. Do you realize what Ukraine is raised to? The 
level of partners: That the relations between them are to 
develop on the basis of respect toward each country's 
independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity. Then, 
second: The presidents recognize the importance of compensating 
Ukraine for the value of highly enriched uranium. Valeriy 
Mykolayovych [Shmarov] already commented on that. Measures were 
determined as to fair and timely compensation during the 
withdrawal of nuclear warheads. Further: The three presidents 
came to a decision on simultaneous actions during the transfer 
of nuclear warheads from Ukraine and the delivery of fuel 
elements for Ukraine's nuclear power stations in compensation. 
We have discussed that. 
  Further: President Clinton is providing ready guarantees. 
What are these guarantees? I quote: First: Respect for the 
independence, sovereignty, and the existing borders. Further: 
A pledge to refrain from any threat of violence or the use of 
force against us, and so on. None, I stress, none of their 
weapons are to be ever used against Ukraine. Further: Again, a 
pledge to refrain from the use of economic pressure to force a 
(?CSCE) state to use its inviolable rights of sovereignty in 
one's interests and thus gain advantage. Understand? 
  Further: Confirmation of commitment to immediate action in 
aid of Ukraine as a nonnuclear state party to the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty in case of Ukraine falling victim to an 
act of aggression or becoming an object of a threat of nuclear 
aggression. Further: As I said, Great Britain joins here, 
etc., etc. 
  President Clinton once again confirmed the United States' 
commitment to the granting of technical and financial aid for 
the safe dismantling of nuclear arms and storage of fissionable 
materials, and so on, and so forth. This is what we are talking 
about. We are talking about the implementation of Clause 5 of 
the Supreme Council's resolution. In this connection, I would 
like to quote this clause, if we have time: 
  Ukraine as a state that possesses nuclear arms will proceed 
toward nonnuclear status and gradually get rid of the nuclear 
arms deployed on its territory provided it receives reliable 
guarantees of its national security, whereby states will 
undertake to never use nuclear arms against Ukraine -- I told 
you about that -- not to use conventional arms against it and 
not to resort to any threat of violence -- and I told you, the 
statement rules out any, I stress, any threat of violence. 
Further: Not to resort to any threat of violence, to respect 
Ukraine's territorial integrity and inviolability of its 
borders; to refrain from economic pressure in the settlement of 
any contentious issues. 
  As you see, I compared the two. Let my esteemed colleagues, 
let the people evaluate everything that has been done by the 
executive power in this short period of time. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Could you tell us about the 
schedule for the elimination of nuclear weapons? 
  [Shmarov] I would like to answer this question. The 
appendix to the trilateral statement has an interesting aspect, 
I would describe it as a first step plan. This partly answers 
your question, and there are probably many viewers and citizens 
curious about this issue. We, too, wondered about it. As they 
say, it is an everyday life situation: One may give something 
today and refuse tomorrow. Therefore, there is a first step 
plan that envisages that a section of nuclear warheads, say 10 
percent or 200 warheads, is transferred to Russia for 
dismantling within a specified time, while the same amount of 
uranium fuel, or uranium-based fuel elements for nuclear power 
stations, is delivered to Ukraine within the same space of time 
to be used in atomic power engineering. 
  Then work will proceed according to the principles worked 
out 
by our and Russia's Defense Ministries, because it is a complex 
technical task. If you remember, President Yeltsin said in 
Moscow that a new initiative is being drawn up by nuclear states 
concerning the complete detargetting of nuclear missiles. In 
fact, there is a search for an organizational formula, and I am 
convinced that the European side understands it. 
  But speaking of fuel elements, the main thing is that as 
soon 
as we transfer weapons, we must receive compensation 
immediately. Because, according to our calculations, these fuel 
elements will last us for about seven years. Recently, I met 
directors of about five of our nuclear power stations, and I 
remember how serious they were about the problem. They were 
asking me to do something about it. I made a certain diplomatic 
move to get some help with energy fuel, etc. I think that a 
five to seven year solution to this problem for our nuclear 
power stations is quite a price. It would account for over 30 
percent of our energy balance. We are talking not of millions, 
but billions of dollars. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] Unfortunately our time on the 
program is running out. Of course, we will not be able to 
discuss all the problems. Ukraine as an independent state has a 
policy that is consistent not only with the interests of the 
Ukrainian people, but also with those of the world. Yesterday's 
summit, and today's discussion of the problems showed that 
Ukraine unblocked the process of nuclear disarmament on our 
planet. 
  [Zlenko] I will allow myself to continue. We are already 
receiving reactions to what has happened. Yesterday, as soon as 
I came from Moscow, I read some articles, and I noticed how 
crudely it was presented, not just what happened there, but the 
state itself. You must bear in mind the image of the state, its 
international reputation. You must consider carefully what you 
are putting into your words, and what the consequences for the 
state will be. That is what we must draw the media's attention 
to. This is very important. It is absolutely important, 
because sometimes, with our ill-considered and rash statements, 
we are putting our state in a very difficult position. Our 
state, with a population of 52 million does not deserve this. 
It has huge intellectual potential, huge resources. It is a 
huge European state, a guarantor of future European security, as 
the U.S. President said during the negotiations here in Kiev. 
You must think about the state, think of what you can and 
cannot say today. This is where the future of our state, its 
independence, and the prosperity of our people lies. 
  [Shmarov] I would like to say this very briefly. I would 
like our people to know that all this work is being carried out 
under very careful control of the military, scientists, 
involving, where necessary, experts from Russia, from 
weapon-manufacturing enterprises, etc. I would not like people 
to have the impression that something is concealed. Everything 
is under control, in order to prevent any instance of nuclear 
danger in our state. 

