BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Nevelskiy report: "No Need To Beware of Space </F>
Communications"] 
  [Text] St. Petersburg -- A hitherto top-secret 
installation 20 kilometers from Ventspils and owned by the 
Russian Defense Ministry's Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) 
opened its doors Monday to Latvian parliamentarians, the 
scientific public, and journalists. 
  This former military camp, where a handful of specialists 
and 
soldiers remain, is still kept in ideal order. There is no 
spitting or discarding of cigarette butts here. Everything is 
spotlessly clean. And yet the camp is not so small. It is 
located in the depths of the border zone, covering 40 hectares 
of a beautiful pine forest. There are five apartment blocks of 
100 apartments each on its territory, along with a kindergarten, 
school, barracks, large hospital, club, gymnasium, and stadium. 
Add to this a superb garage and filling station and a powerful 
boilerhouse and generator hall with two marine diesel generators 
each producing one megawatt, and you will have some idea of the 
site, whose existence used to be a strict military secret. 
  Its main asset is its unique 32-meter antenna. All around 
the world such giant installations can be counted on the fingers 
of one hand. This 1,000-tonne structure designed for space 
communications is one of the most precise and complex of modern 
instruments. It is around this antenna that the fuss has now 
developed. 
  Owing to the hasty Russian troop withdrawal from Latvia our 
country is nursing colossal losses. There are many 
installations on this Baltic republic's territory which cost 
astronomical amounts of money to build and are now having to be 
abandoned. In particular, Latvia has inherited 26 former 
military airfields with ideal concrete runways (four of them are 
the best in Europe) capable of handling all types of aircraft, 
including the heaviest transports. Latvia is simply unable to 
digest everything it has inherited. Real estate, even if left 
unmonitored for a short period of time, becomes easy prey for 
looters. There are now whole gangs of them in the republic who 
rob abandoned military installations. For instance, immediately 
after one flying unit was withdrawn and redeployed to the east, 
the robbers descended on the deserted airfield. When, a couple 
of days later, representatives of the local authorities arrived 
here, they saw a picture that is now typical of Latvia -- stores 
were opened and sealed premises broken into. The raiders took 
everything they could find, including doors and window frames. 
  Obviously, the same fate would be in store for the Ventspils 
installation. But, fortunately for it, events have begun to 
develop to quite a different scenario. 
  When equipment was removed and the question of dismantling 
the antenna arose, the military consulted its developer -- 
Professor Boris Alekseyevich Poperechenko, chief designer at the 
Moscow Power Institute. He flew in and satisfied himself that 
dismantling the dish would be impossible. Did that mean it had 
to be blown up? No, the chief designer could not tolerate the 
idea of destroying his brainchild, which was the embodiment of 
state-of-the-art Russian technology. He suggested a different 
option. 
That was how the news of this unique installation reached the 
Russian Academy of Sciences. And the leaders of the Applied 
Astronomy Institute proposed using it for absolutely peaceful 
purposes. 
  The fact is that this antenna is a superb radio telescope. 
The Russian Academy of Sciences' scientific organizations had 
never dreamed of such modern equipment. The largest telescope 
our radio astronomers have available to them is the 22-meter 
dish in Serpukhov. Consequently, when they need to do serious 
space research, they are forced to appeal to the military and to 
lease free time on their dishes. Understandably, in this 
situation you can only ever do one-time experiments, rather than 
systematic observations. 
  There was one other reason why it was important for the 
Russian Academy of Sciences to get its hands on the Ventspils 
installation. For eight years now the Applied Astronomy 
Institute has been implementing under a government decree the 
"Quasar" project -- a national Russian system of radio 
interferometers to be based on six 32-meter dishes located over 
a huge area from Leningrad Oblast to Kamchatka and from Murmansk 
to the North Caucasus. The greater the distance between the 
dishes, the more accurately the coordinates of stars and quasars 
can be determined and the more reliable the research results 
will be. 
  Project "Quasar" will also make it possible to resolve 
purely 
applied tasks connected with precision cartography, geodesy, the 
study of the country's natural resources, and so forth. But the 
construction of each of its six centers will require billions in 
expenditure and take a long time -- building a counterpart of 
the Ventspils dish will take up to 10 years. That is why the 
scientists are so interested in using it for the needs of 
fundamental and applied science. 
  This sensible and noble idea has met with a response from 
virtually everyone. After visiting Riga in late April a 
government delegation from Moscow signed a protocol envisaging 
joint work between scientists from the two academies of 
sciences, and a fundamental decision was reached to set up a 
Latvian-Russian radio astronmy center. It only remains to sign 
the already prepared draft intergovernmental agreement, but.... 
  "Initially we could not understand what was going on in 
Latvia," Andrey Finkelshteyn, deputy leader of the Russian 
Government delegation and director of the Applied Astronomy 
Institute, said. "All the necessary permits and signatures had 
seemingly been collected, the idea had been approved in 
government circles, and -- nothing happened. Then we realized 
that the Latvian Government is in a more difficult position than 
our own: Every step it takes is monitored by the opposition, if 
it took one step out of line it would be destroyed. 
Consequently, the republic's leaders are afraid that during the 
debate in the Saeima somebody will state that it is not Russian 
scientists who want to come to the Ventspils site, but disguised 
intelligence operatives; that the government has struck a deal 
with the Moscow generals.... And another scandal would break." 
  It was in order to calm things down and reassure the Latvian 
public that such fears are groundless, that the sensational 
"open-door" event was held near Ventspils Monday. 

