Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Roundtable talk by Takeshi Kondo, director of Itochu </F>
Corporation's Political and Economic Research Institute; 
Atsuyuki Sassa, former chief of the Cabinet Security Affairs 
Office; and Haruhiko Shibuya, director general of International 
Information Bureau of the Foreign Ministry; chaired by 
unidentified GAIKO FORUM staff member on 20 December 1993, 
entitled: "How To Strengthen the Functions of Collecting, 
Analyzing and Communicating Information;" place not given; first 
paragraph is GAIKO FORUM introduction] 
  [Text] Information has gained more importance for Japan's 
diplomacy, because the framework of confrontation between the 
United States and the Soviet Union collapsed and international 
order has since become flamboyant. Now, once more the 
importance of informing people and of disseminating information 
to foreign countries must be recognized. At the same time 
information activities and their understanding must be altered 
drastically. 
<H5>  Background of International Information Bureau's Formation </H5>
  [GAIKO FORUM] It is advocated that Japan has to strengthen 
its diplomacy and that the functions of collecting information 
and the like must also be strengthened. In August 1993, the 
Foreign Ministry went through a major reorganization process 
which resulted in the creation of the International Information 
Bureau, specializing in the collection of information. Mr. 
Shibuya, you are the bureau's first director, please tell us how 
the bureau came about and its characteristics. 
  [Shibuya] As for collecting diplomatic information, there 
have been both criticism and advice from both within and 
without. The Persian Gulf war broke out at the very time it was 
thought that something had to be done about information 
collection, and the Council for Administrative Reform 
recommended in its report the strengthening of information 
collection systems. Taking that opportunity, the Foreign 
Ministry was reorganized. 
  Its main purpose was to reinforce the policymaking and 
information fields. In the policymaking field, the Foreign 
Policy Bureau, with the former United Nations Bureau as its 
foundation, came into being. In the information field, the 
International Information Bureau was established, with the 
Information Analysis, Research, and Planning Bureau as its 
predecessor. 
  The former Information Analysis, Research, and Planning 
Bureau had three functions: collection and analysis of 
information, policy planning, and comprehensive security 
affairs. The comprehensive security affairs and policy planning 
functions were transferred to the Foreign Policy Bureau, and the 
function of collecting and analyzing information was separated 
to become an independent specialized bureau. Being newly 
established, the bureau faces various problems. But on the 
grounds that collecting and analyzing information has something 
to do with policymaking and that such collection and analysis of 
information which is helpful to policymaking is urgently needed, 
I am attempting swift and effective coordination with and 
relaying information to the policymaking field. 
  The collection and analysis of information must be dealt 
with 
in a highly technical way. A considerably large part of 
information collection and analysis is still done by medieval 
manual methods, but I will try to utilize readily available 
high-tech machines. 
  [GAIKO FORUM] I suppose that the Gulf war should have been 
an earthshaking incident for you. But, when Japan was under the 
U.S. occupation after the war and then the framework of 
confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union was 
firmly established, I think Japan seemed to have had no need of 
seriously collecting information itself. Such a trend was not 
only limited to the information field, the Japanese diplomatic 
posture was in a kind of lukewarm situation. In this 
connection, what do you think are the weak points of Japanese 
diplomacy, Mr. Shibuya? 
  [Shibuya] One of them is that part of the work of the 
collection and analysis of information, relatively speaking, is 
not systematized. And a considerably larger part of it relies 
upon individual techniques and talents. These individuals will 
leave the job sooner or later, leaving nothing to be passed on. 
In that sense, an orderly systematization of the work must be 
carried out. 
  On top of this, as you have mentioned earlier, I think Japan 
has been so accustomed to the Cold War structure in which the 
situation did not change rapidly that its sensitivity toward 
information has become stolid. What is important is how to 
revive that sensitivity to information. I have to admit my 
sensitivity has also become numb. 
  Let me tell my own experience relating to the interim 
agreement on the Middle East peace about which it was 
occasionally reported that Israel and PLO were making secret 
contacts. Although I was informed that they were having 
contacts, a small, not an all-out, effort was made to put 
feelers out extensively because the contacts did not yield any 
results. 
  As for North Korea [DPRK], Kim Yong-chu [as published] was a 
surprise in a sense in becoming a member of the Political Bureau 
of the Workers Party of Korea [WPK] and the DPRK's vice 
president. I am excited about it because a man who had 
disappeared after a reported defeat in the power struggle to 
succeed Kim Il-song made an abrupt reappearance in July 1993 and 
was reinstated as a Political Bureau member and became vice 
president in December. 
  [Sassa] The same was true about Vladimir Zhirinovskiy of 
Russia's Liberal Democratic Party. Everybody failed to take 
note of him. 
  [Shibuya] Our immediate concern in the analysis of Russian 
affairs was focused on the political viewpoint of whether the 
presidential faction could muster a majority. In that sense, 
the great leap of Zhirinovskiy and his faction exceeded our 
expectations. Opinion surveys frequently conducted these days 
were to blame for it. These surveys were conducted among urban 
citizens, and their results were strongly in favor of the 
reformists and the presidential faction. It can be said that 
little consideration was given to such technical restrictions in 
the opinion survey conducted in Russia which started to follow 
the process of democratization and gulped down the survey 
results. Another point I have to reflect upon is that I paid 
little attention to the fact that the two extremes of right and 
left are most likely to gain strength in elections conducted 
under bad economic conditions. 
<H5>  Informing the People Gains Importance </H5>
  [GAIKO FORUM] Thank you for your frank remarks. Now Mr. 
Kondo, I suppose the life and death of business depends on a 
corporation's information collection activities, and in that 
sense private activities in the years following the end of WWII 
were serious enough, were they not? 
  [Kondo] From now on, however, it will be more serious, I 
think. For a nation, the role of information activities is 
gaining conspicuous weight more than ever now that the structure 
of the Cold War has disintegrated. In the three fields of 
information activities -- collection, analysis, and 
communication -- I feel that communicating information to the 
people will become more and more important from now on, 
especially in Japan's case. 
  It was mentioned earlier that the Japanese people naturally 
reached a consensus on Japan's diplomacy while the Cold War 
structure existed between East and West. Consequently, little 
effort was needed to build up a consensus among the people. I 
think now the time has come when the people's consensus must be 
actively sought for the state. In that connection, it seems to 
be very important to communicate information to the people. In 
a democracy, an effective diplomacy cannot be pursued, whatever 
good policies there are, unless a fundamental consensus of the 
people exists. 
  I have worked in Washington for a long time, and from that 
experience I strongly believe in the importance of such 
enlightenment of the people. My tenure began in 1987 when the 
Cold War structure started to tumble and the United States began 
to have a hard time putting together an American consensus on 
diplomacy. For example, congressional discontent with the 
Japanese response to the Gulf crisis came out in the open, 
resulting in the overwhelming support of a resolution demanding 
pulling out U.S. forces in Japan and such. It was one of the 
foreboddings that suggested extreme difficulty in building up a 
popular consensus strongly related to the base of the future 
order of mutual security between Japan and the United States. 
By the same token, I feel that enlightening the Japanese people 
on diplomatic problems will become more important from now on. 
  One more thing I have to add to the three elements of 
information I mentioned earlier is that the nation as a whole 
should not neglect to disseminate information to the outside 
world. Of course it is important for the government to send 
information to counterparts in other nations, but for future 
diplomacy it is imperative to provide the ordinary people of 
other nations with correct information. From now on, 
democratization processes will make headway in many countries, 
including Russia and China. Unless backed up by popular 
consensus, other nations cannot be expected to pursue wholesome 
policies toward Japan at all times. Therefore, I think direct 
communication with the people of other countries is an 
indispensable means of future diplomacy. 
  I firmly believe that we need to realize once more the 
importance of the two factors: communicating information to the 
Japanese people and disseminating information to the outside 
world. 
  [GAIKO FORUM] We featured in our September 1993 issue the 
subject of "How To Strengthen External Dissemination of 
Information From Japan." A reader suggested that the matter of 
news agencies also should have been included in our review. 
  [Kondo] Certainly that matter should be given consideration, 
but in my opinion as much as one half of the works of the 
Foreign Ministry should be directed toward domestic purposes, to 
put it in extreme terms. Close examination of the U.S. State 
Department reveals that it is engaged in active enlightenment 
activities in the United States. Each state has a number of 
organizations like the foreign affairs council, and the State 
Department dispatches lecturers there, sponsors symposiums to 
discuss diplomatic and international problems among government 
officials and private citizens with such organizations as the 
core, and engages in various other activities. 
  In addition, there is such an interesting system as the 
"diplomat in residence." Under this system, the State 
Department loans foreign service officials to universities or 
think tanks and even to domestic enterprises for a certain 
period of time. Likewise, the U.S. State Department has a very 
strong recognition of the importance of information 
communication and enlightenment work about diplomatic problems 
for the benefit of the people. I was greatly impressed by the 
government recognition of the fact that the basis of diplomacy 
lies in the making of popular consensus in a democracy. 
  After the collapse of the Cold War structure, Japan's 
domestic opinion is likely to waver in various phases of 
international problems. There is no entity other than the 
Foreign Ministry that can attempt to build up a consensus at the 
level of the people, in order for Japan to conduct diplomatic 
efforts in pursuance of a long-range national interest. 
<H5>  Automatic Overseas Complaints System Recommended </H5>
  [GAIKO FORUM] So far we have discussed wide-ranging subjects 
such as collection, analysis, communicating, and dissemination 
of information. Let me hear Mr. Sassa's views about them. 
  [Sassa] First of all, I must point out that Japan has 
extremely few information experts. In the case of the United 
States, competitive relations exist between the State Department 
and the Central Intelligence Agency, and DIA [Defense 
Intelligence Agency] cuts in between them. In spite of some 
evil effects, fierce competition in the field of international 
intelligence is waged among at least three powerful government 
organizations, the State Department, CIA, and DIA, resulting in 
sharpening and improving abilities of information collection and 
in mutual criticism. 
  For example, during the Gulf war, only CIA's analysts of 
reconnaissance satellites predicted the breakout of war, while 
the State Department was criticized for having optimistic views 
about the situation, exemplified by U.S. Ambassador Glaspie's 
taking leave. As the result, the State Department underwent 
improvement. Such competitive relations are not found in Japan. 
That is a serious problem. 
  Now, let me cite Swiss examples. Switzerland uses the 
universal conscription system and every citizen is an 
intelligence officer. As far as I know, everyone working at a 
Swiss bank or firm is a reserve officer until age 50. 
Therefore, all businessmen are concerned about politicomilitary 
affairs. Whenever I meet a Swiss banker or journalist, I am 
questioned without fail. And they write reports. It seems they 
have to write reports probably twice a year at designated times. 
And some of them even make overseas calls from Geneva to me in 
Tokyo. 
  I think the way to improve information collection abilities 
is to have multiple intelligence organizations competing among 
themselves and to make every citizen an intelligence officer. 
  I had an experience working in Hong Kong, and it turned out 
to be trading firms, not journalists who had the most correct 
information when riots broke out. Journalists come to the 
consulate-general for information and get wrong information. 
[laughter] The consulate- general has to use diplomatic 
language, so it cannot say anything offending to the host 
government. 
  I was in Saigon when the Viet Cong launched the Tet 
offensive, and everyone knew South Vietnam was beaten. When 
gunshots were heard, all South Vietnamese soldiers fled, 
throwing away their uniforms and rifles. Only the U.S., ROK, 
and Philippine soldiers were fighting the war. At night, flares 
were incessantly shot up to prevent the Viet Cong from making 
movements. I thought it was a stupid war and I told the U.S. 
consul-general what I had in mind when I came back home: "In my 
opinion, the war is being lost and it would be better for the 
United States to disengage at a proper time. Americans are 
saying so and everyone I meet says it is a stupid war." The 
U.S. consul-general was very furious and retorted that it was 
nonsense because the war was being won at the time. He has a 
kind of mentality that the war would soon be finally won. So I 
showed the films I had shot in Saigon to the CIA and FBI people 
who wanted to see them. The shots showed such a hopeless 
situation of only American soldiers seriously performing their 
duty or ammunition transport vehicles stuck in traffic 
congestion. They seemed to have agreed with my opinion and 
probably they made such reports. It will come to no good unless 
situations are covered by several organizations. 
  In Japan it is a rule that the man in charge of information 
at all government offices is rotated every two years. As things 
are, the capabilities of analysts will in no way be improved. 
So I have proposed setting up career positions in the 
information/intelligence field. Once in that position, a man in 
either administrative or appointee posts would not have to have 
subordinates. Promotions in grade and pay raises will suffice. 
Having dozens of people in the grades of information experts, 
bureau directors, and division chiefs in grade without 
subordinates will not matter. The analytical capabilities will 
not improve nor will information experts be nurtured unless a 
system is created where everybody is engaged in his specific 
duty for his career. 
  Third, as for relaying information, there is a vertical 
bureaucracy preventing horizontal communication, and in trading 
firms information will not be passed to competitors. The mass 
media compete among themselves for scoops. There will be no 
opposition to the idea that all information will end up in the 
Office of the Prime Minister. Information will not be 
circulated horizontally. 
  On July 1, 1986, Messrs. Nakasone and Gotoda made an attempt 
to strengthen the cabinet. Created were the five cabinet 
offices of internal affairs, external affairs, security affairs, 
information research, and public relations. Meetings were held 
frequently to maintain active horizontal communication. The 
five chiefs chosen by Mr. Gotoda had quite an experience of 
exchanges and broad viewpoints that resulted in smooth 
functioning. Mr. Gotoda created the cabinet liaison office of 
information to smooth the horizontal flow of information. That 
meeting was participated in by the director of the Information 
Analysis, Research, and Planning Bureau of the Foreign Ministry, 
the Security Bureau director of the National Police Agency, the 
Defense Policy Bureau director of the Defense Agency, the deputy 
director general of the Public Security Investigation Agency, 
and the director general of the Cabinet Information Research 
Office, and occasionally the director general of the Cabinet 
External Affairs Office in order to make it function. However, 
the organization has become a skeleton since Messrs. Nakasone 
and Gotoda are gone and others, including me, resigned. When the 
office was set up, antiterror measures for the Seoul Olympics 
and the Tiananmen incident were dealt with, with a smooth flow 
of information. 
  There was an absolute rule that no paperwork would be made. 
The deputy chief cabinet secretary would report to the prime 
minister and no contents of the meeting would be told to 
subordinates nor revealed to reporters. After meetings, 
reporters flooded us with questions to find out what the 
subjects of the meeting were, but we did not tell because of the 
rule. This way of handling information was carried out for one 
and a half years. This is one form of attempt. I do not mean 
this is the best way of communicating information, but I think 
it is better to report to the prime minister and then let him 
reveal the information. For that purpose, an assistant is 
needed and it can be the deputy chief cabinet secretary, because 
the prime minister is busy. He must not reveal the source of 
information and only say that it was reported. I think this way 
will do well. 
  As for disseminating information to the outside world, I 
have been advocating the creation of an automatic contest system 
since my incumbency. It is a system whereby an objection is 
automatically made. It can be explained like this. The 
International Press Division of the Foreign Ministry screens all 
foreign media reports connected with Japan. The very same 
things are being done by the domestic and foreign divisions of 
the Cabinet Research Office and briefings are given twice a week 
on behalf of the prime minister. And for example, if THE NEW 
YORK TIMES writes something absurd about Japan, a counter 
article is immediately made public. When a certain country says 
something far from the truth, an objection is raised at once. 
Japan is not used to raising objections, however unreasonable 
the things are that are said about it. But I think this action 
of raising protests amounts to the dissemination of messages 
from Japan. 
  This dissemination is not limited to protests or objections. 
When Japan receives a message, it should immediately hold 
meetings and make a reply. What is unwise about Japan is that 
it does not return calls to those who sent messages to Japan. 
It is necessary to return calls or to make protests positively 
to the mass media when required. The protestor can be anybody, 
and there is no rule that it ought to be the Foreign Ministry. 
When an absurd article is carried by THE NEW YORK TIMES, a 
refutation must be made within a week by somebody. I think 
Japan lacks in such action, leaving it at the mercy of criticism 
and bashing, suffering a great loss. I suggest the Foreign 
Ministry make up a list of those who can make such refutations 
and work out a system for immediate refutation. 
<H5>  How To Polish Information Sense </H5>
  [Kondo] In that connection, the United States makes good use 
of the abilities of private citizens. Not only in the field of 
dissemination, but also in the collection and analysis of 
information Japan should come up with a good idea about 
utilizing private abilities. Japan needs to have more 
participation by academia in diplomatic debates, and it is a 
problem that Japan fundamentally lacks in think tanks in the 
true sense. Think tanks in the true sense means that they have 
to be nonprofit, independent, and specialized in public policy. 
There are no such think tanks in Japan. Therefore they have to 
be created by all means. This matter has to be given serious 
consideration now that the structure of the Cold War has 
disintegrated. If Japan comes to possess such firmly 
established think tanks specialized in public policy, refutation 
in academic terms and theory can be made as Mr. Sassa proposed. 
  European nations and the United States are doing that very 
well. In the collection of information, attempts are made to 
make good use of private abilities such as those of college 
professors and private organizations like think tanks which are 
entrusted with such work, by allocating quite a large budget 
amount. Thus they are contributing to the dissemination of 
information. I think this is one of the future tasks Japan has 
to deal with. 
  [Shibuya] I agree with the points raised so far. Although 
not quite enough, the Foreign Ministry has been making every 
effort. As examples of the contest system, I can point to the 
fact that the consulate-general in New York writes a letter to 
the editor when it finds in THE NEW YORK TIMES articles critical 
of Japan or that the consul-general makes an appointment with 
the editor for a talk. I take your suggestions as advice that 
the Japanese Government as a whole should undertake such 
activities on a wider scope in setup and scale. I, myself, 
think such a necessity exists. 
  [Sassa] In the United States are found many public-oriented, 
independent, nonprofit information officers who are well paid 
and freely stalk the world, although it is not known who 
sponsors and pays them. 
  They are stalking because they can contact primary sources 
in 
collecting information. Whatever efforts are made to strengthen 
the international division of the Foreign Ministry, of the 
Cabinet Research Office, and the foreign news departments of all 
newspapers, pictures and written articles are nothing more than 
processed secondary information. In Japan, however, these 
information officers are troubled by a shortage of travel 
expenses and have no sponsors. 
  For everybody to get in touch with the primary source of 
information, it is necessary to have a feelers system, I think. 
For example, Clinton takes over the new government in the 
United States and Tokyo is flooded with Americans, as if all 
Washington moved to Tokyo. They boast of meeting such and such 
personalities and ask the Japanese what they think of Clinton. 
Like running a dragnet, they collect information. Democrats 
and Republicans; it makes no difference. When Republican Bush 
took over from Reagan, another Republican, a horde of feelers 
came over. 
  What Japan does in such a case is, contrary to the United 
States, to send delegations to promote the new government that 
has come into power. Or, when the new prime minister makes his 
first visit to the United States, he is accompanied by an 
entourage of about 60 people, consisting of three persons from 
each ministry. I think it would have been better for each 
ministry to have sent delegates to their counterparts in the 
United States when Clinton won the Presidency, and collected 
information and fed it back home. 
  Now is the time to send many feelers to Moscow, I think. The 
first principle of information collection is to get in touch 
with the primary source of information. That costs money, and 
private think tanks use ample funds. The government must have a 
budget for the purpose, since think tanks cannot be created in 
Japan. 
  [Kondo] I am in complete agreement with you. Sensitivity 
to information was mentioned earlier, and it is a problem for 
both the government and the public to improve it. In that 
connection, I understand the need for money well, and that must 
be provided by the government. 
  [Shibuya] In connection with utilizing private abilities, I 
can see the necessity of strengthening the contacts, exchanges, 
and cooperation with think tanks. But such efforts have not 
turned out to be useful practically, as thought to be. So it 
remains one of the future objectives of our efforts. As for the 
budget for scholarly exchanges, each and every embassy is 
allocated money for research specialists, and I hope this will 
be expanded in the future. 
<H5>  European and U.S. Style Think Tanks Needed for Japan </H5>
  [Sassa] What I also want to point out is the fact that such 
colossal family trusts as Ford or Rockefeller in the United 
States engage in academic activities as well as charities. They 
make contributions to universities and set up nonprofit and 
independent institutes specializing in public policy as 
mentioned earlier. The research institutes of Japanese 
securities companies and banks are all for the benefit of their 
own companies, are they not? 
  [Kondo] They have their own standpoints and interests, and 
sometimes they must to take into consideration the standpoints 
of their clients and specific government offices they are 
related to. In that sense, there are restrictions and they are 
not independent nor specialized in public policy. Future Japan 
absolutely needs institutes possessing the aforementioned three 
conditions. For that purpose, tax systems have to be adjusted 
to make it possible. European tax systems have such provisions, 
and they can be good reference. When such think tanks are 
created in Japan, it will become a lot easier to share 
information throughout the country. Also they can be expected to 
serve as catalysts to form a popular consensus. 
  [GAIKO FORUM] It will take a long time before such a system 
is created. So, what I have in mind is that capable officials 
in each ministry should play the role with certain general 
feelings of solidarity. 
  [Sassa] So far, they have been relied upon for their artisan 
and masterly expertise. These abilities are finished and gone 
after their deaths. That is why systematization is needed. The 
most feasible means are for the Foreign Ministry to earmark a 
large amount of overseas travel expenses and research expenses 
under a overall theme of strengthening information activities. 
As things stand now, research specialists are doing their own 
study rather than studies for the state. 
  [Shibuya] Certainly such aspects exist now. Most research 
specialists are scholars, and it is natural for them to place 
emphasis on their own study. The Foreign Ministry and embassies 
must take the initiative in questioning how they analyze 
situations. I think such exchanges are scarce. 
  [Sassa] I think so, too. Going back to the problem of the 
primary source of information, I think the most welcome service 
for people from foreign countries is providing them with the 
convenience of meeting the right persons and the persons they 
want to see. If you do this, they will let you get in touch 
with primary sources when you go to their countries. It is for 
us to say that we will let you meet the source in person. And 
we get collateral exchanges, since give and take is a rule in 
the information world. Rewards are either money, friendship, or 
grant of convenience. Like business, a deal cannot be struck 
without mutual benefit. 
<H5>  Higher Level of Knowledge of Neighboring Countries Needed </H5>
  [GAIKO FORUM] In the future collection and analysis of 
information, what area is the important one? 
  [Sassa] It is North Korea after all. 
  [Shibuya] It may be so as a matter of reality. But in a 
medium and long-range view, it is necessary to be aware of the 
problem of China. 
  [Sassa] It is a problem related to Deng Xiaoping and how 
long he will live. 
  [Shibuya] In a short-range view, it is important to watch 
how the transition will be made. 
  [Sassa] I think the gravest problem is North Korea, because 
Kim Chong-il alone could not be the only heir-apparent to Kim 
Il- song who wanted to make his son the dictator's successor. 
Something must have happened or must be taking place. The 
gravest problem of 1994 is North Korea. And what will become of 
Russia's Zhirinovskiy in the elections in 1994? It will pose a 
serious problem if a man who utters such things becomes the 
president. When we, in reading the situation, judge that 
Zhirinovskiy may win we cannot help but stage campaigns to 
defeat him. I do not think diplomacy should be only passive. 
  [Kondo] Needless to say, Japan has to make an in-depth study 
of its neighboring countries -- Russia, the Korean Peninsula, 
China, and the United States. Those countries are not 
understood well, contrary to what everybody thinks. Japan has 
to upgrade its level of knowledge about these four nations by 
all the people. Especially, unexpectedly few people really know 
about the United States although it seems that everybody 
understands that country. In recent years, it seems that the 
study of the United States in the true sense has been neglected. 
When I was in Washington, I felt that the United States was 
very active in regional studies, including Russia and China, and 
some of them had a wide scope and deep study. From now on, 
Japan has to deepen and improve its knowledge about Russia, the 
Korean Peninsula, China, and the United States, including their 
national traits with which Japanese interests are deeply 
involved. 
  Especially on the Korean peninsula, various things are 
expected to take place from now to next year and the year after 
next. With the present level of the people's knowledge, there 
is a possibility that Japan may face a very difficult situation 
in carrying out its diplomacy based a long-range national 
interests. In this connection, I hope that regional studies, 
including these areas, and activities to enlighten the people 
will be initiated as soon as possible. 
  [Shibuya] In connection with Japan-U.S. relations, I have 
experienced not knowing American things, contrary to my 
expectations. When I was working in Chicago, my son waned to 
see the Chicago Cubs play. So I bought the tickets, entered the 
stadium on the first base side and found the home team on the 
third base side. When I used this episode at another place to 
illustrate how difficult it is for Japan and the United States 
to mutually understand each other, I was told that the home team 
is on the first base side there. Thus I exposed how ignorant I 
was about the versatility of the United States. It is harmless 
as long as the topic is confined to baseball, but what will 
happen if our talks are at the level of politics and economics? 
  On the contrary, the United States seems to have much 
difficulty in understanding Japan. For example, Michael 
Crichton wrote a best selling novel "Rising Sun." On the last 
page is found a list of books that the writer read in order to 
write this novel. The bibliography is voluminous, listing books 
and academic articles written in English. He wrote this novel 
after serious study of Japan. He explained in detail what 
"keiretsu" and relations between "senpai" [seniors] and "kohai" 
[juniors] are. But when police officers in "senpai" and "kohai" 
relations are talking to each other, the book describes that 
"senpai" addresses his junior "kohai" in Japanese and tells him 
what to do. The Japanese juniors address to their seniors 
"senpai," but do not address their juniors "kohai." And that 
usage appears frequently in the novel, despite the fact that the 
senior officer is supposed to be well versed in Japanese 
affairs. If the writer had been a little modest and let a 
Japanese read his manuscript before publication, he would not 
have made such an error. I learned the lesson that a modest 
posture is necessary even in a matter I think I am well versed 
in. [laughter] 
  [Kondo] Such a thing can happen at any time. Especially in 
connection with Japan-U.S. relations, there is a general 
understanding in Japan that the United States has changed with 
the advent of the Clinton administration. But that is not true. 
With the termination of the Cold War, the United States has 
returned to what it used to be. When looked at historically, 
the United States in the Cold War structure was quite a peculiar 
country, and it has only returned to the original state. From 
now on, Japan has to maintain relations with the United States 
in its original state. With an understanding that the United 
States has changed because the Clinton administration came in, a 
correct long-range response cannot be expected. 
  This is not limited to the case of the United States. In 
handling information, one thing we have to be careful about is 
to grasp a phenomenon in the large frame of the big currents of 
history. Otherwise, mistakes tend to occur. 
  In this connection, I want to point out another difficult 
problem in eliminating presumption for those handling 
information. If you have beliefs when you are engaged in 
information activities closely related to business, you tend to 
take note of the facts in the way you hope for them to be and 
lead your analysis in that direction. Information activities 
leading to accept a fact as it is without prejudice are 
difficult for us, but it is undoubtedly one of the principles 
that we have to observe. 
  [Sassa] It is a warning against mixing understanding and 
judgment of values in the process of information collection. 
  [Kondo] A look at the information organizations of the U.S. 
Government reveals efforts to clearly separate the division that 
handles collection and analysis of information from the policy- 
making division. It shows that no presumption is allowed in 
information. 
  [Shibuya] In Japan's case, policymaking leads the way and 
information analysis is frequently influenced by policies. This 
must be corrected, I think. 
<H5>  Japan-U.S. Relations Require Incessant Efforts </H5>
  [Sassa] Assuming that Japan works out a 100-year plan, it 
should be noted that Japan is an island nation, not part of the 
continental nations. Therefore, in its 2,000-year history, 
Japan has never concluded an offensive and defensive alliance 
with China, the ROK, or Russia. It was always with the United 
States. So the future diplomatic keynote entirely lies in 
Japan-U.S. relations. 
  In that connection, what Mr. Kondo said is perfectly correct 
in that the United States has never liked Japan. It only 
pretended to like Japan because the strong adversary, the Soviet 
Union, existed. And now it has returned to its original place. 
It is a big mistake to think that things will become better 
when the generation that was at war is replaced by the next one. 
Hatred and prejudice are reproduced. Therefore incessant 
efforts are needed to prevent the very vulnerable Japan-U.S. 
relations from breaking up. In that sense, there is a need to 
make refutations. Misunderstanding can be avoided by making 
persuasive refutation, not a sensational one. I was 
specifically referring to the United States when I made the 
suggestion of a contest system. The spreading of news by word 
of mouth is astoundingly fast in the United States, and most 
Americans know that a Japanese prime minister made 
discriminatory remarks about race. Bad things, however minor, 
spread in no time. I visit the United States frequently, and a 
female immigration officer surprised me by saying, "A prime 
minister should not say such things. It is bad to say somebody 
is uneducated and lazy." On another occasion a taxi driver said 
to me, "We are lazy, as you know." I do not know where they 
picked up such information, but it is certain that such 
destructive information spreads in no time. 
  [Kondo] In that sense, we have to make logical refutations 
and at the same time make a strong point in relaying messages to 
the common American people that Japan and the United States 
share a common sense of values and common national interests 
when making refutations. And that message should be relayed 
repeatedly. 
  [Shibuya] Another necessary point in making complaints is to 
take considerate care of the feelings of the other party. 
  [GAIKO FORUM] One of our conclusions is that we do not know 
the United States as we are expected to and that the Japan-U.S. 
relations are more important than serious situations in Korea, 
Russia, and China. 
  [Sassa] Through dissemination of international messages, 
both Japan and the United States are required to exert efforts 
to dispel misunderstanding. The Japanese people are less aware 
of the other party, contrary to what is expected of them. So, 
domestic public relations become necessary. There is 
information not found in newspapers and the other side of the 
story and good stories. Such stories should be told as 
information and in public relations. In other words, attempts 
should be made to upgrade the people's understanding. 
  [Shibuya] Looking from different angles, the Foreign 
Ministry and the Japanese Government intently spoke of 
internationalization several years ago. And to a certain 
degree, Japanese society has been internationalized. The people 
have come to be interested in world situations and acquired 
knowledge. Naturally they will look at foreign policy with 
severe eyes, and some people may think that they can do the same 
thing. For them it is necessary to give correct information. 
<H5>  The Problems of Belittling Human Intelligence </H5>
  [Sassa] It was mentioned earlier that information should be 
read in the currents of history. Information can also be 
divided into electronics intelligence and human intelligence, 
but human intelligence has begun to be neglected. 
  The best example can be found in December 1979. At dawn, 
56,000 Soviet troops pushed into Afghanistan. Everybody missed 
it, and the United States asked us if we knew the name of the 
Soviet commander. We had been totally dependent on the United 
States for information, how we could know. In those days, 
President Carter was at odds with the CIA, insisting that no 
intelligence officers were needed because reconnaissance 
satellites were at work. Thus the United States could not 
predict the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan nor the Vietnamese 
invasion into Cambodia. Satellites could reveal that 50,000 
Soviet troops and so many tanks were in Afghanistan, but the 
United States could not give the name of the Soviet commander 
because it had no human intelligence. It makes a big difference 
who commands the troops, Rommel or Rundstedt? Therefore, the 
name of the commander is first-grade information when military 
conflicts break out. This can be picked up through human 
intelligence, not by satellites. 
  [Shibuya] In that connection, when the Soviet troops invaded 
Afghanistan I was chief of the Analysis Division and was told by 
an able diplomat of a certain nation that there was little 
possibility of invasion by the Soviet Union. He backed up his 
prediction saying PRAVDA had carried an article in praise of 
Afghan President Amin for his policy of nonalignment. Taking 
note of this, I did my own analysis at about six o'clock in the 
evening. That evening I had a meeting, so I decided to send a 
telegram the next morning, and after attending the meeting I 
went home. The next day the Soviet troops invaded and I 
survived the mistake of sending wrong information because of my 
laziness. 
  And as was mentioned earlier, machines cannot read human 
minds. During the Iran-Iraq war, an American diplomat came to my 
office and spent three or four hours talking about this and 
that. So I asked him, "I do not have any information, but you 
should have. Why do you waste your time having lengthy chats 
with me?" His answer was, "I have information, all right. But 
when a prediction is made that a certain city under siege by 
either Iranian or Iraqi troops is to fall the next day, the next 
morning the besieging troops are gone somewhere else." In other 
words, troop movements could be detected by satellites, but he 
could not read their minds. He was at a loss as to what Teheran 
or Baghdad were thinking, but his chat with me was helpful, he 
said. It was an encouraging word for me. That sort of 
situation existed at that time. 
  [GAIKO FORUM] These days information is regarded as 
something floating in the air, but it is useless if not 
accompanied by human contacts. Thank you very much. 

