CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Xu Yanhong (6079 1750 7703) "Employment -- </F>
Important Route to Raising Women's Status in Society: Interview 
with State Statistical Bureau, Social Department director Wu Jun 
(0702 6511)"] 
  [Text] In September 1995, the United Nations Fourth World 
Women's Congress will be held at Beijing -- the largest 
international conference to take place in China since the birth 
of the People's Republic. At that time, 15,000 representatives 
of United Nations member states will gather in Beijing to 
discuss issues of women in the world. One-half of the human race 
being female, issues of women are relevant to the development of 
human kind. Not long ago, this reporter called on State 
Statistical Bureau's Social Department director Ms. Wu Jun, who 
is a member of the propaganda subcommittee of the China 
Organizing Committee for the 4th World Women's Congress. 
  [Reporter] In July 1985, the 3rd World Women's Congress held 
in Nairobi, Kenya, adopted the "Nairobi Forward Strategy for 
Raising the Status of Women by the Year 2000." May I ask what is 
the current status of women in China? 
  [Wu] At present, with respect to employment of women in 
China, it can be said that the number of women employed is 
rising rapidly, but their status within the occupational 
structure is improving slowly; that basic education is rapidly 
reaching more women, but the rate of women graduating from 
higher education is slow; that traditional concepts still to a 
considerable degree hamper development of women's self esteem 
and competitiveness; and that discrimination in the society 
against women still exists and women do not enjoy equal 
educational and employment opportunities. 
  [Reporter] What are the results of China's effort to raise 
the status of women? 
  [Wu] China is one of the countries that endorsed the 
"Nairobi 
Strategy." The Chinese government has historically emphasized 
the importance of raising the social status of women. In the 
current waves of reform and opening, women in China are marching 
smartly forward in the society, and this can be seen in terms of 
the following: 
  First, the number of women employed is increasing rapidly. 
Reform and opening have created a favorable societal environment 
for women to play their role. In 1990, of the total 647,240,000 
persons employed in China, 291,010,000 were females, an increase 
of 27.7 percent over the 1982 figure. In this same time period, 
the number of males employed increased by 21.3 percent. In 1990, 
the number of females employed constituted 44.96 percent of the 
total employed population, an increase of 1.27 percentage points 
over 1982. 
  Second, channels of employment for women are widening. In 
the 
last few years, women's employment in the various trades and 
occupations has shown considerable changes. The number of 
females employed in financial and insurance trades has increased 
1.6-fold, commercial food service and supply trades 79.6 
percent, offices and organizations 78.6 percent, and public 
health and welfare trades 42.7 percent. Other than 
transportation, telecommunications, construction and real estate 
services, where increases in the number of males employed are 
greater, in all other trades and occupations, the rate of 
increase of females employed is faster than males. In health and 
welfare occupations, the rate of increase in employment of 
females is much greater than males. 
  Third, the cultural background of women been raised, while 
their status within the occupational structure continues to 
improve. In 1990, the number of women with junior high, high 
school and college education increased 56.98 percent, 37.6 
percent and 2.08-fold respectively over comparable figures in 
1982. The fact that women's cultural and educational level is 
rising has contributed to improved employment status of women. 
  [Reporter] What do you consider to be the most pressing 
issues for women in China today? 
  [Wu] There are several: Women still have more difficulties 
seeking employment and, for college-educated women, obtaining 
work assignments matched to their training; in terms of 
improving their status within the occupational structure, women 
still tend to hold lower grade jobs; in rural areas, women face 
greater difficulties moving into other non-agricultural fields; 
and in the work force, a relatively higher proportion of females 
employed are of the younger age groups. 
  In education of women, both their numbers and rate of 
enrollment in school are low among females of school age in 
rural areas; overall, among the employed, the higher that 
educational or technical background required in certain 
occupations, the lower the proportion of women represented 
therein. 
  [Reporter] To realize the "Nairobi Strategy" stated goal 
that 
"for women to participate in development, there must be 
realistic assurances that women and men can participate equally 
in formulating plans for national economical and social 
development, and take part concretely in developmental 
activities," what further steps should China undertake to help 
implement this goal? 
  [Wu] To begin with, first we should further intensify reform 
and liberate and develop our productive capacity. Only through 
deepening reform, continually liberating and developing our 
productive capacity, raising the automation, technological and 
knowledge levels in our work while lessening the degree of 
direct reliance on man's physical labor in the production 
process, can we further widen the channels of employment for 
women. We must at the same time vigorously develop the tertiary 
industries. 
  Second, we need to raise the levels of socialization, 
mechanization and automation in household chores and labor. 
  Third, we should vigorously develop education. With respect 
to education for females, we should strive for a unified 
approach to making basic education available to all women as 
well as raising the educational level of all women. In 1990, 
close to one-third of the females age 15 and over were 
illiterate or semi-literate; while only 2.3 percent of women in 
ages 20-24 had a college education. Therefore, on the one hand, 
we should concentrate on eliminating illiteracy among women, at 
the same time, we must also emphasize promoting higher education 
for women. 
  Fourth, we should ensure that in the process of developing 
the socialist spirit and culture, concrete efforts are made to 
promoting respect for women and supporting and protecting 
benefits for women through widespread propaganda and creating an 
atmosphere conducive to realistically carrying out our tasks. 

