Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Gonchar, Federation Council member, </F>
under the "Russia and Ukraine" rubric: "Situation in the Crimea: 
"The Center Line or the Frontline; on a Possible Variant of the 
Development of Events"] 
  [Text] A lot seemed utterly unrealistic and fantastic not 
very long ago. Few could have conjectured that Armenia would be 
at war with Azerbaijan and the Dniester region with Moldova, 
that the mojahedin would destroy Russian border posts, that war 
would ruin and plunder prosperous Yugoslavia.... 
  Today, we are on the threshold of yet another conflict, 
which 
in scale could surpass all of the others that we have seen thus 
far. What is in question is Crimea. 
  It is said: "If you want peace, prepare for war." The people 
in Crimea want peace very much. The tension is growing rapidly. 
The noise of the engines of military vehicles can be heard 
behind the reports of the first round of the presidential 
elections in Crimea. Thirty-eight percent of the votes received 
by Yuriy Meshkov, the leader of the Republican Party and a 
supporter of Crimean independence, against 17 percent of the 
votes for Nikolay Bagrov, the chairman of the Supreme Council of 
Crimea, established the two candidates of the second round of 
elections. In the second round on 30 January, Meshkov could 
receive another 30 percent--the votes of other candidates who 
came out for the actual secession of Crimea (in one or another 
form) from the structure of Ukraine. But Ukraine does not plan 
to give Crimea to anyone anywhere. 
  In this situation, an inevitable worsening has already 
started, and it is dangerous, because it makes it possible for 
various political forces to play the "Crimean card" for their 
own interests. I picture the situation in Crimea sufficiently to 
declare: The very first spilled blood will create a prolonged 
conflict from which Russia will be unable to stand aside. The 
marking off is already actually not from the "center line," but 
from the frontline. 
  The presidential elections have already given one important 
result: The referendum of 1991, when a majority of Crimeans 
expressed themselves for locating the peninsula in the structure 
of Ukraine, has already passed into history. 
  The increase in pro-Russian attitudes is fully explained by 
the well-known difficulties of the Ukrainian economy, the 
coupon-ruble exchange rate, and also by a rejection of some of 
the actions of Ukrainian authorities by an appreciable part of 
the population of the peninsula. It is the increase in 
pro-Russian attitudes that is making the worsening of relations 
between Moscow and Kiev very probable and that is creating the 
possibility of an acute political crisis in both Russia itself 
and in Ukraine. 
  The actions of a politician depend on the conditions in 
which 
he is placed. As "a candidate in independent" Crimea, he will 
inevitably be subjected to pressure on the part of Kiev. It 
cannot be otherwise, because even President Kravchuk and the 
Ukrainian Government will end up in their turn under the 
pressure of nationalists who also have sufficient strength for 
their own actions on the peninsula. But because each action 
gives rise to a counteraction, the answer will be a further 
increase in sympathy for Russia, right down to direct appeals 
for "reunification." 
  Not one president who might be elected to this post will be 
able to ignore the will of the people. Only a very mature 
politician in this situation will be able to "pass over a 
blade," without tearing the status quo with one striking but 
incorrect step. There are a lot of opportunities for such steps, 
including those capable of directly influencing the situation in 
Russia. 
  It is possible to let the situation go a little further and 
simultaneously to appeal to President Yeltsin and to the State 
Duma with a request to examine the question and accept Crimea 
into the Russian structure. After the president most likely 
answers "No," the Duma will express itself somewhat differently, 
and some parties will habitually deploy a detail of volunteers 
to Crimea. When there is the smell of a big war with a nuclear 
Ukraine (in fact) that is not badly armed overall (at the 
expense of the Soviet Army), the president could be faced with 
the choice: the Duma or war. And what is he supposed to choose? 
  It is reassuring that the leaders of Crimea and the leaders 
of Russia understand all of this perfectly well. But under what 
conditions will they operate? No kind of common sense and 
political experience will withstand "the pressure of interests" 
that are reinforced by the demands of the voters. 
  Crimea is tied to Ukraine and to Russia with a thousand 
invisible threads. It is necessary to be aware that there are 
those for whom a conflict is advantageous. Someone is already 
hoping to make money on the supplies of weapons and equipment, 
to profit on food and medicine, to extract a triple price for 
transporting refugees, and so on. All of this has already 
happened in "hot spots." 
  Interests can be confronted only by other interests. Indeed, 
it was only several years ago that no one believed that Georgia 
would be at war with Abkhazia, but, after all, neither was it 
believed there would be a unified Europe or that the Berlin Wall 
would be destroyed. There is also a solution to the "Crimean 
question." It is very complicated, but there cannot be a simple 
solution here. The solution is not only for Crimea to go 
halfway, but also for Russia as a whole. Rapprochement is the 
only alternative to confrontation. The only alternative to 
Russian-Ukrainian confrontation (if not because of Crimea, 
another reason will be found) is a Russian-Ukrainian union. 
First and foremost, an economic union. Its pluses are apparent 
to many in Ukraine: Almost 90 percent of the oil and 70 percent 
of the gas come from Russia, many Ukrainian goods are already 
squeezed out of the Russian market (even Ukrainian sugar is more 
expensive than Cuban sugar), and the rate of exchange of the 
coupon to the ruble speaks for itself. 
  The economic union has a lot of supporters and opponents--in 
both Russia and Ukraine. The "opponents" in Kiev talk about the 
inevitable loss of independence in the event of a union. The 
"opponents" in Russia--about Ukraine's sponging and the state 
charity at the expense of the taxpayer.... 
  There are very many different aspects to any form of 
economic 
cooperation (more so with a union). Actually, the Ukrainian 
economy today is more seriously disorganized than the Russian 
economy. However, very soon the inevitable sharp increase in the 
rates of inflation in Russia (which have already started) are a 
reminder that Ukraine, nonetheless, is a fraternal country and 
that the ruble, nonetheless, is closer to the coupon than to the 
dollar or to the mark. Given the increasing rates of inflation, 
many will stop being frightened by "subsidization" of the 
economies of the countries of the former USSR. 
  In any case, the variants of a possible development of 
relations of Ukraine and Russia today lie between two extremes: 
from confrontation all the way to military conflict and an 
economic union with a unified monetary system, "transparent" 
borders, and so on. The question is what is more advantageous 
and what responds to the interests of the parties more. 
Yugoslavia received its experience, and even in a purely 
economic sense does not speak in favor of war. 
  Under our conditions, it is not only the economy that 
determines policy, but also vice versa. Life has shown that the 
breakup of the country is capable of bringing political 
dividends. The practical question rests on how to make an 
economic union politically advantageous to its supporters. Up 
until now, all of the technology of mutual relations in the CIS 
proved its unsuitability. All of the countries of the 
Commonwealth and the new abroad are at a very complicated stage: 
Without new political technologies and operational developments, 
all that will be left will be to discuss questions of 
humanitarian assistance with the West. 
  Discussions about the fact that "Russia is the first among 
equals" are simply not technological. Ideas are needed that 
would set the beginning of an evolution in a new direction. The 
balance of interests must show in precisely what direction. But 
whatever this direction is--today it is a direction away from 
the frontline. 

