Language: <F P=105> Belarusian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Doctor of Economic Sciences Stanislaw </F>
Bahdankevich, chairman of the board of the Republic of Belarus 
National Bank, under the "Continuing the Debate" rubric: "A Wish 
Alone Is Not Enough...."] 
  [Text] Criticism of the National Bank by economic managers 
is easy to understand: Enterprises are choking because of a 
shortage of working capital, with inflation having long gone 
over all reasonable limits. It is of little concern to a plant 
director or a kolkhoz chairman that each new credit to his 
economic unit extended at the expense of increasing the money 
supply strengthens that same inflationary pressure. They are 
forced to be more concerned about survival today than about the 
coming day. 
  However, as I see it, when scientists with doctoral degrees 
take the floor, as the esteemed V. Kulazhanko did in NARODNA 
HAZETA on 17 November, they should not approach this issue so 
superficially, or should at least approach it with greater 
responsibility. 
  A professor in the area of economics should know that the 
exchange rates of all monetary units are established in keeping 
with their "prices" on the currency market. As a rule, a 
currency exchange acts as such a market. Changes in demand and 
supply of each specific currency on the exchange immediately 
influence its exchange rate cost, which is registered by central 
banks. This is an elementary norm of a market economy, even as 
imperfect a market economy as ours. 
  In turn, demand and supply of currencies on the market 
depend 
on a number of factors, each of which is quite significant in 
its own right. 
  In this instance, the status of the balance of payments of a 
state on the whole and in regard to the principal partner 
countries separately, understandably depending on the volume of 
economic relations with them, ranks first. For Belarus, Russia 
is now the key economic partner; it accounts for about 
four-fifths of the total volume of trade. Trade with Western 
countries is mainly dollar-denominated. That is why the 
establishment of realistic exchange rates of the Belarusian 
ruble against the Russian ruble and the dollar is of paramount 
importance to the economy of the republic. 
  It is common knowledge that at present we buy considerably 
more from Russia than we sell to it. Arrears in payments for 
energy resources, oil and gas, appear particularly catastrophic. 
The implementation of a state-to-state agreement in keeping with 
which a large proportion of our export to Russia goes toward the 
delivery of energy resources--a peculiar barter between 
states--results in only a part of the "live" money participating 
in the general commodity trade; in this segment, the demand for 
Russian rubles exceeds their supply considerably. For example, 
at the 3 November trading session, when the exchange rate of the 
Russian ruble came to the mark of one to six Belarusian rubles, 
an almost 10-fold surplus of demand over supply was registered. 
A similar situation, although to a somewhat lesser degree, was 
noted at the subsequent trading sessions of the Interbank 
Currency Exchange. Perhaps Professor V. Kulazhanko will suggest 
where and from whom the money needed may be obtained in a 
civilized manner, through the use of market instruments? 
  At present, we are persistently suggesting to the government 
to give up state-to-state barter in order to ensure the 
availability of a greater money supply in real commodity trade 
with Russia and thus alleviate the lack of correspondence 
between the demand and supply of Russian and Belarusian rubles 
in the currency market, as well as to concentrate in the 
National Bank all foreign-exchange reserves, including the 
Russian ruble, in order to possess the necessary instruments to 
influence the exchange rate of the Belarusian ruble. 
  It is also important to understand that no matter how 
sizable 
the gold and currency reserves of central banks are, they are 
intended solely to neutralize the influence of transitory 
fluctuations in demand and supply of a particular currency. 
Artificially supporting the exchange rate at a high level with 
the help of reserves is only possible for a very limited period 
of time; it will not stabilize the exchange rate and will bring 
about the complete loss of its reserves by the state. We should 
add to this that the Interbank Currency Exchange is a sovereign 
joint-stock company in which the National Bank has only 9 
percent of the votes. 
  However, the main point is that, as the postwar experience 
of 
the world and also the current experience of Ukraine suggests, 
the establishment of the exchange rate on the basis of comparing 
domestic prices in the states in question, that is, 
administratively, may only sweep the problem under the rug, 
increase the outflow of foreign-exchange capital from the 
country, and transplant [currency] exchange operations onto the 
street. In Ukraine, the volumes of [currency] sales and exports 
grew steadily between April and August of this year, when the 
exchange rate of the karbovanets was determined by the results 
of trading on the currency exchange. After the introduction of a 
fixed exchange rate of the karbovanets, the volume of currency 
sales on the exchange fell by a factor of 15, and 
foreign-exchange proceeds from exports--by a factor of three. In 
October of this year, the market exchange rate already was lower 
than the fixed rate by a factor of six. Effective 2 November of 
this year, exchange trading was suspended by an edict of the 
president. 
  Therefore, the stabilization of the exchange rate of the 
Belarusian ruble against the Russian ruble depends primarily on 
reducing the deficits of the balances of trade and payments, 
which now go into the hundreds of millions of rubles, to the 
size of real external financing. The exchange rate of the 
Belarusian ruble is doomed to fall further in the absence of 
such a balance. In general terms, this calls for a substantial 
reduction in energy consumption, the implementation of a firm 
policy to reduce the energy and material effectiveness of 
production. The growing domestic prices for imports (taking into 
account the falling exchange rate of the Belarusian ruble) are 
becoming the instrument that ensures reduction in energy 
consumption. On the other hand, it is necessary to increase the 
export of products to the Russian Federation that the 
devaluation of the Belarusian ruble facilitates. Besides, for 
the period of transition Belarus badly needs credit support from 
the world community and the Russian Federation in order to cover 
the deficit of the balance of payments (and therefore stabilize 
the exchange rate of the Belarusian ruble). In the absence of 
external financing, the rate of decline in production may turn 
into a free fall. 
  The budget and monetary-credit policy within the republic is 
the second most important factor. In principle, a budget deficit 
amounting to 5 or 6 percent of the domestic national product 
appears to be a quite tolerable evil if this deficit is covered 
by attracting to the budget funds from the money market without 
increasing the total money supply. The trouble is that the 
deficit is being financed through the emission of credit, i.e., 
putting into circulation money to which no goods correspond. For 
as long as this practice continues, the Belarusian ruble is 
doomed to losing value in the form of both inflation and a 
decline in its exchange rate. 
  The monetary and credit policy that has been pursued this 
year ensures a reduction in the rate of growth of credit 
emission. In 1992, this rate exceeded 27 percent per month, 
whereas in the first half of 1993 it amounted to 17 percent, and 
in July through November it was less than 9 percent. For 1994, a 
still firmer policy is being considered. Calculations indicated 
that it is possible to ensure a rate of inflation below 10 
percent per month and the stabilization of the exchange rate of 
the Belarusian ruble if the growth of net assets of the National 
Bank is restricted to no more than a factor of two. 
  Attaining these indicators is very complicated. First of 
all, 
a mechanism should be created to cover at least one-third of the 
budget deficit by issuing and selling government securities. 
Also, it is necessary to create a mechanism of financial 
self-support for each economic entity that operates normally. 
The availability of working capital is the foundation of all 
production. An economy that does not have its own monetary funds 
that are adequate to repeat each new production cycle, that is, 
to cover the permanent irreducible balances of raw and other 
materials, unfinished products, and finished output, will 
continuously experience great financial difficulties. An 
analysis indicates that in the environment of inflation, the 
financial standing of many enterprises, sovkhozes, and kolkhozes 
is distorted. In reality, a number of economic units that are 
technically considered profitable are potentially bankrupt if 
the loss of internal working capital is taken into account. In 
such economic units, accounts payable, mainly short-term bank 
credit, cover between 50 and 100 percent of the minimum working 
assets. 
  This problem needs to be solved. It is impermissible to use 
short-term credit resources of banks, which boost inflation, to 
replace the working capital of economic entities. Short-term 
bank credit may and should be obtained only to accumulate 
temporary or seasonal reserves and expenditures. This norm 
should become law for our commercial banks that serve the 
economy. 
  Hence the conclusion: It is necessary to focus the attention 
of owners and managers of economic entities, and all organs of 
government and power on ways to ensure the preservation of 
proprietary working capital and its growth rather than on 
"shaking loose" credit at banks. Only through creating a 
mechanism for the self-financing of permanent irreducible 
reserves and costs at each enterprise is it possible to 
ameliorate finance and the economy, and to stabilize the 
Belarusian ruble. 
  Bank credit should be expensive, somewhat above the level of 
inflation. Term rates on bank deposits and holdings should be 
set no lower than the level of inflation. 
  There is no other way to ameliorate our economy and its 
financial and monetary-credit system. 
  The development of effective devices for overcoming the 
crisis can hardly be expected if we are afraid to acknowledge 
reality. Since July 1992, national currencies have been 
operating de facto in the noncash circulation of all states 
which previously belonged to the USSR. Since July 1993, 
following the introduction of new banknotes of the 1993 issue by 
the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, a fully sovereign 
national monetary system based on the noncash Belarusian ruble 
and the banknotes of the National Bank also emerged in Belarus. 
Now is the beginning of December; all types of payments in the 
territory of the republic are made solely in Belarusian rubles 
(settlement bills), but we are still debating whose currency we 
use: Russian or Belarusian. Arguments put forth by the opponents 
of acknowledging reality are simply not serious. Do assertions 
merit attention to the effect that it is necessary to postpone 
the recognition of Belarusian bills until a program is worked 
out that supports their stable operation, gold and currency 
reserves are formed, and the level of labor remunerations, 
retirement benefits, scholarships, prices, and so on is revised? 
  The genuine essence of the problem is found in the fact that 
the Belarusian ruble that really exists is a weak currency. Its 
depreciation has been caused by the economic crisis and the 
growth of the deficit in the balance of payments. Whether our 
parliament recognizes this ruble as parallel tender of not, the 
National Bank and the government should and will take a set of 
measures to increase the stability of precisely this functioning 
monetary unit. The recognition is necessary first of all in 
order to grasp that our budget, subsidy, credit, 
foreign-exchange, and other policies should proceed from the 
fact that our own monetary system and our own currency exist, 
which need attention, merchandise equivalents, and protection. 
  The recognition of the Belarusian ruble as the national 
currency for the period of transition would lead, for example, 
People's Deputy Prakapovich to grasp the fact that financing 
housing construction by means of credit emission, i.e., by 
putting into circulation money to which no goods correspond, 
financing that may destroy our economy, is one of the main 
causes of inflation, the depreciation of the Belarusian ruble, 
and a hidden inflationary tax on the entire population of the 
republic. The housing problem should be solved by way of 
increasing the proportion of the accumulation fund in the 
national income at the expense of reducing the consumption fund, 
at the expense of a strict economy and savings regimen for each 
developer, and at the expense of real credit resources which 
would be the equivalent of the temporarily free accumulation 
fund--but not through credit emission. 
  An attempt by some analysts, including the already mentioned 
Professor V. Kulazhanko, to tie the fall of the exchange rate of 
the Belarusian ruble to prices and real wages in Belarus and 
Russia is likewise surprising. Incidentally, why not in Germany 
or Japan? As has already been said, the monetary systems of 
Belarus and Russia have actually been separated for a long time 
and have functioned independently. 
  The economic crisis whose peak we are approaching is 
manifested primarily in the monetary and credit system; the 
crisis of the monetary and credit system is merely the result 
but not the cause of the acute economic crisis. The incorrect 
interpretation of cause and effect brings about an exaggeration 
of the role of monetary policy, banking, and credit in 
ameliorating the sick economy. During a period of transition 
from a monopolized, administrative economy which is based on 
state property and a large number of operating enterprises, no 
scientifically substantiated monetary policy is capable of 
effecting reconstruction in the national economy, of making 
structural changes, boosting production, ensuring privatization, 
the development of private business, and competition, and 
augmenting the merchandise equivalent of the monetary unit 
through the means of production, property, land, and securities. 
In the environment of belated reforms, an excessively strict 
monetary policy may only facilitate a precipitous fall in 
production and a drop in the standard of living of the populace, 
and bring about a social explosion. 
  At the same time, it is an axiom that it is not possible to 
ameliorate the economy on a market basis without resolving acute 
issues in the financial, budgetary, and monetary-credit systems 
and without first of all reducing the level of inflation to 5-8 
percent a month. 

