BFN 

  [Text] Lagos, June 29 (AFP) -- At least four delegates to a 
conference called by Nigeria's military regime to introduce 
democracy announced they were quitting, various sources said 
Wednesday [29 June] as a powerful union leader again threatened 
a strike if opposition leader Moshood Abiola remained imprisoned. 
  One of Abiola's daughters, Lola Abiola Edewor, told AFP late 
Tuesday that reliable sources told her Chief Abiola had suddenly 
and mysteriously fallen ill in the secret location where he has 
been held since June 23. 
  Three of the delegates -- Denis Inyang, Oladapo Fafowara, 
and 
Pascal Bafyau -- were among 96 figures chosen by the government 
to represent states at the meeting, which adjourned Tuesday just 
a day after it opened. 
  The fourth, Alhaji Yekini Alabi, was one of 272 delegates 
elected to represent 30 regions. He attended on behalf of the 
central state of Kawara. 
  Meanwhile Frank Kokori, general-secretary of the powerful 
Union of Nigerian Petroleum and Natural Gas Workers, told AFP 
the union "is maintaining our ultimatum" to the government to 
turn over power to Abiola by July 4. 
  "We will go on strike from Monday, if the government does 
not 
comply," he added. 
  Abiola was arrested after he proclaimed himself president on 
the anniversary of the June 12 presidential election annulled by 
the military regime, which he is widely believed to have won. 
  The opposition, which denounced the conference as a farce, 
has called for the release of Abiola, who faces a possible life 
prison sentence for treason. 
  The meeting adjourned for two weeks Tuesday after delegates 
said they needed more time to examine the agenda. 
  Court officials Wednesday said Inyang, chairman of the 
Nigerian Students' Association, filed a complaint in the High 
Federal Court on Tuesday claiming that the government's choice 
of him to represent the eastern state of Akwa Ibom amounted to 
"assassination" of his reputation. 
  He demanded 50 million naira (2.2 million dollars) 
compensation for "defamation." 
  Two newspapers said Fafowara, formerly a career diplomat, 
released a statement saying he learned he had been chosen from 
press reports to represent the southwestern state of Osun. 
  He said he could not agree to being named by a military 
government to attend a conference which was not sovereign, at a 
time when leading figures such as Moshood Abiola had been thrown 
in prison. 
  His decision was reported by the GUARDIAN and VANGUARD 
newspapers. 
  "I cannot...claim the right to speak freely at conference 
when others, who are equally committed to reestablishing 
democracy in Nigeria are detained by the police," added 
Fafowara, who served as a Nigerian diplomat in Britain, the 
Netherlands and Turkey. 
  He added that he had resigned as general director of the 
Association of Nigerian Industrialists in 1992 because he 
opposed a non-democratic government. 
  Bafyau, chairman of the powerful Nigerian Trade Union 
Federation -- of which the oil-workers' union is a key member -- 
and picked by the government to represent the northeastern state 
of Adamawa, said Wednesday he had not attended the opening 
ceremonies Monday. 
  No one has seen him since then in Abuja, where the 
conference 
was held, according to an AFP correspondent there. 
  Newspaper reports quoted Alabi, the fourth delegate to quit, 
as saying he did so because of pressure from his advisors. 

