Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Excerpts" from interview with Cesar de Queiroz Benjamin, </F>
chief author of Workers Party's economic program, by Carlos 
Eduardo Alves; place and date not given: "PT Wants To Quadruple 
Military Spending" -- first two paragraphs are FOLHA DE SAO 
PAULO introduction] 
  [Text] The government program that Luiz Inacio Lula da 
Silva of the PT [Workers Party] will advocate in the 1994 
presidential campaign has some surprises. For example, the party 
wants to quadruple military spending: from 0.5 percent to 2.0 
percent of GDP [gross domestic product]. One of the objectives 
is to "guarantee greater strategic autonomy in the country's 
international policy," says editor Cesar de Queiroz Benjamin, 
one of the coordinators of the team drafting the PT's platform. 
The PT is thinking of reviving or revitalizing programs such as 
those concerned with the development of nuclear technology, the 
AMX aircraft, the Antarctic, the All-Brazilian Space Mission, 
the Calha Norte Project, and the electronic warfare center. 
  Benjamin, who is the chief author of the program's economic 
section, says that a moratorium on the foreign debt--until now 
one of the PT's dogmas--cannot be made into a "fetish." Although 
he did not complete his education in economics, he considers 
himself to be "self-taught." "Cesinha," as he is called by his 
friends, has been a leftist militant for 14 years. He was a 
political prisoner between the ages of 17 and 23 years and was 
exiled. Here in Brazil he has worked chiefly as an editor of 
scientific publications. He currently divides his time between 
the PT and the Nova Fronteira Publishing House in Rio de 
Janeiro. On the team responsible for Lula's government program, 
Benjamin represents the PT's orthodox wing. Here are the main 
passages from Benjamin's interview with FOLHA DE SAO PAULO. 
  [Alves] What can the country expect from Lula's program and 
a 
possible PT administration? 
  [Benjamin] Brazil is not experiencing just any crisis. A 
long 
period in national life that began in the 1930's and lasted 
until the 1980's has exhausted itself. It was dominated by three 
structural characteristics: accelerated industrialization to 
replace imports, urbanization, and the establishment of a 
nationally integrated economic system. Those characteristics 
dominated national life for 50 years, and they have lost their 
ability to instill dynamism into society. The crisis is situated 
outside that long period and at the junction between two major 
periods. What people can expect from a Lula administration is 
that it will initiate another long period in Brazil and disclose 
the structural characteristics that will dominate a lengthy new 
development process. It is only with those characteristics that 
we will be able to stabilize the national economy. 
  [Alves] What would be the fundamental changes in the 
economy? 
  [Benjamin] The first is the fact that with the process of 
industrialization to replace imports having been exhausted, we 
must discover a new principle of economic dynamics that will 
keep a long-term frontier of accumulation open in the Brazilian 
economy. And that new principle is the establishment of a 
domestic mass market. That characteristic will have to reach the 
point of dominating Brazilian economic dynamics, not as a 
short-term characteristic linked only to distribution policies 
but as a reorganization of the productive sector for the purpose 
of exploiting Brazil's domestic potential. 
  [Alves] Who would gain and who would lose from such a 
development? 
  [Benjamin] I feel that 95 percent of Brazilian society would 
gain. The workers would be the first to gain, but so would 
business sectors that are capable of adapting to that new model, 
which makes a rather wide scope for private accumulation 
possible. The losers would be the sectors that have grown 
accustomed to living as parasites on the national crisis over 
the past decade--meaning, in this case, financial capital as 
currently organized, the large landowners, and the oligopolies 
in general. 
  [Alves] As regards the banking system, what are the premises 
on which you are working? 
  [Benjamin] We will not have problems in our relations with 
the bankers if they show the government and society that they 
are capable of operating their businesses in a context of low 
inflation and of performing the basic function of any financial 
system, which is to supply credit for production. But if they 
insist on continuing to act as a national debt cartel and 
treating their agents as money stores, the relationship is going 
to be difficult. The current system is dysfunctional from the 
standpoint of the Brazilian economy, and it will have to be 
penalized by an adjustment which, incidentally, will also have 
to affect the state banks. 
  [Alves] Will that adjustment be drastic? 
  [Benjamin] I don't think so, because we are going to make a 
viable, simple, realistic, and legal proposal beforehand for 
extending the profile of the domestic debt--a proposal will 
involve losses but no foolishness. We are going to offer 
adjustment options. Incidentally, we suggest that the banks 
begin making their adjustments now, regardless of the election 
results. The orgy is going to have to stop or the nation will 
explode. 
  [Alves] What approach will the government program take in 
relation to the agrarian question? 
  [Benjamin] I have just received a preliminary document on 
agrarian reform. The basic idea is to establish a new "contract" 
between agriculture and society, its priority objective being 
food security for our people. Just as all the developed 
countries, even those with less agricultural potential than 
ours, have done. Our objective in one term of office would be to 
achieve self-sufficiency in producing the 12 items making up the 
basic food basket. As far as the distribution of land is 
concerned, the preliminary goal is to settle 1 million families 
during the first five years of a reform process that is expected 
to last 15 years. This would require the expropriation of about 
30 million hectares, and considering the size of Brazil's 
territory, that is not much. It is an agrarian reform not 
limited to the agrarian issue. It is rounded out by agricultural 
and agroindustrial policies to ensure supplies and food security. 
  [Alves] Do you intend to pay for expropriating that land? 
  [Benjamin] Yes, in accordance with the legislation in 
effect. 
In fact, implementing the Land Statute would be a big step. The 
money for payment will come primarily from budget funds. As the 
country frees itself of the need to roll over the domestic 
debt--which eats up 60 percent of the budget--it will begin to 
have the money it needs. With the resumption of growth, the tax 
base will tend to rise as a matter of course. With inflation 
under control, the basis for funds at the state's disposal will 
grow larger. This is not a particularly expensive program. But 
we have not yet put a figure on the cost. 
  [Alves] How will foreign capital be treated? 
  [Benjamin] What we have had in Brazil over the past 15 years 
is a lot of rhetoric in favor of international integration and, 
in practice, a lot of international isolation. To achieve that 
integration, our country's elites are destroying Brazil: 
destroying the domestic market and the national state. We are in 
favor of foreign capital, especially the kind linked to 
investments. But what we are getting is the entrance of hot 
money into Brazil--money that is not coming here in the form of 
investments, because our people are being pauperized, our state 
destroyed, and our inflation rate rising. 
  [Alves] Do you intend to revise the privatization process? 
  [Benjamin] Certainly. It is a criminal process unrelated to 
any idea of industrial policy. It is fraudulent. It has led to 
the formation of big private monopolies in key areas such as 
steel and fertilizers. Compared to the privatization process 
decided on by the Collor administration, P.C. Farias is a 
chicken thief. As regards the companies that have been 
privatized, we are going to take a look at appropriate legal 
measures. We will not tolerate the formation of private 
monopolies in basic sectors. 
  [Alves] The PT has historically advocated an audit of the 
foreign debt and the suspension of payments on that debt. Will 
this continue? 
  [Benjamin] It is still being discussed. My personal opinion 
is that we were correct in the early 1980's when we said that 
attempts to pay the foreign debt by accepting the absurd 
conditions imposed by our creditors would disrupt the Brazilian 
economy. But we would be wrong now to turn the moratorium slogan 
into a fetish. We would not recover what we have already lost, 
and we would not be able to exploit a scenario that is more 
favorable to us at the moment than it was in the 1980's. 
International interest rates are low and will probably remain 
that way for the next few years because of the serious 
unemployment problem in the central countries. A moratorium must 
be considered a means, not an end. It is important to see to it 
that the economy is not condemned to operate like a machine for 
producing a megasurplus in our trade with the rest of the world, 
as it is now. In the second place, our country must not be a net 
exporter of capital, which it was in the 1980's. Third, the 
problem must be looked at from the standpoint of an overall 
solution that will not prevent us from taking advantage of new 
opportunities in our relations with other countries. Those are 
the ends, and whether to declare a moratorium or not belongs to 
the discussion of means. And it is no longer such a dramatic 
issue. 
  [Alves] How do you analyze Minister Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso's economic plan? 
  [Benjamin] The plan throws all the burden of budget 
adjustment on expenditures and investments, which are already 
very low, and leaves intact the financial component of the 
imbalance in the public sector. Moreover, it does not provide 
clear rules for converting the business world to the URV 
[expansion not given], something that will probably increase the 
conflict over distribution. The acceleration of inflation is 
already clear, and it will continue at least for the next few 
months. This means that a new cycle of concentration is under 
way. We do not believe that path is valid. The crisis will not 
be solved by plans, but by a new and comprehensive national 
project that will point the operators in the public and private 
sectors to new frontiers for the long-term accumulation of 
capital. 
  [Alves] How does the PT approach the issue of the Armed 
Forces? 
  [Benjamin] We are going to have high-level dialogue with the 
Armed Forces with no petty deals. Especially since recovering 
the ability to control and defend the territory and acquiring a 
greater degree of strategic autonomy in the geopolitical space 
of immediate interest to us--South America and the South 
Atlantic--must be fundamental goals of any serious government. 
We have three immediate measures in mind: increased 
professionalization of the military, reequipment of the armed 
services, and a continuation of the main programs aimed at 
technological expertise. With some slight changes in direction, 
that would include support for the program to develop nuclear 
technology, the All-Brazilian Space Mission, the AMX program, 
the Antarctic program, the Calha Norte Project, and the 
electronic warfare center. 
  [Alves] That requires investments. Is it a priority issue? 
  [Benjamin] In the medium term--to be implemented throughout 
the administration's term of office and consolidated at its 
end--we anticipate the setting up of a Ministry of Defense and 
the establishment of a rapid action force to consist of land, 
air, and sea forces in accordance with the principles of modern 
warfare. It would amount to an operational restructuring of the 
Armed Forces. This is a serious issue. Our country lacks defense 
capability. And that is part of the more general process in 
which the state and nation are being destroyed. The objective is 
to guarantee the defense of its territory and greater strategic 
autonomy in its international policy. Military spending 
currently represents 0.5 percent of GDP, and that is not enough. 
In the course of our administration, we want to increase that to 
2 percent, including research and technological development. 
<H5>  Bio Information </H5>
  Cesar de Queiroz Benjamin is 39 years of age, married 
for the second time, and the father of three children: Carol, 
10; Teo, 5; and Sofia, 3. An editor, he did not complete his 
higher education and has never been elected to office. As an 
active member of MR-8 [8 October Revolutionary Movement], he was 
a political prisoner and an exile, and he was among the founders 
of the PT. The PT wing to which he belongs is called the 
"Leftist Option," a group headed by Sao Paulo State Deputy Rui 
Falcao, national vice president of the PT. 

