BFN 

<F P=106> [By Paul Stober] </F>
  [Text] The National Intelligence Service [NIS] will emerge 
virtually unscathed from a planned shake-up of South Africa's 
secret services, and is set to become the country's chief 
information- gathering agency. Intelligence sources and 
military analysts this week confirmed that the NIS will be 
responsible for the collection and analysis of all strategic 
intelligence -- inside and outside South Africa -- under the new 
government. But there is still heated debate about the agency's 
legal powers, such as the right to arrest. 
  NIS operatives, confident about a bright future under the 
new 
government, are referring to their organisation as the "Mo, Joe 
and Louw show" -- referring to the ANC intelligence's number 
two, Mo Sheik; his chief, Joe Nhlanhla; and the present chief of 
the NIS, Mike Louw. It is not yet clear who will emerge at the 
head of the agency. 
  To date, South Africa's three major intelligence services -- 
Military Intelligence (MI), the Crime Intelligence Service 
(formerly the security police) and the NIS -- have operated with 
scant regard for each other's jurisdictions. 
  Under the new guidelines, the NIS will obtain the 
information 
necessary to identify threats to national security and then 
instruct the other agencies to monitor those people or parties 
regarded as dangerous. 
  Commenting on the emergence of the NIS as the top dog, the 
Centre for Conflict Resolution's Laurie Nathan said: "The NIS 
has had a more positive role than the other intelligence 
agencies in preparing for the transition. It is appropriate in 
a democracy that the premier intelligence agency, responsible 
for strategic national intelligence, is a civilian agency, 
rather than police or military intelligence." 
  Although the NIS has been traditionally regarded as more of 
an academic think-tank than an intelligence agency, sources who 
have worked with it say it has an impressive 
information-collection capacity and an impressive ability to 
make sense of the data. 
  Key to the survival of the NIS is the close relationship it 
has developed with the ANC's department of intelligence and 
security. The latter has been willing to work with the NIS, 
whose slate remained relatively clean during the days of "total 
onslaught" and which dealt with the ANC in a sophisticated 
manner. 
  Now that the ANC is in government, its intelligence 
department will be moving almost wholesale into NIS ranks. 
Although relatively small and lacking in trained personnel, it 
brings with it political access to the new ruling party -- a 
vital factor if the agency is to influence government policy and 
secure its budget. 
  It is not yet clear where ministerial responsibility for the 
NIS will fall, but a proposal being closely examined suggests 
that the agency should report to a cabinet under-secretary based 
in the president's office. With a view to making intelligence 
agencies more open to public scrutiny, a parliamentary select 
committee is likely to keep an eye out for abuses of power by 
the intelligence services. Nhlanhla is said to be genuinely 
committed to increasing transparency and accountability. 
  The powers of the other intelligence agencies have been 
severely curtailed by the emergence of the NIS. 
  Officially, MI will be limited to counting other countries' 
tanks and planes. However, it is likely that for as long as the 
army is used for internal law and order operations, it will have 
to run internal intelligence operations. "The army's 
information needs are different from those needed for policing 
operations. If they are deployed internally, they will have to 
collect their own information," said an MI specialist. 
  Because former Umkhonto we Sizwe [Spear of the Nation; ANC 
military wing] intelligence personnel are available to the ANC, 
the organisation has enough operatives to place in key positions 
in MI and will have a sizeable impact on the agency. 
  The police intelligence capability will be cut back to only 
what is needed to combat crime. 
  The NIS is likely to escape widespread cutbacks, even though 
the military has acknowledged that South Africa does not face 
major military threats in the foreseable future. Ironically, 
say intelligence experts, this means information-collection 
operations need to be beefed up, especially if there is a 
scaling down of the preparedness of conventional forces. 
  "We need longer to get ready, so we need earlier warning," 
explained an intelligence expert. As the chief early-warning 
system, the NIS is likely to benefit from any bolstering of 
South Africa's intelligence capabilities. The NIS is preparing 
for its expanded role by, among others, publicly campaigning to 
recruit more agents into its ranks. 
  The biggest danger facing the new intelligence order is that 
old loyalties will linger: "There will be a drop in the 
standard of collection and analysis simply because of divisions, 
mistrust and empire building by individuals. All agencies have 
that problem." 
  The Transitional Executive Council's [TEC] intelligence 
subcouncil was supposed to provide the TEC with information and 
do the groundwork on restructuring the intelligence services. 
In the end, the council made minimum progress because the 
agencies did not trust each other enough and jealously guarded 
their terrain. New agents will have to resist the temptation to 
report to their old masters. 
  Said Nathan: "There is a danger the new intelligence 
agencies will carry on operating in the old conservative way. 
Mechanisms of control and oversight will therefore be extremely 
important. The competancy of these agencies remains to be seen. 
Deliberate sabotage is an unlikely possibility." 

