BFN 

  [Text] President Hashemi-Rafsanjani, who is currently on a 
visit to Gilan Province, attended a gathering of clerics and 
seminarians in Rasht and announced: Thousands of development 
plans are under way in the deprived provinces. We are 
optimistic that one day, the Sistan wildernesses will be 
transformed into a major agricultural pole. 
  He added: When officials initiated the first Five-Year Plan, 
there was much apprehension about its implementation and 
outcome. But today I announce that the plans have been 
implemented and in some cases we are ahead of schedule. 
  The president deemed bitterness and hardship an intrinsic 
part of the reconstruction process in the country and stressed 
the determination of the people to continue on this path firmly 
and resolutely. 
  President Hashemi-Rafsanjani stated: Most factories and 
industries have reached self-sufficiency in the five years since 
the war ended. This is why the enemies of the revolution raise 
a hue and cry against the country's achievements. 
  He called for the greater presence of the clergy in the 
country's reconstruction. Our colleague at Rasht center reports: 
  [Begin unidentified correspondent recording] With the 
conclusion of his schedule for the first day of his visit to 
Gilan Province, President Hashemi-Rafsanjani addressed a 
gathering of Friday and congregational imams, 'ulema, scholars, 
and clerics from all over the province. The gathering was held 
at the Imam Khomeyni prayer ground in Rasht. In his address he 
elaborated on the victorious trend of the Islamic revolution and 
the clergy's mission in the reconstruction era. 
  The president described the difficult conditions of the 
post-war period and said: The enemies imagined that after the 
war ended, we would be unable to reconstruct the damaged areas. 
But now the tools of construction are in our hands and we 
should strive even further for the country's prosperity. 
  Before Hashemi-Rafsanjani's address, Hojjat ol-Eslam 
val-Moslemin Ehsanbakhsh, the supreme jurisconsult's deputy in 
Gilan, expressed his appreciation of the Hashemi-Rafsanjani's 
government policies and efforts by government organizations to 
rebuild the areas damaged in the 1369 [year beginning 21 March 
1990] earthquake in Gilan. He said: The Gilan clergy enjoys a 
rare cohesion and solidarity. The functioning of 16 Shiite 
seminaries and two Sunni seminaries are evidence of the fervor 
of the people for the manifest religion of Islam. [end 
recording] 

