Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Doctor of Economic Sciences and Russian </F>
Federation First Deputy Minister of Science and Technical Policy 
Andrey Georgiyevich Fonotov, by Svetlana Fedorovich, under the 
rubric ``Opinions''; place and date not given: ``Andrey Fonotov: 
The Primary Thing Under Present Conditions Is To Create a New 
Institutional Environment''--first paragraph is SEGODNYA 
introduction] 
  [Text] Andrey Georgiyevich Fonotov was born in 1947 in 
Leningrad. He graduated from the Economics Faculty of Moscow 
State University imeni Lomonosov. He is a doctor of economic 
sciences. For a long time he worked at the TsEMI (Central 
Institute of Mathematical Economics, where Glazyev, Gaydar, and 
Shatalin worked). He is the author of more than 100 works and 
books on questions of planning, forecasting, and the theory of 
scientific and technical progress. At present he is RF [Russian 
Federation] First Deputy Minister of Science and Technical 
Policy. 
  Fedorovich: Andrey Georgiyevich, what is the 
Ministry of Science and Technical Policy for you personally? Is 
the new name of the former State Committee for Science and 
Technology merely the copying of some western models or is an 
entirely specific meaning incorporated in this? 
  Fonotov: Well, in general the existence of such a 
ministry is not entirely typical of the West, although it does 
exist in England, France, and the FRG, but not, for example, in 
the United States. Following Russian traditions, any socially 
significant function is not realized until it has been 
institutionalized. Any public movement or organization, for 
example, a ministry, can be an institution. Many of our best 
minds, among them Karamzin, Solovyev, and Klyuchevskiy, back in 
the 19th century noted that in Russia progress always came from 
above. P.N. Milyukov asserted that the government in our country 
was more progressive than the people for certain reasons, 
history points to this, the facts testify to this. So today the 
ministry of science, if we talk about its specific tasks, is 
called upon to create a new environment, in which the scientific 
community should function. People often call me an 
institutionalist, but, believe me, my conviction is based on 
rather specific things. In the future the main goal is not only 
to support scientific directions, to plan priorities, as is done 
at times, or to chose the directions that are most important 
from the standpoint of the national economy, although all this 
is an indispensable condition of the activity of the ministry. 
The primary thing under present conditions is to create a new 
institutional environment. And the future of Russian science 
actually depends on how successfully we accomplish this task. 
  Fedorovich: Does technical policy today consist 
precisely in this? 
  Fonotov: Yes, because under stable conditions, 
when normal institutions, which determine the functioning of one 
sphere or activity or another, have already been established, 
all the above-named problems are solved as if automatically in 
the process of the routine activity of the corresponding 
institutions. 
  Fedorovich: Well, we are starting from scratch.... 
  Fonotov: If you consider that a few years ago 
market institutions were included on the list of mortal sins, we 
need the ministry. But this is, so to speak, one aspect. But the 
other aspect is that we always had a kind of idea, which was 
given by Marx, about the laws of socioeconomic development. 
There were so-called formations, there were modes of production, 
they replaced each other in succession, while the Bolsheviks 
were distinguished from all the others by the fact that they 
were the first to realize in what kind of system they were 
living and determined the levers, which it is possible to 
actuate in order to speed up in the interests of mankind the 
replacement of some formations with others. In reality this, as 
in science in general, is merely one of the possible hypotheses 
of the development of society, moreover, as experience shows, a 
very approximate hypothesis. There can be many such hypotheses. 
Therefore, it is strange when people say that Marxist science is 
the only true science.... 
  Fedorovich: And it is omnipotent, because it is 
true.... 
  Fonotov: Precisely. For some people it is. But for 
some people it is false. Such a Marxist love triangle with 
science at the base. But if we speak seriously, the approach 
based on types of development seems more adequate to me. I have 
attempted to formulate a certain hypothesis--I need to do some 
more work on it in order for it to be confirmed--which states, 
in particular, that somewhere at the turn between the 17th and 
18th centuries mankind passed from stagnant, random development 
to the innovation, or evolutionary, type. How does society today 
differ from what we had several centuries ago? We consciously 
cultivate innovations. Vernadskiy has an excellent illustration 
of this: All the basic achievements of mankind--the wheel, fire, 
the compass, paper--do not have authorship, because they were 
developed by people, who did not find themselves in the course 
of civilization and were somewhere on the periphery of human 
development. At that time completely different forces and 
different people were the motive forces of civilization. But 
today we ourselves are artificial, and our problems are 
problems, to which man himself has given rise. And in order to 
survive somehow in this system, we should cultivate what is new 
all the time. It is no secret that the basic institutions of 
modern society were introduced to Russian soil from outside. I 
defined such a type of development--survival at any price--as 
the mobilization type. Precisely for this reason the planting of 
market relations for us is not simply the problem of, say, 
developing the same institutions: All the same the mobilization 
and innovation types of development differ completely. A 
mobilization economy, in particular, cannot even be called an 
economy, since in it the criterion of efficiency or economy is 
completely absent. Only the enormous expending of inefficient 
labor takes place. The best means of getting rid of the defects 
and drawbacks of the mobilization type is the switch to the 
innovation type of development. For this it is necessary to 
reform fundamentally all the spheres of our society and to 
change in principle its reproduction mechanisms. 
  Fedorovich: Andrey Georgiyevich, let us all the 
same return to science and to what is now happening in it. We 
received, honestly speaking, a difficult legacy. It turned out 
historically that industry, which in our country had always 
nudged science, had been militarized. The scientific traditions 
in our country are a very graphic illustration of this. We have, 
perhaps, so few scientists who are Nobel Prize winners because 
our science was basically a ``closed theme.'' How are you trying 
to change this? 
  Fonotov: No sphere on this level can be changed 
individually. Science is a part of the overall cultural system 
of society, if you take our Soviet culture, it was completely 
deficient. And this appears first of all in the quality of 
scientific personnel. 
  Fedorovich: But were there outstanding scientists 
in the USSR? 
  Fonotov: As is known, the blossoming of Russian 
science of the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 
20th century was accompanied by the overall cultural blossoming 
of Russia of that time. And this confirms my ideas that Soviet 
science was in some sense the illegitimate child of Russian 
science. Because many domestic scientific schools and prominent 
scientists were educated in tsarist Russia--take Zhukovskiy, 
Sikorskiy, Zvorykin, Ipatyev.... And the next generation still 
stayed at the level which Vernadskiy, Pavlov, and Florenskiy 
predetermined. But then that was all, it was a waste. You get 
Chernobyl, you get accidents on gas pipelines, capsizing ships, 
falling planes. In our country all values, which determine the 
ethos of the scientific community, were turned upside down, the 
result is that the ethos began in the final analysis simply to 
be destroyed. Only people like L.V. Kantorovich, who lived 
outside this community and was an unworldly man, were able to 
survive. Such people were able to aspire to Nobel Prizes. 
Science has its own laws of development, and it is impossible to 
judge it in terms of benefit or harm. This is a very intricate 
institution, which the most complex and most subtle combination 
of conditions of origination precedes. We today, unfortunately, 
do not have an environment, in which science could have a 
full-fledged existence. For long years the state decided what it 
was necessary to do, in what directions, what directions were 
beneficial and what ones were harmful. We shut down cybernetics 
and genetics and launched scientific communism. Scientists were 
employees. The priorities of science were distorted: First of 
all they directed attention to technical disciplines connected 
with the production of weapons. For example, the theory of 
Pavlov was cultivated because it made it possible to influence 
the state of the mind and social psychology. Our not so stupid 
disciples of Stalinist, communist, and similar propaganda used 
splendidly the theory of conditioned reflexes. If about 10 years 
ago you were to say to a person the word imperialism, he would 
issue the corresponding discordant epithets. Things, which did 
not particularly interest the state, were neglected. Modern 
directions of knowledge and research could not actually and 
intrinsically ripen on Russian soil, by imitating we were all 
the time in the position of chasers. Our present situation first 
of all is dictated, unfortunately, by the loss of the internal 
mechanism of the self-development of the scientific community. 
Of course, in all countries of the world science is to some 
extent both a maidservant and a kept woman of the state. But all 
the same there are limits, beyond which the actions of the state 
begin to affect science destructively. 
  Fedorovich: In the West, as is known, the state 
plus some companies or others sustain academic and university 
science. Mainly firms support sectorial science. In our country 
they are tearing the state to pieces: Money is needed here, 
money is needed there, but there is no money, so will we imitate 
the western system or will we invent our own wheel? 
  Fonotov: You and I talked about Soviet science. 
However things were there, this science functioned and achieved 
some goals, otherwise they simply would not have supported it. 
But the point is that when certain social institutions fade away 
and recede gradually into the past, science, which was formed as 
an integral part of this society, of course, also cannot be 
preserved in the form in which it existed. However, a question 
arises: What kind of science can form in our country, if we do 
not know toward what kind of society we are heading? The very 
general parameters, which are formed in programs of the state 
and in other public documents, thus far are incapable of tracing 
this society clearly. One thing is clear: This should be science 
that is based on the free search for the truth. Of course, it is 
possible to reply: How can a scientist be free, when they do not 
give him money? I understand, for today's people of science this 
is a drama, but they are now if only not forcing them to report 
back at the meeting of the party committee on the work that has 
been done. And they are not making them go during working time 
to ideological seminars. Nevertheless we have been forced to 
find answers to many questions: After the structure of the 
government of the country was changed, many scientific research 
organizations found themselves thrown to the mercy of fate. And 
thereby the stream of assets, which came to them through certain 
channels, dried up. What was it necessary to do immediately 
under these conditions? The idea of federal science centers 
arose. Of course, for the present it is rough, moreover, thus 
far they have been creating obstacles for us, and we simply 
cannot get our legislative acts through the staff of the 
government and through the numerous reconciling instances. For 
example, they say to us: "Why does the science center contain 
several legal persons? Let them unite into one." But would you 
try to make such institutes as the Central Aerohydrodynamics 
Institute, the Scientific Research Institute of Aviation 
Technology, and the All-Russian Scientific Research Institute of 
Aviation Materials one legal person? Each one has its own very 
well-known trademark. We argue, ask advice, and seek allies. 
Meanwhile, you know, in the year and a half that I have been in 
this chair, the nature of the interrelations in the scientific 
community has changed appreciably: Earlier people came to us, 
figuratively speaking, on half-bent legs, but now they drop in 
like they would at a scientific seminar. We and they talk, 
argue, and swear at one another. Of course, the Ministry of 
Finance ruined us soundly, when it ceased to pay us money in 
May, and we, for example, during the third quarter received only 
13 percent of the amount of planned assets. One has to extricate 
oneself by means of reserves, owing to the fact that 
organizations are getting credits, thereby running into big 
debts. Some of them will probably not endure such a thing. But 
nevertheless I am observing a completely different nature of 
interrelations--not supplication, but partnership. 
  Fedorovich: But scientists are continuing to 
leave. What is your attitude toward those who are leaving Russia? 
  Fonotov: A combined attitude. In any society there 
can be a situation, when people simply have not been able to 
adapt to the existing circumstances in the collectives in which 
they work. There are no complaints here. A person did not find 
himself here, perhaps, he will find himself there. It is no 
secret that today we are also continuing to finance not 
scientists and not scientific schools, but abstract 
``collectives.'' In our country the addressness is for the 
present still weak, that is, the elite, the people who are most 
talented, thus far can directly receive money in our country 
with great difficulty. Nevertheless many people are leaving not 
because abroad it is possible to eat and dress well and educate 
children, but because here they have no opportunity to work. And 
nevertheless, no matter what difficult times there are today, I 
want to say that there is the concept of a common cause and 
one's native country, which today is having a hard time and 
which it is necessary to help. Although Guy de Maupassant called 
patriotism the egg that war laid.... I believe that in bad times 
it is necessary to assume the general burden of problems, while 
it is necessary to leave in good times, but this, unfortunately, 
is in theory. 
  Fedorovich: And how many scientists have we lost 
today? 
  Fonotov: Now about 90,000 are leaving annually. 
Incidentally, this figure comes to only a fourth of the quantity 
of so-called permanent emigration from the USSR. In practice of 
these 90,000 only 2 percent fall to the category of scientific 
workers. True, one should specify: This figure is from the 
department of visas, the OVIR. But there are, after all, also 
those people who, while leaving for a temporary job, remain 
abroad forever. The statistics are silent with respect to them. 
The scale of this process is rather large. At the Academy of 
Sciences there are already now institutes, at which half of the 
lead associates are on missions abroad. 
  Fedorovich: If we have begun to talk about the 
Academy of Sciences.... What do you think of the latest edicts 
that give the highest echelon of science, that is, academicians, 
all sorts of benefits? 
  Fonotov: All edicts are not alike. And, of course, 
any edict, which is aimed at supporting science, the scientific 
community, and the scientific and technical potential, should be 
regarded as positive. But I am categorically opposed to it when 
one of the units of the scientific community at the expense of 
others carves out certain benefits for itself. In our country 
many people believe that the academy is all Russian science, 
although the academy is only 8 percent of the people and 12 
percent of the scientific potential. In our country basic 
research to a significant extent is conducted outside the 
academy. For example, high energy physics, chemistry, and 
economics. The academy is very respected and prestigeous, but 
nevertheless one of the institutions of the scientific 
community. Therefore, when the president signs an edict, which 
for some reason is entitled ``On the Material Support of Russian 
Scientists,'' and puts all these assets into the hands of the 
Academy of Sciences, the entire scientific community is 
bewildered. I do not believe that one must not give anything to 
the academy, but it is necessary to give something to the 
Ministry of Science and Technical Policy, because we formally 
represent the entire scientific community. In reality we 
represent for the scientific community the state and for the 
state, the scientific community. So that an independent 
committee, of which it would not be a sin to invite foreign 
scientists to be members, should probably be established for 
such actions. A comprehensive approach to the very functioning 
of science and a unified position of the scientific community 
are necessary, otherwise many good initiatives will be doomed to 
failure. For example, all our attempts last year to get through 
the Supreme Soviet a draft law concerning the fact that grants 
would be exempt from any tax assessment, were torpedoed. They 
said to us: If foreign charitable foundations give such aid, we 
will not tax it, but if a university--this is as is not a 
charitable organization--gives it, please, we will take it 
without fail. Today we are thereby consciously cutting off the 
narrow stream of money, which Russian science is capable of 
receiving from abroad. If the actions of the scientific 
community in such cases were coordinated, the results would be 
more significant. And some parts of the scientific community 
must not try to gain some advantages at the expense of the 
others. 
  Fedorovich: What do you think of the fact that 
several scientists have begun to open their own firms? Fedorov 
is a hackneyed example, but there are also others.... 
  Fonotov: There is nothing bad in this. 
Incidentally, many of these firms in one way or another are 
financed by the Ministry of Science and Technical Policy. We 
financed Fedorov, for example, very solidly, considering the 
social value of what he does. The state under Ryzhkov gave him 
about 300 million rubles. At that time this was an enormous 
amount of money. And today it is a considerable amount: 
somewhere around 300 billion rubles. We hope that many of our 
scientific production associations, which have a good research 
potential, for example, the State Optics Institute imeni Vavilov 
and the State Institute of Applied Chemistry in St. Petersburg, 
in a few years with better, normal guardianship of the state, 
and first of all the Ministry of Science and Technical Policy, 
will become Russian du Ponts and Fords. The State Institute of 
Applied Chemistry, in particular, has a unique technology of 
ozone-safe coolants. Both the Koreans and du Pont have already 
offered to buy them from us. In pharmacology there are quite 
amazing developments. In practically all spheres we have 
world-class developments, and we should learn to commercialize 
them. 
  Fedorovich: And what is happening now with the 
scientific and technical centers that we built abroad? 
  Fonotov: Do you have in mind distant foreign 
countries or neighboring ones? In the former USSR many research 
facilities remain, including in Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and 
Ukraine. We also did much building in developing countries, 
incidentally, we also have something in developed countries. 
Inasmuch as during the construction they used our standards and 
our technologies, they were thereby bound to our markets. And 
we, of course, should make every effort so that Russian 
metallurgists, not specialists from the FRG or Japan, would 
carry out the reconstruction of Bhilai. We have all the 
resources for this. It is necessary to agree to the elimination 
of any political problems that arise, for the best policy is a 
good economy. Of course, because of security considerations it 
is impossible to release some technologies from control, selling 
them thoughtlessly to third countries. Here together with 
interested departments we are trying to establish some barriers. 
As to neighboring foreign countries, the trends of cooperation 
in the CIS are intensifying, a commission, which, it is true, 
for the present is poorly picking up speed--the interstate 
scientific and technical council--has been established; there 
are agreements that regulate the use of joint facilities, for 
example, in Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan is next in line, and, I 
think, we will come to an agreement with Ukraine. Honestly 
speaking, without our former republics, particularly Belarus and 
Ukraine, it will be very hard for us to live: We will have to 
create everything from scratch. I am not talking at all about 
space research. In order to build a new Baykonur, we need to put 
the entire country on a starvation diet.... 
  Fedorovich: Are there weaknesses in your activity 
as deputy minister? Do you sympathize, perhaps, with some 
specific area of science? 
  Fonotov: I have a weakness for talented people. 
Inasmuch as the scientific elite of the country passes through 
this office, it is necessary to work with it, it is necessary to 
help them, it is necessary to lead them to the machinery of 
government and to admission to other ministries. As a whole 
first of all the problem of scientific and technical policy, for 
the formulation of which I am responsible in the ministry: How, 
what, by what forces and in what time we will do all this, is 
important for me. 
  Fedorovich: So how much time, in your opinion, 
will we need in order to restore the scientific potential and 
not to end up in the category of third-rate countries? 
  Fonotov: There is an optimistic forecast and a 
pessimistic forecast. The pessimistic forecast is 30 years. 
While the optimistic forecast depends on a large number of 
subjective factors. If the president had been able to reach an 
agreement with parliament in December of last year, we would be 
today much farther along the path of reforms and would have 
already now some results. And there would be no talk about the 
fact that atomic reactors are standing unattended somewhere in 
Dmitrovgrad or in Obninsk and soon there will be no one at all 
to work at them, because there is nothing with which to pay 
wages. Poorly financed science, as we understand, increases 
significantly the risk of a catastrophe. True, the fact that 
people are continuing to work even under these very difficult 
conditions, is consoling. And therefore I am not losing hope: 
Given favorable circumstances in about 10 years we will all the 
same have overcome what we dread most. 

