Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Chuan Likphai yesterday expressed 
alarm at worsening pollution and pledged that his Government 
will enforce environmental protection laws more strictly in 
order to halt further damage. 
  The Premier was addressing the Fourth Indo-Pacific Fish 
Conference at the Central Plaza Hotel -- a conference whose main 
focus is the scientific study of fish. But he concentrated on 
the environment and expressed concern both about the polluting 
effects of fish farming and industrial pollution. 
  He expressed sadness at the deterioration of the fresh-water 
lake of Songkhla ``near my home town in the South, which at one 
time was teeming with a great variety of fish and wildlife, and 
was famous for its scenic beauty.'' 
  He said Songkhla lake is dying. ``The lake is being 
destroyed by waste water released from the local community.'' 
  He noted that geographically Thailand is flanked on both 
sides by seas which in the past provided a sheer abundance of 
fish and other marine resources. Numerous rivers and canals 
criss-crossed the Central Plains. 
  He said he remembered reading the journals of foreign 
visitors who about a century ago travelled to Thailand. 
  ``They told of their ships getting stalled after their 
rudders hit big schools of fish while sailing up the Chao Phraya 
River,'' Mr Chuan said. 
  ``In fact, we have a folk-saying dating back about 800 years 
that says, 'In the water we have fish, in the fields we have 
rice,' fish and rice being the staple foods of our people.'' 
  ``Of course, with the rapid depletion of our fish resources, 
and our monoculture of rice being diversified along with 
industrialisation in recent years, such a saying seems rather 
ironic, and nostalgic also for many people with fond memories of 
the good old days.'' 
  ``As we plunged into earnest development of our fishing 
industry, our exploitation of these abundant fruits of the seas 
and rivers has catapulted Thailand to a leading position in the 
international fishing industry. Fish and seafood have now 
become a major export item for the Kingdom.'' 
  ``The total volume of fish and seafood exported this year 
exceeded $2,000 million in value. Thailand's fishing fleet 
roaming the high seas now ranks seventh in the world.'' 
  ``Despite this great feat in the development of our fishing 
industry and its contribution to the national economy, our joy 
is somewhat subdued by our awareness that we have achieved such 
a position at the expense of the rapid depletion of our once 
abundant resources and the degradation of the sea and coastal 
environment.'' 
  Mr. Chuan noted that coastal areas have silted up, due to 
unchecked soil erosion resulting from alarming deforestation and 
the unsystematic operations of commercial shrimp farms. Water 
temperatures have changed and salinity has caused untold damage 
to coral reefs and aquatic life. 
  He said that to stop more damage to the environment, the 
Government has further tightened up the enforcement of 
environmental protection legislation. 
  ``Industrial factories are now required to install necessary 
water treatment systems. Large shrimp farms along the coasts 
and seafood processing plants are to strictly observe the laws 
on environment protection.'' 
  ``And in 1993, the Government has allocated $99.6 million to 
the Fisheries Department to implement its comprehensive projects 
to replenish our resources. This budget will increase to $108.7 
million in fiscal 1994.'' 
  ``In this regard, I would like to commend our scientists who 
have succeeded in breeding many kinds of fish which would be 
extinct under natural conditions. Many organisations and groups 
have also been active in the conservation of marine life.'' 
  ``These noble efforts have yet to compensate for the loss 
through our past careless exploitation of our fish resources. 
Many varieties have already become extinct.'' 
  Mr. Chuan said he was glad to hear that Mekong River giant 
catfish and shark conservation will be discussed at the 
conference, apart from such major topics as taxonomy and the 
biogenetics of fish. 
  ``The discussion of taxonomy, or the classification of fish 
species, may prove ironic if there are simply no fish to 
classify,'' he said. 

