BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 2 Jun (XINHUA) -- The national joint 
conference on sample surveying one percent of China's total 
population held its first meeting in Beijing on 2 June. 
  State Councillor Peng Peiyun chaired and spoke at the 
meeting. She stressed: The holding of the meeting indicated 
that the work on sample surveying one percent of China's total 
population in 1995 has begun in an all-around manner. It will 
be another large-scale survey on China's national conditions and 
strength since the fourth national census held in 1990. The 
survey will enable us to further understand changed conditions 
in the quantity, regional distribution, basic composition, and 
housing environment of China's population. It will provide a 
basis for China to form long-term population-control targets and 
to improve responsive measures. It will also provide 
comprehensive and accurate information on China's population for 
China to develop the socialist market economy. In March, the 
State Council General Office distributed the "Circular on Sample 
Surveying One Percent of China's Total Population in 1995" to 
its subordinate organs. We hope governments at various levels, 
particularly localities that are chosen to be surveyed, will pay 
close attention to the survey and strengthen their leadership 
over the work. Various relevant departments should closely 
coordinate with one another and make their greatest efforts to 
properly accomplish the population-surveying task. 
  The survey will be conducted on 12 million people who are 
sampled and chosen from various provinces, autonomous regions, 
and municipalities across China. The survey will mainly collect 
information on the basic conditions, economic activities, 
culture, education, marriages, births, migration, and housing 
conditions of China's population. The on-the-spot survey will 
be carried out in October 1995, and the results' main data will 
be published in January 1996. 
  Attending the meeting were Zhang Sai, director of the State 
Statistical Bureau, and leaders of other relevant ministries and 
commissions. 

