OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0153B </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Col A. Tsvetkov, doctor of military sciences, </F>
and Lt-Col V. Tsarkov, candidate of historical sciences] 
  [Text] The early 1990's were marked by significant changes 
in the development of the world community. The Cold War became a 
thing of the past; a mighty world power--the Soviet Union--broke 
up; the size of the armed forces in a number of countries of 
America, Europe, and Asia is being reduced; and relations 
between states once belonging to different social systems are 
improving. 
  The U.S. administration that came into office in January 
1993 
also stated its view of international relations in the situation 
that has been created. Developing new tenets of a national 
security strategy, it not only continues to assign an important 
role to the "intelligence community"[.sup]1[/] in ensuring a 
favorable balance of forces for the country and stability on a 
global and regional scale but is also stepping up the activities 
of its bodies. 
  In all stages of its existence, American intelligence has 
serviced primarily the interests of the U.S. military-industrial 
complex. This has been demonstrated in its global nature, the 
sharp anti-Soviet orientation, and the allotment of intelligence 
functions to all the main agencies participating in the pursuit 
of foreign policy. 
  The basis of the current U.S. intelligence system was set 
forth in the National Security Act of 1947 and in National 
Security Council (NSC) Directive 20/1 of 1 August 1948, which 
officially proclaimed the U.S. path toward overthrowing the 
socialist system in the USSR. Specific goals in the war against 
the Soviet Union were defined more specifically in NSC Directive 
20/4, approved by President H. Truman on 23 November 1948. 
  These documents officially recognize intelligence activities 
against socialist countries as state policy and an integral 
element of Washington's overall policy course. It also defined 
the system of intelligence agencies. The Intelligence 
Consultative Council (ICC) was created under the NSC, which 
included representatives of all agencies involved in 
intelligence and subversive activities. The Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA), created in 1947 based on the Office of Strategic 
Services (OSS) disbanded immediately after World War II, began 
to play the dominant role among all special services. The 
organizational structure of the CIA was basically defined by 
1955. In place of the Office of Policy Coordination and the 
Office of Special Operations that existed before, often 
duplicating one another, the Office of Planning was formed, or 
as it is often called, the office of covert operations. During 
this time, the offices of intelligence information, scientific 
intelligence, and administration appeared. 
  Appropriate adjustments were made to the intelligence 
organization of the armed forces. A permanent joint intelligence 
committee began to coordinate the activities of the various 
types of intelligences. It was made up of the deputy director of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff for intelligence, the assistant chief 
of staff for intelligence of the Army, and the chiefs of 
intelligence of the Navy and Air Force. A joint intelligence 
group with two offices--planning and current intelligence 
operations--became the committee's working group. Intelligence 
in the Army was accomplished by the G-2, in the Navy by the ONI, 
and in the Air Force by the A-2. 
  At the same time, the National Security Agency (NSA), the 
Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the State Department, the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), which is part of the U.S. 
Department of Justice, the Intelligence Office of the Federal 
Atomic Energy Commission, the Intelligence Service of the 
Department of Treasury, and a number of other organizations and 
institutions were drawn into the orbit of intelligence 
activities. 
  The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) and also the 
Intelligence Service of the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) were created in the early 1960's. In 
addition, steps were taken to create space intelligence, and 
special forces were formed. 
  The 1970's were a qualitatively new stage in the development 
of the U.S. intelligence services--creation of a system of 
global espionage and stepping up of intelligence and subversive 
activities and terrorist actions abroad, particularly after the 
appearance of U.S. Presidential Directive PD-59 in the summer of 
1980. During this time, the U.S. intelligence bodies were 
strengthened and reorganized in order to increase the 
effectiveness of intelligence organizations, create a system of 
competing intelligence bodies and a centralized file system, and 
expand covert operations abroad. "We," then-President R. Reagan 
stated, "must do everything we can for the United States to have 
the best intelligence." 
  The National Security Council, headed by the President, 
remained the highest body overseeing intelligence. Its main 
working bodies were the Special Coordination Committee, headed 
by the President's assistant for national security, and the 
Committee for Policy Assessment, headed by the director of the 
CIA. In addition, during this time, striving to further 
intensify intelligence and terrorist activities against 
socialist and liberated countries, U.S. President R. Reagan, at 
the suggestion of the CIA director, brought back the 
Consultative Council on Overseas Intelligence Activities that 
was disbanded by J. Carter in March 1977. 
  The nucleus of the U.S. "intelligence community" during the 
Reagan Administration remained the Central Intelligence Agency, 
directly subordinate to the National Security Council. The CIA's 
main tasks were defined in its updated regulations in the 
following manner: Managing political, economic, and military 
intelligence on a global scale; accomplishing covert operations 
abroad (primarily in socialist countries); analysis and 
assessment of intelligence information and reporting it to the 
government; and coordination of the activities of U.S. 
intelligence services. 
  Whereas no fundamental changes took place in the overall 
structure of the CIA (the central staff, branches within the 
country, and foreign bodies) when the Reagan Administration took 
office, there was a clearly defined trend in the top leadership 
toward reinforcing it with experienced professional intelligence 
agents. Thus, W. Casey, who was in charge of Reagan's election 
campaign, was appointed director. During World War II he held 
the position of chief of the European Office of the Office of 
Strategic Services. An experienced intelligence agent, D. Bross, 
was appointed as his special assistant, and B. Inman, former 
director of the National Security Agency who enjoyed the trust 
and favor of the President, was appointed deputy director. As 
the American weekly NEWSWEEK wrote at that time, "Casey is able 
to strengthen covert agent intelligence; Inman is able to 
organize the administrative apparatus of the CIA and maintain 
cordial relations with Congress." 
  During this same time, the intelligence bodies of the U.S. 
Department of Defense were reorganized significantly: The DIA, 
NSA, and Aerospace Intelligence Agency. Special Operations 
Forces (SOF)[.sup]2[/], intended for operations in "hot 
spots" of the globe, occupied a special place in this system. 
  The DIA--one of the principal intelligence organizations 
"competing" with the CIA--began to be given the main role in the 
Pentagon's intelligence. As then Pentagon chief C. Weinberger 
said, its main tasks were to firmly oversee the intelligence 
services of the branches of the armed forces and the military 
attache staffs, improve the quality of intelligence assessments, 
and step up the pace of scientific research and development in 
the interests of improving intelligence forces and assets." 
  In the DIA, the information service and subunits of 
scientific and technical intelligence were strengthened, as was 
the office supervising the work of military attaches (the 
agency's numerical strength increased to 6,000). 
  Considerable attention was devoted to the NSA in the U.S. 
global intelligence system. This, in the assessment of the 
western press, the "all-penetrating electronic monster" is 
intended to organize and manage communications and electronic 
intelligence on a strategic scale, decipher codes of foreign 
states, coordinate the activities of other intelligence bodies 
in this area, develop codes for governmental, diplomatic, and 
military communications, ensure secrecy of information being 
transmitted over these channels, and also oversee the security 
services of the armed services (beginning in 1971 through the 
Central Security Service--CSS) and other agencies. 
  "Break-ins into foreign embassies in the United States and 
abroad, organized from time to time to steal codes and cipher 
machines, and also intensification of electronic surveillance 
within the country," as the magazine PROGRESSIVE noted, are a 
new function of the NSA. 
  The procedure for collecting, processing, and distributing 
information obtained by NSA forces and assets, as well the 
coordination of its activities with similar systems of the CIA 
and FBI were improved considerably during these years. In 
particular, in 1976 the United States began using the gigantic 
Ilike-IV computer (located in an armored bunker of Building N 
233 of NASA at Moffett Field, California) to process 
intelligence information. It is a system of 64 computers able to 
perform from 100 to 200 million operations per second and store 
8.4 million bits in the data bank and another 1 billion bits in 
the magnetic memory. At the same time, the NSA has stepped up 
research considerably in the area of cryptography and creating 
cipher machines, cooperating closely with the Defense Analysis 
Institute (DAI). 
  The State Department's intelligence service has a special 
office instead of a Bureau of Intelligence and Research. The 
structure of this service has basically remained the same (six 
regional and several functional offices), but its subunits 
engaged in analyzing the condition of the economy, science, and 
social processes in the USSR and other countries have been 
expanded considerably. The staff of the special office is manned 
basically with career intelligence agents known for their 
aversions for the Soviet Union and other socialist and 
developing countries. 
  A step forward was made in stepping up the intelligence 
activities of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Besides 
accomplishing functions of political criminal investigation and 
counterintelligence in the country, the bureau has stepped up 
intelligence collection abroad. By that time, as the WASHINGTON 
POST newspaper wrote, the FBI "had its own agents in most 
capitals of the world and in many cities of various countries." 
The Drug Enforcement Administration, which engaged in 
identifying on U.S. territory and abroad organizations producing 
and supplying drugs and, at the same time, assessing the 
economic capabilities of certain countries, was operationally 
subordinate to the FBI. 
  The new economic upheavals by the early 1980's enlivened the 
activities of the Secret Service of the U.S. Treasury Department 
(Intelligence Support Office), which began to concentrate its 
efforts not only on studying the financial situation in leading 
capitalist states but also on obtaining data on the credit and 
financial system of socialist countries and its capabilities for 
financing defense measures. 
  The intelligence service of the Department of Energy has 
also 
defined its role in the U.S. intelligence community. It has 
begun in earnest to engage in the collection and analysis of 
information on the nuclear industry, scientific discoveries, and 
research developments in the area of nuclear physics and on the 
availability and amount of fissionable materials in the leading 
powers of the world. It also is engaged in the development of 
aerospace reconnaissance systems for detecting nuclear tests and 
in the assessment of the capabilities of foreign states in the 
areas of creating nuclear weapons. 
  Former CIA Director R. Helms named the following as among 
the 
CIA's urgent problems in the 1990's: Monitoring the 
proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons; 
intensifying the collection of information in key regions of the 
world, including using the latest satellites; strengthening 
cooperation with the intelligence services of NATO countries; 
conducting intelligence collection against Russia and its 
economic, nuclear, and military potentials; increasing interest 
in the Middle East and China; increasing the role of covert 
agent intelligence in obtaining information. 
  In unison with the statement by R. Helms, the American 
newspaper the BOSTON GLOBE noted that the CIA has intensified 
"spy activities against Russia" together with other intelligence 
services of East European and also Baltic states, having 
received consent for such cooperation from the White House in 
July 1992. 
  Former President G. Bush spoke even more openly concerning 
this when he addressed CIA employees in January 1993. In 
particular, he emphasized that today the White House requires 
more, not less, intelligence information. Bush, who once headed 
the CIA, substantiated this position by the "preservation of 
real threats to U.S. national security." The new U.S. President 
B. Clinton is adhering to the administration's previous policy 
with respect to intelligence--"preserve a strong and active 
system of obtaining and analyzing intelligence information." 
  Based on the military-political tasks facing the United 
States today, the Clinton Administration has decided to "expand 
the role and capabilities of all types of intelligence 
collection." To this end, a number of steps are being taken to 
improve intelligence management bodies, and forces and assets of 
covert agent, space, electronic, air, maritime, and also ground 
forces intelligence. 
  James Woolsey, who is no novice in intelligence, was 
appointed director of the CIA in January 1993. Between 1977 and 
1979 he was deputy secretary of the Navy and had a career in 
naval intelligence and counterintelligence. In the staff of the 
CIA, in addition to the four main directorates 
retained--operations, information, science and technology, and 
administrative--a directorate for planning and coordination 
began functioning. Its main purpose is to assume some of the 
functions of the main operations directorate (planning covert 
operations abroad and accomplish cooperation with intelligence 
services of other countries.) 
  The functions of the intelligence and research office of the 
State Department were modified somewhat in connection with the 
breakup of the Warsaw Treaty Organization and the Soviet Union 
and with formation of the new states. The office began to be 
more involved in overseeing the intelligence activities of 
embassies, particularly in countries of Eastern Europe, the 
Baltics, Transcaucasia, and Central Asia. It has improved the 
quality of processing obtained intelligence information with the 
aid of the latest computers, and increased the number of 
employees of the office involved in conducting negotiations on 
disarmament problems outside the United States. 
  The Federal Bureau of Investigation not only has preserved 
its positions under the new administration but has also 
strengthened them, particularly in the area of 
counterintelligence abroad, after authorization for citizens to 
travel freely abroad in Russia and other states of the former 
USSR. 
  The structure and tasks of the Directorate of Intelligence 
Support of the Treasury Department and the Directorate of 
Intelligence of the Energy Department remained basically 
unchanged. 
  As far as the Drug Enforcement Administration is concerned, 
it recently has strengthened its overseas and coordination of 
activities with the intelligence services of foreign states, 
including Russia. 
  The DIA has strengthened its positions under the Clinton 
Administration. Besides a certain updating of missions and 
changes in the structure of the staff of the DIA director 
(reorganization of the special group of advisers in the area of 
intelligence information analysis), there has been a 
strengthening of subunits of covert agent intelligence of the 
Main Directorate of Operations, Planning, and Personnel Training 
and also of the Directorate of Foreign Ties of DIA. The 
contingent of students at the College of Military Strategic 
Intelligence has been expanded through the attendance of citizen 
of East European countries. 
  The NSA has reexamined somewhat its activities in connection 
with recent changes in the world. It has considerably 
intensified subunits of communications and electronic 
intelligence for monitoring the situation in countries of the 
former USSR, in the Middle East, and in the Far East. 
  In addition to the existing National Office of Air and Space 
Reconnaissance (NOASR, as part of the Department of the Air 
Force), engaged in operating equipment and directly conducting 
reconnaissance, the Central Office of Imaging Intelligence was 
created in the Department of Defense in May 1992. Its tasks 
include planning and coordinating programs using satellites and 
strategic reconnaissance aviation. 
  Significant changes have taken place in the work of staffs 
of 
intelligence bodies of the departments of the Army, Air Force, 
and Navy, primarily along the line of reorienting them in new 
directions in accordance with changes in the geostrategic 
situation in the world. 
  Work is continuing on increasing the effectiveness of covert 
agent intelligence. Typical in this respect is the statement of 
one of the former directors of the CIA, W. Casey, who stated in 
an interview with the magazine PROGRESSIVE that "covert agent 
intelligence is continuously being developed thanks to constant 
support of the government and the Senate." 
  Covert agent intelligence collection is conducted by CIA 
resident agents overseas (more than 100 of them), military 
attaches of the Defense Department, the diplomatic corps, an 
other departments, using for this specially trained intelligence 
agents sent out on the territory of foreign states under legal 
cover (diplomats, journalists, scientific workers, businessmen, 
tourists, and so forth) and also recruited citizens from one or 
another country. 
  The Clinton Administration is devoting special attention to 
stepping up secrecy in the activities of covert agent 
intelligence collection and increasing the scale of covert 
operations abroad. As the foreign press notes, the new CIA 
director's personal experience in supervising Navy intelligence 
"strengthened in him the opinion about the need to implant 
reliable agents and covert operations specialists in key areas 
of the world." 
  After summarizing the experience of using Special Operations 
Forces in the armed conflict in the Persian Gulf[.sup]3[/], 
measures are being conducted to improve their organizational 
structure, armament, equipment, and methods of combat employment. 
  A typical feature of further improving U.S. electronic 
intelligence collection is the creation of integrated (fixed and 
mobile) automated communications, electronic, radar, and 
electro-optical intelligence collection systems, which is done 
comprehensively using ground, maritime, air, and space assets. 
The NSA alone has at its disposal more than 2,000 intercept and 
direction-finding sites located both on the continental United 
States and abroad. They are in any American embassy and also at 
such sites as Istanbul (Turkey), Darmstadt and Berlin (Germany), 
Brindisi (Italy), the island of Crete, and in Morocco and 
Norway. According to data from the London magazine THE NEW 
STATESMEN, the NSA site at Menwith-Hill (Great Britain) uses the 
services of the British Post and Telegraph Agency to hook up to 
nearly all electronic communications channels in Western Europe. 
  As before, especially after the military conflict in the 
Persian Gulf, the United States highly values space intelligence 
collection for its global nature and ability to monitor huge 
territories and water areas of the globe in short periods of 
time, expose various installations, precisely determine their 
coordinates, and rapidly transmit obtained data to echelons 
concerned, down to and including the tactical level. The United 
States uses imaging and electronic intelligence systems for 
conducting reconnaissance collection from space, as well as a 
ballistic missile early warning launch detection system. 
  The imaging space intelligence collection system is based on 
integrated use of Lasp and Samos satellites, each of which can 
conduct reconnaissance in an area up to 100 km wide up to eight 
times while flying over the territory of Russia during daylight 
hours. The satellites of this system are equipped with 
photographic, television, and infrared intelligence collection 
equipment. 
  The basis of the space electronic intelligence collection 
system is the Big Bird and Key Hole satellites, which make it 
possible to conduct continuous surveillance of the most varied 
enemy electronic assets and determine their location and basic 
characteristics. 
  The space-based ballistic missile early warning launch 
detection system is being improved. It includes four or five 
satellites, two information receiving and processing centers, 
six mobile receiving complexes, and one transportable receiving 
station. This system uses infrared telescopes, proton detectors, 
and radiation reconnaissance instruments installed on satellites 
to register the flare of the sustainer stage missile rocket 
engines as well as nuclear detonations. The United States began 
developing the new "Orius" in 1991 to replace "Iments" equipment. 
  In addition to the above systems, great hopes are being 
placed on the Columbia manned spacecraft commissioned under the 
Space Shuttle program back in 1983. Manned space ships are 
equipped with weapons and reconnaissance equipment. 
  In recent years, American specialists have continued work in 
the direction of expanding the capabilities of the integrated 
aerial reconnaissance system, primarily by improving the U-2R, 
SR-71A, and RC-135 aircraft, decreasing their radar contrast, 
equipping them with more powerful engines, creating strategic 
unmanned reconnaissance aircraft, and also improving onboard 
reconnaissance equipment of tactical reconnaissance aircraft 
(cameras, lasers, side-looking radar, and infrared devices). It 
is planned to gradually replace the F-16R and RF-4C 
reconnaissance aircraft. To this end, the new Lightning-2 
reconnaissance aircraft is being developed based on the F-22A 
fighter. As a result, U.S. spy agencies will receive the 
capability to obtain data on the enemy in detail and in short 
periods of time in continental and ocean theaters of military 
operations on a real or near real-time basis. 
  Recently, aerial reconnaissance infrared devices, above all 
those operating in the long-wave portion of the IR spectrum, 
have improved considerably. They make it possible to fairly 
reliably disclose camouflaged enemy objects, above all his 
missiles, aircraft, and tanks, according to the temperature 
difference of their surface or engine exhaust gases and the 
temperature of the background. 
  The United States assigns a special role in its spy plans to 
E-3A Sentry reconnaissance aircraft of the AWACS long-range 
radar detection and control aircraft equipped with radar and 
electronic intelligence collection equipment. These aircraft, 
belonging to the 552nd Air Wing of the United States Air Force, 
make regular flights over Europe and the Middle East. They are 
able to detect airborne targets at ranges up to 400 km, vector 
weapons to them, and also detect ground targets. Judging from 
reports appearing in the press, the Pentagon is considering 
further expanding airborne spying activities against Cuba, 
Yugoslavia, Iraq, and the DPRK. 
  A new stage in improving U.S. maritime reconnaissance forces 
and assets became the completion of creation of a global system 
for detecting enemy nuclear-powered missile submarines. Its 
basis is the SOSUS long-range sound surveillance system (a 
network of hydrophones located in the Atlantic, Pacific, and 
Arctic oceans and connected to 22 shore-based receiving posts) 
and also nuclear-powered submarines and surface ships equipped 
with sonar equipment. Some of the SOSUS sensors are installed on 
the seabed, and other at various depths in the water. The 
information gathered from them along with data from other 
maritime reconnaissance forces and assets flow together to a 
central information collection point over a network of UHF 
channels and via satellite. 
  The main role in such a system, according to the journal 
PROGRESSIVE, is to vector weapons to a Russian missile submarine 
and suddenly put it out of commission. "This aspiration," the 
journal concludes, "is in keeping with the preemptive strike 
concept dominant in Pentagon strategists' thinking up to now." 
  Thus, this brief review of the structure and activities of 
the U.S. "intelligence community" makes it possible to conclude 
that today and in the foreseeable future it will be assigned a 
significant role in implementing foreign policy and safeguarding 
U.S. interests in various regions of the world. 
Footnotes 
  1. On reorganization of U.S. intelligence services, see: 
ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE, 1993, No 3, pp 9-12.--Ed. 
  2. For more details on the SOF, see: ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE 
OBOZRENIYE, 1992, No 1, pp 9-16.--Ed. 
  3. On U.S. SOF in the Persian Gulf, see: ZARUBEZHNOYE 
VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE, 1991, No 10, pp 16-18.--Ed. 

