Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 28 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- Ernesto Melendez, 
minister president of the State Committee for Economic 
Cooperation, said in Havana that companies formed with foreign 
investment in Cuba now number 129. Of the 129 "economic 
partnerships," 32 are tourism-oriented, said the Cuban official, 
whose remarks were published on Monday by the business weekly 
OPCIONES. 
  The weekly, which was first published in January by JUVENTUD 
REBELDE, the official mouthpiece of the Union of Young 
Communists (UJC), is aimed at foreign businessmen interested in 
investing in the island. 
  Melendez, director of foreign investment in Cuba, also 
disclosed that his ministry has received 149 more applications 
to form joint ventures, the first of which appeared three years 
ago. 
  "We form partnerships with foreign businessmen who provide 
financing, capital for new facilities, and modern technology 
that allows us to produce on a competitive level," he pointed 
out. Melendez explained that most foreign investment in Cuba 
comes from Spain, followed by France, Great Britain, the 
Netherlands, Italy, and Sweden, which are also primary sources. 
He added that Europe has invested more capital than America, 
including Canada, Mexico, Chile, and the Caribbean nations, and 
the duration of partnerships fall within a 10-25 year range. 
  Melendez explained that coinvestments range from the 
exploration and exploitation of oil to industrial production and 
tourism administration. Nevertheless, he rejected the 
possibility of "speculative or questionable operations" in the 
future. 
  Melendez said that multinational conferences on investment 
will be held this year in Cuba and will be similar to those 
sponsored by the British editorial group Euromoney in 1993 in 
London, Cancun, Mexico City, and Havana. 
  A constitutional reform in 1992 permitted joint ownership of 
capital goods in Cuba, an unprecedented shift in the country's 
former state monopoly-type economic structure. 

