BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Chuan Likphai yesterday ruled out the 
extradition of Chat Thai Party MP Thanong Siriprichapong to the 
United States to face charges of drug trafficking. Chuan said 
Thailand would prosecute its own citizens and would not 
extradite them to face charges in foreign countries. 
  The US Embassy in Bangkok announced on Wednesday that on 
January 12, 1993, it requested the Thai government to serve 
legal notice on Thanong that he was the subject of assets 
forfeiture proceedings before the US District Court in northern 
California. 
  "By principles, we will not extradite Thais to be prosecuted 
overseas," Chuan said. "Extradition will be made only against 
foreigners who commit wrongdoings abroad and try to hide out in 
our country. (The United States) may request us to extradite 
(Thanong) but we will not do it. No matter what wrongdoing he 
might have committed, it is Thai officials' responsibility to 
prosecute him." 
  Thanong, a Nakhon Phanom MP, is accused by the US Drug 
Enforcement Agency (DEA) of having conspired to smuggle more 
than 45 tons of marijuana into the United States between 1977 
and 1987. The US Embassy said the drug deals earned Thanong 
more than $10 million. 
  Chuan said yesterday he had ordered Foreign Minister Prasong 
Sunsiri to find out the full details of the charges. 
  The prime minister said the authorities were required to 
follow up the case and find out whether the opposition MP had 
committed crimes as charged. 
  Chuan said the Office of Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) 
might 
have been pursuing the case but did not yet have enough evidence 
to take legal action against Thanong. 
  "It is difficult to take action against someone if there 
isn't enough evidence," Chuan said. 
  Prasong met Chuan at Government House at 11.25 am yesterday. 
  Emerging from the meeting, Prasong told reporters he had 
briefed the prime minister over Thanong's case. 
  Prasong said the US government had so far not requested that 
Bangkok extradite Thanong. He said the DEA only wanted the 
government to inform Thanong about the seizure of his assets in 
the US. 
  Thanong had the right to choose whether or not to appear 
before the US court. 
  National Security Council Secretary-General Charan 
Kunlawanit 
said police would find out more information about the alleged 
drug trade. 
  Police Director General Pratin Santipraphop said police were 
monitoring the case but could not take any action because there 
were no evidence against Thanong. Pratin said police had yet to 
get evidence against Thanong from the United States. 
  Meanwhile, Charan Phakdithanakun, secretary-general of the 
Judicial Affairs Division of the Justice Ministry, said 
yesterday the Thai-US extradition treaty does not oblige Bangkok 
to extradite Thai citizens at US requests. He said the treaty 
would normally apply to foreign criminals who escaped to 
Thailand. 
  In case of Thanong, Charan said the Thai authorities could 
take action against him if the alleged drug smuggling took place 
after September 27, 1991, the day a new Thai narcotics 
suppression law went into effect. 

