CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Garri Yastrebov and Aleksandr Istomin, under the </F>
rubric ``Ecology and Health'': ``Childhood Cannot Be Postponed 
Until Later''; first paragraph is ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI introduction] 
  [Excerpts]At the start of the current school year, 
scientists of the Moscow Research Institute of Hygiene imeni 
Erisman, Professor G. YASTREBOV, doctor of medical sciences, and 
A. ISTOMIN, candidate of medical sciences, not only remind us 
about childhood problems, but offer concrete ways of resolving 
them. [Translator's note: All of Istomin's article follows.] 
  Have you noticed how pale and peaked most of our children 
look lately? Particularly dramatic changes have taken place for 
the kids who live in large cities: their eyes have grown dull, 
less laughter is heard, they do not move around much, and they 
virtually never initiate active games --this requires much 
energy, and that is expressly where all is not well. Why? 
Dramatic worsening of diet, for it is expressly with food that 
we get energy-filled calories so essential to the body. 
  The scientists at the Institute of Nutrition recently 
carried 
out mass-scale studies in different parts of Russia. The results 
are sad: most preschool and school children do not receive in 
their food what their bodies need. Their diet includes few foods 
containing biologically active protein: meat, fish, milk and 
dairy products, as well as fresh vegetables, fruit, and 
vegetable oil. Not so long ago, we worried that our children 
were eating too many sweets, and now they often fail to consume 
the standard amount. But bread, grain and pasta products are 
consumed more and more which, of course, disrupts normal 
function of digestive organs. Up to 20 percent of the children 
are overweight because of this, but this is precisely the case 
where extra weight is not beneficial. And more than 15 percent 
of the higher-grade children have already ``earned'' chronic 
gastrointestinal diseases. Such a formerly rarely encountered 
disease as iron-deficient anemia is now encountered rather often 
in our children (about 10 percent). 
  A group of scientists of our institute carried out 
full-scale 
studies of actual diet of children in secondary schools, 
boarding schools, and PTU [vocational-technical schools] in 
Altay Kray, Komi Republic, Moscow, Tula oblasts and other 
regions. Their conclusions: obviously unbalanced qualitative and 
quantitative composition of diets. These growing children 
consume 14 to 17 percent less foods containing protein than they 
require. There is a particularly enormous shortage of protein of 
animal origin and vegetable oil (in some case up to 50 percent 
deficiency). There are low levels of vitamins C, A, B and some 
minerals (calcium, phosphorus, iodine) in the kids' diet. 
  The results of hygienic studies were confirmed, by 
biochemical parameters, alimentary (nutritional) status, 
anthropometric data, and level of work capacity. Screening of 
12-year-old schoolchildren in Moscow revealed that vitamin C 
levels in blood were below the required allowance in 40 percent 
of them, and at a severely deficient level in 5 percent. Vitamin 
A and E levels in blood were low in one-third of the children. 
In addition, a correlation was demonstrated between impaired 
structure and quality of nutrition, on the one hand, and higher 
susceptibility to colds and infectious diseases, on the other. 
  As yet such pathological states as anemia, rickets, 
dystrophy, avitaminosis and other diseases caused by deficient 
diet have not appeared on a mass scale among children. But the 
standard of living of most inhabitants of Russia continues to 
decline, and if there is no stabilization in the immediate 
future disaster will strike soon: after all, a poor diet in 
childhood and adolescence is dangerous to vital functions, not 
only in this period, but also impairs the foundation for good 
health in subsequent years. We adults and particularly the 
powers that be must realize that a child's body develops 
according to its own physiological laws, and its development 
cannot be deferred to a later date. Children cannot wait for the 
time when, finally, reforms will be carried out, life will 
become good and they will be fed better. And in the meantime, 
should they stop growing? Stop developing? 
  At the present time, management of some administrations (the 
fate and health of our children depends on them to some extent) 
are trying to shift many of their duties to parents: as if to 
say that how children eat depends on them. I agree that the 
family carries the main burden, that poor eating habits (and 
often elementary ignorance of the fundamentals of wise 
nutrition) do indeed ruin a child's health. But now, when 
families are impoverished and, as a rule, struggling to feed the 
children with anything available, the state simply does not have 
the right to let them face this problem alone. 
  In the first place, listening to medical and hygienic 
scientists, there must finally take a position as to the minimal 
``basket'' of consumer products for children. It should be 
consistent primarily with the standards of physiological 
requirements of basic nutrients and energy, and not by the size 
of the state subsidies for organization of nutrition. The 
approximate daily amounts of foods for children and adolescents 
of school age (6 to 17 years) would be as follows, in grams 
(gross): milk -- 500, cottage cheese and products made from it 
-- 40-50, sour cream -- 15-20, butter -- 25-40, cheese -- 10-15, 
meat -- 140-220, fish -- 40-70, 1 egg, vegetable oil --10-20, 
potatoes -- 200-300, other vegetables -- 275-350, fruit, berries 
-- 150-500, rye bread -- 70-150, wheat bread 150-250, grains and 
pasta -- 45-60, sugar, confectionery products -- 70. 
  But, since our children spend most of the day outside their 
home (in kindergartens, schools), another problem arises: to 
provide them with a balanced diet in these institutions. But the 
matter of nutrition is worsening more and more in schools, PTU 
and tekhnikums. In a study of diets of PTU students (15-17 years 
old), hygienists learned that there was a decline in nutritional 
and biological value of the diet: by 22 percent for protein, 43 
percent for fat, and 32 percent for carbohydrates. The caloric 
deficiency constituted 34 percent. 
  Many of us know first hand about the breakfasts and dinners 
in schools. It is not bad enough that children are (usually) 
offered far from the products and food that they require for 
normal vital functions; in addition to everything else, it is 
offered at such a cost that you lose your appetite. Schools are 
by no means concerned about organizing balanced nutrition. Here, 
I as a specialist in the field of optimum nutrition, can see the 
following solution. The state has the right to provide the 
Ministry of Education with a state order: civilized, sound 
two-meal nutrition for schoolchildren should become an integral 
element of the education process. It is worthwhile to ponder 
about another thing: could part of the state subsidy to parents 
for children be switched to schools for organization of 
breakfasts and dinners? Of course, provided it is used for the 
designated purpose. 
  Science will not abandon the problem of child and adolescent 
nutrition. For example, the scientists at our research institute 
have developed preventive programs (and some of them have 
already undergone trials) to optimize nutrition of young 
Russians. 


