BFN 

<F P=106> ["Stipulations on Management of First Import of Chemicals </F>
and the Import and Export of Toxic Chemicals"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Chapter I -- General Principles </H5>
  Article 1: In order to protect the health of human beings 
and the ecology, to strengthen management over the first import 
of chemicals and over the import and export of toxic chemicals, 
and to implement the "London Code on Exchange of Data on the 
International Trade in Chemicals (1989 amended version)," 
(London Code for short) these stipulations are drafted. 
  Article 2: Activities in the import and export of chemicals 
within the areas administered by the PRC must abide by these 
stipulations. 
  Article 3: These stipulations apply to the first import of 
chemicals, and to environmental management regarding the import 
and export of chemicals listed into the "Category of Toxic 
Chemicals Banned or Strictly Restricted in China" (the Category 
for short). 
  Food additives, medicines, drugs for use in animals, 
cosmetics, and radioactive materials need not follow these 
stipulations. 
  Article 4: The terms used in these stipulations have the 
following meanings: 
  1. "Chemicals" refers to chemical materials made by man or 
obtained from the nature, including the chemical materials 
themselves, chemical mixtures, or compenents of chemical 
compounds, as well as the substances used as industrial 
chemicals and pesticides. 
  2. "Banned chemicals" refers to chemicals that are 
completely banned because they harm health and the environment. 
  3. "Strictly restricted chemicals" refers to chemicals that 
are banned because they harm health and environment, but still 
can be used under special circumstances and with authorization. 
  4. "Toxic chemicals" refers to chemicals that, after 
entering the environment, cause harm to health and the 
environment through environmental accumulation, biological 
accumulation, biological transformation, chemical reaction, and 
so on, or which cause serious harm and potential danger to human 
beings through contact. 
  5. "The first import of chemicals" means the export to 
China, by a foreign businessman or his agent, of a chemical that 
has not been registered in China by him. Even if the same kind 
of chemical has been registered in China by another foreign 
businessman or his agent, the former case will still be viewed 
as a first import of chemicals. 
  6. "Approval granted upon prior knowledge" means that 
international transportation of banned and strictly restricted 
chemicals -- banned and strictly restricted for the purpose of 
protecting mankind's health and the environment -- must be 
carried out with the approval of the state-level department 
assigned the administrative duty by the importing country. 
  7. "Export" and "import" refer to the activities of 
performing formalities for the entry and exit of chemicals 
through the PRC's customs departments, not including transit 
shipments. 
<H5>  Chapter II -- Supervision and Management </H5>
  Article 5: The State Environmental Protection Administration 
practices overall environmental supervision and management 
regarding the first import of chemicals and the import and 
export of toxic chemicals, takes charge of the thorough 
implementation of the procedure for granting approvals upon 
prior knowledge according to the "London Code," announces 
China's list of banned chemicals or strictly restricted toxic 
chemicals, registers the first import of chemicals, approves and 
manages the import and export of those toxic chemicals listed in 
the "Category," signs and issues "Environmental Management 
Registration Certificates for the Import/Export of Chemicals" 
and "Environmental Management Note of Advice on Allowing the 
Import/Export of Toxic Chemicals To Pass Through," and issues 
public notices on registering chemicals that are imported for 
the first time. 
  Article 6: The PRC's customs departments examine the import 
and export of toxic chemicals listed in the "Category," and 
allow them to pass on presentation of the "Environmental 
Management Note of Advice on Allowing the Import/Export of Toxic 
Chemicals To Pass Through" issued by the State Environmental 
Protection Administration. 
  The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, 
pursuant to its duties, assists the State Environmental 
Protection Administration in examining the relevant contents of 
applications for environmental management registration regarding 
the first import of chemicals and the import and export of toxic 
chemicals, and announces the "Category of Toxic Chemicals Banned 
or Strictly Restricted in China." 
  Article 7: The State Commission for Assessing Toxic 
Chemicals, to be established by the State Environmental 
Protection Administration, is responsible for the work to 
comprehensive appraise those chemicals for which applications 
for environmental management registration are lodged for the 
purpose of import and export, and will advise the State 
Environmental Protection Administration on technical matters 
relating to the implementation of these stipulations. 
  The State Commission for Assessing Toxic Chemicals will 
consist of the management personnel from the departments in 
charge of the environment, health, agriculture, the chemical 
industry, foreign trade, commercial inspection, customs, and the 
relevant quarters, as well as technical experts; they will serve 
a three-year tenure. 
  Article 8: Following these stipulations, the local 
environmental protection departments at various levels will 
carry out environmental management and supervision of the first 
import of chemicals and the import and export of toxic chemicals. 
<H5>  Chapter III -- Registration Management </H5>
  Article 9: When a foreign businessman or his agent exports 
to China any chemical that has not been registered in China 
(except for pesticides), he must file an application with the 
State Environmental Protection Administration for environmental 
management registration regarding the first import of chemicals, 
fill out the "Application for Environmental Management 
Registration Regarding the First Import of Chemicals" according 
to the regulations, and provide a test sample (generally not 
less than 250 grams) free of charge. 
  Registration and management of pesticides sold by foreign 
businessmen to China for the first time, will continue to be 
carried out according to the "Regulations on Registering 
Pesticides," and the Ministry of Agriculture will exchange 
registration information with the State Environmental Protection 
Administration according to a fixed schedule. 
  Article 10: When the State Environmental Protection 
Administration examines and approves applications for 
environmental protection registration regarding the first import 
of chemicals, it will grant environmental management 
registration permits to chemicals that meet requirements, and 
will issue the "Environmental Protection Registration 
Certificates for Import/Export of Chemicals," to allow their 
import. No registration will be performed for the chemicals 
that, on examination, are found to be unsuitable for import into 
China, and the applicants will be so notified. 
  For a chemical that is imported for the first time, and on 
examination is deemed to require more testing and a longer 
period of observation in order to determine its degree of 
danger, temporary registration can be performed, and a temporary 
registration certificate can be issued. 
  The chemicals that have not obtained environmental 
management 
registration certificates for the import of chemicals, or 
temporary registration certificates, cannot be imported. 
  Article 11: The environmental management registration 
obtained by a foreign businessman or his agent during the first 
import of a chemical to China will be valid for five years; if a 
request for extension of the registration is required before the 
valid period expires, the original applicant should file an 
application to renew the registration six months ahead of the 
date of expiration. 
  A temporary registration is valid for one year, and a 
decision should be made before the date of expiration on whether 
to grant formal registration. Under special circumstances -- 
and with approval from the registration department -- an 
extension can be granted, but not for more than one year. 
  Article 12: Each time a foreign businessman or his agent 
exports to China any industrial chemicals or pesticides listed 
in the "Category," or when someone inside the country imports 
such chemicals from a foreign country, he must file an 
application for environmental management registration regarding 
the import of toxic chemicals with the State Environmental 
Protection Administration. For those chemicals that are allowed 
to be imported, the administration will issue the "Environmental 
Management Registration Certificate for Import/Export of 
Chemicals" and the "Environmental Management Note of Advice on 
Allowing Import/Export of Toxic Chemicals To Pass Through" (the 
"Note of Advice" for short). The "Note of Advice" follows the 
system of one note for each batch, and each "Note of Advice" can 
be used for customs clearance only once within its period of 
validity. 
  Article 13: To apply for the export of chemicals listed in 
the "Category," one must file an application with the State 
Environmental Protection Administration for environmental 
management registration regarding the export of toxic chemicals. 
  After receiving the application, the State Environmental 
Protection Administration should notify the department in charge 
in the importing country, and after receiving a notice of 
approval for import from the department in charge in the 
importing country, will issue to the applicant the 
"Environmental Management Registration Certificate for 
Import/Export of Chemicals," which allows the export of toxic 
chemicals. Concerning chemicals for which the department in 
charge in the importing country does not give import approval, 
no registration will be performed, no export will be allowed, 
and the applicant will be so notified. 
  Article 14: The "Environmental Management Registration 
Certificate for Import/Export of Chemicals" signed and issued by 
the State Environmental Protection Administration must have a 
stamp from the PRC State Environmental Protection Administration 
approving environmental management registration regarding the 
import and export of chemicals. A green "Environmental 
Management Registration Certificate for Import/Export of 
Chemicals" is granted to an applicant who wants to import or 
export a toxic chemical listed in the "Category." A pink 
"Environmental Management Registration Certificate for 
Import/Export of Chemicals" is granted to a foreign businessman 
or his agent who wants to export a chemical to China for the 
first time. A temporary registration certificate is white. 
  Article 15: The first page of the "Environmental Management 
Note of Advice on Allowing Import/Export of Toxic Chemicals To 
Pass Through" will be kept by the State Environmental Protection 
Administration. The second page (the original) will be given to 
the applicant for customs clearance purposes. The third page 
will be sent to the State Administration for Import and Export 
Commodity Inspection. 
  Article 16: The verification period for an application for 
environmental management registration regarding the import and 
export of chemicals begins from the day the application is filed 
with information meeting the requirements for registration. The 
verification period for an application for registering the first 
import of chemicals will not exceed 180 days; the verification 
period for an application for registering the import and export 
of the toxic chemicals listed in the "Category" will not exceed 
30 days. 
  Article 17: When the State Environmental Protection 
Administration examines and approves an application for 
environmental management registration regarding the import and 
export of chemicals, it has the power to question the applicant 
and to ask him to supply more relevant information. 
  The State Environmental Protection Administration should 
keep 
the technological secrets concerning the information and sample 
provided by the applicant. 
  Article 18: The State Environmental Protection 
Administration takes sole charge of the printing of the 
application forms for environmental management registration 
regarding the first import of chemicals, the application forms 
for environmental management registration regarding the import 
and export of toxic chemicals, the environmental management 
registration certificates for the import and export of 
chemicals, temporary registration certificates, and the 
environmental management note of advice on allowing the import 
and export of toxic chemicals to pass through. 
<H5>  Chapter IV -- Prevent Environmental Pollution in Ports </H5>
  Article 19: Classification, packaging, labeling, and 
transportation of chemicals during import and export are to 
follow the relevant regulations on the transportation of 
dangerous goods in the international community and in the 
country. 
  Article 20: During the process of loading, unloading, 
storing, and transporting chemicals, it is necessary to adopt 
effective precautionary measures to prevent environmental 
pollution. 
  Article 21: In case of pollution or possible pollution of a 
port due to damage to package or failure to meet packaging 
requirements, the department in charge of the port should take 
immediate measures to prevent and clear the pollution, and 
should inform the local environmental protection department 
promptly, so as to carry out investigation and handle the case. 
The expense incurred during prevention and clearing of 
pollution will be paid by the person responsible for it. 
<H5>  Chapter V -- Punishment </H5>
  Article 22: Those who violate these stipulations, and those 
who import and export chemicals without performing environmental 
management registration regarding the import and export of 
chemicals, will be fined by the customs departments according to 
the relevant rules of customs administrative sanction procedure, 
whereas those involved will be ordered to perform the 
registration procedure that has not been performed, and those 
who perform such registration procedure later but fail to get 
approval, will be ordered to send or take their goods back. 
  Article 23: Those who cause pollution to China's ports when 
importing and exporting chemicals will be punished by the local 
environmental protection departments. 
  Article 24: Those who violate the state's foreign trade 
control regulations when importing and exporting chemicals will 
be punished by the foreign trade departments according to the 
relevant regulations. 
<H5>  Chapter VI -- Supplementary Articles </H5>
  Article 25: A chemical that is imported for the first time 
for experimental purposes is exempted from registration provided 
the annual import volume is less than 50 kg. (Chemicals listed 
in the "Category of Toxic Chemicals Banned or Strictly 
Restricted in China" are not included.) 
  Article 26: The method of collecting fees for environmental 
management registration regarding the import and export of 
chemicals will be drafted later. 
  Article 27: The interpretation of these stipulations rests 
with the State Environmental Protection Administration. 
  Article 28: These stipulations will be implemented beginning 
1 May 1994. 

