BFN 

<F P=106> [Work Report of the Supreme People's Court -- given by Jen </F>
Jianxin, president of the Supreme People's Court, at the Second 
Session of the Eighth National People's Congress, NPC, on 15 
March 1994] 
  [Text] Beijing, 25 Mar (XINHUA) -- Fellow deputies: The 
following is a report on the work of the Supreme People's Court 
in 1993 and tasks for 1994. Please examine the report. 
  1. Persist in Striking "Relentless Blows" against 
Criminals To Maintain Social Stability 
  Stability is an important guarantee for reform and 
development. In 1993, people's courts throughout the country 
continued to adhere to the policy of "doing two types of work at 
the same time, attaching equal importance to both" and launched 
relentless blows against serious criminal activities. During 
1993, various people's courts in the country handled 403,267 
criminal cases of first instance and concluded 403,177 trials of 
such cases. A total of 451,920 criminals were imposed sentences 
with legal binding, of which 173,897 criminals were sentenced to 
five or more years of fixed-term imprisonment, life 
imprisonment, or death (including those sentenced to death with 
a temporary stay of execution for two years), accounting for 
38.48 percent of those being punished or 3.86 percent more than 
the percentage of those being severely punished in the previous 
year; 269,652 people were punished by imprisonment of less than 
five years, detention, or probation; 6,371 people were exempted 
from punishment; and 2,000 people were declared not guilty. 
Various people's courts completed the trial of 95.11 percent of 
those cases within the legal time limit. The various people's 
courts' punishment of criminals played an important role in 
strengthening comprehensive management of public security, 
maintaining social stability, and guaranteeing the smooth 
development of reform, opening up, and economic construction. 
  Take a firm grip on major cases, strike relentless 
blows against criminals. In view of poor public security 
and the constant occurrence of serious and vile criminal cases 
in some localities, people's courts at various levels stressed 
handling cases of murder, robbery, rape, setting off explosives, 
kidnapping, extortion, and hooliganism, especially crimes 
committed by gangs, and severely punished criminals in a prompt 
manner in accordance with the law. During 1993, various people's 
courts sentenced 237,164 criminals who seriously endangered 
state security and public order with legal binding, of which 
141,460 people were sentenced to five or more years of 
fixed-term imprisonment, life imprisonment, or death (including 
those who were sentenced to death with a temporary stay of 
execution for two years), accounting for 59.62 percent of those 
punished or 2.6 percent more than the percentage of those 
severely punished in the previous year. Various people's courts 
effectively struck blows against serious criminals and had a 
quite good effect on society. 
  Launch struggles against specific crimes in a 
deep-going way to stop the spread of serious crimes. In 
recent years, "highway robbery and railroad banditry" have been 
rampant on some railroads and highways, and criminal activities, 
including robbery, theft, kidnapping women and children for 
sale, and organizing and forcing women to engage in 
prostitution, have been very serious in some locales. Last 
year, people's courts at various levels coordinated with public 
security and people's procuratorates in accordance with 
arrangements made by the Central Committee for Comprehensive 
Management of Public Security and concentrated their efforts on 
launching struggles against specific crimes with significant 
results. Meanwhile, people's courts in various locales 
concentrated their efforts on cracking down on prominent crimes 
in light of the actual situation in those places. For instance, 
Yunnan and Guangdong Provinces cracked down on many cases of 
smuggling and drug trafficking. The people's courts in those 
provinces severely punished criminals according to the law by 
seriously implementing the "Decision on Bannning Drugs" of the 
NPC Standing Committee. In view of the actual requirement of 
dealing relentless blows against drug trafficking, the Supreme 
People's Court in June 1993 authorized the Guangdong Higher 
People's Court to sentence some drug traffickers to death. 
Various people's courts in the country handled 5,020 drug 
related cases, and severely punished a number of serious 
offenders. This has promoted the struggle against narcotics. 
During an earlier period, there were increasing cases of 
secretly crossing the national borders in Fujian, Zhejiang, 
Guangdong, and other coastal areas. The Supreme People's Court 
promptly made arrangements and issued a "Circular on Severely 
Cracking Down on Illegal Crossing the National Borders and 
Related Crimes." People's courts in places where illegal 
crossing of the national borders was frequent closely 
coordinated with local public security and other concerned 
departments and launched a struggle against this specific crime. 
The people's courts have severely punished those criminals who 
organized stowaways, and have in the main stopped the spread of 
such illegal activities. 
  Actively take part in the comprehensive effort to 
improve public security in close conjunction with trial 
work. Last year, while handling down severe punishments to 
criminals in accordance with law, people's courts also seriously 
took part in the comprehensive effort to improve public 
security, especially in areas where public order was in a state 
of chaos. First, through such forms as public trials, public 
sentencing, and explaining laws in connection with criminal 
cases, people's courts promoted education to publicize the legal 
system to enhance citizens' concept of the law, to frighten 
criminals, and to encourage the masses to struggle against 
criminal activities. Second, people's courts improved the work 
of submitting proposals in connection with the administration of 
justice. In the past year, to deal with problems discovered in 
the course of trials, they have submitted to the relevant 
departments and units more than 60,000 judicial proposals aimed 
at improving management, plugging loopholes, and improving the 
trial system, most of which have been adopted. Third, people's 
courts strengthened the work of juvenile courts in order to 
protect the legitimate rights and interests of minors and to 
prevent crime or reduce the number of crimes committed by 
juveniles. Fourth, people's courts continued to implement the 
principle of integrating specialized organs with the mass line, 
and where conditions permit, the majority of the criminal 
elements whose crimes were fairly minor were put on probation 
and public surveillance. Last year a total of 60,992 criminals 
were sentenced to probation and placed under the control of the 
public who helped in educating and transforming them. At the 
same time, in the course of reform through labor, those 
criminals who truly repented or demonstrated meritorious service 
had their sentences reduced or were paroled according to law. 
Last year a total of 230,052 sentence reduction cases and 
33,388 parole cases were processed. Fifth, people's courts 
strengthened work at basic- level units. Fully taking advantage 
of the characteristic that they maintain close ties with the 
masses, who had easy access for filing their own legal 
proceedings, people's courts promptly transferred a large number 
of cases of civil and economic disputes and minor criminal cases 
to people's mediation committees under guidance so as to prevent 
contradictions from getting worse and to reduce crime. 
  2. Resolutely Launch Struggle Against Corruption and 
Severely Crack Down on Serious Economic Crimes 
  In August 1993, especially after the CPC Central Committee 
made the decision and plan to strengthen the struggle against 
corruption, courts throughout the country gave primary 
importance to the struggle to severely crack down, according to 
law, on serious economic crimes such as embezzlement and 
accepting bribes. New progress was made in this work. Last 
year, a total of 27,463 cases of economic crimes of the first 
instance were accepted, and 27,323 of them were handled. Of 
that number, 15,204 cases were accepted and 16,143 cases were 
handled between August and December, the monthly average of 
which increased 73.62 percent and 102.13 percent, respectively, 
over the previous 7 months. Last year, a total of 22,106 
offfenders were given sentences with legal binding, excepting 
lawsuits being processed, the cases dismissed by procuratorates, 
and those being returned to procuratorates for further 
investigations. Of this number, 6,863 offenders were sentenced 
to fixed-term imprisonment of over 5 years, to life 
imprisonment, and to death (including a two-year stay of 
execution), accounting for 31.05 percent, an increase of 7.17 
percentage points over 1992; 14,351 offenders were sentenced to 
fixed-term imprisonment of below 5 years, to criminal detention, 
and to control through public surveillance; 540 offenders were 
exempted from criminal punishment; and 352 people were declared 
not guilty. 
  Vigorously concentrate on the trial of major economic 
criminal bases. In July last year, the Supreme People's 
Court convened a national conference of heads of high courts to 
draw up a special plan for handling economic crime trials, 
especially major cases involving embezzlement and acceptance of 
bribes. At the conference, the Supreme People's Court stressed 
that it was necessary to make this work the criterion for 
judging success or failure in the struggle against corruption. 
To carefully implement the relevant instructions, people's 
courts at all levels adopted a series of measures and 
concentrated on organizing efforts meticulously. The Supreme 
People's Court and the high people's courts strengthened their 
guidance and supervision over the trial of major cases. Last 
year, a total of 7,872 criminal cases involving over 10,000 yuan 
were tried in the country, accounting for 54.75 percent of the 
total number of economic crimes, an increase of 10.66 percentage 
points over the previous year. Of the total number of cases of 
economic crimes, 443 casses involved a sum of over 300,000 yuan. 
Those criminals who received sentences included 69 county-level 
cadres and 7 cadres of departmental and bureau level. People's 
courts tried to promote the deepening of the struggle against 
corruption by holding public trials and public sentencing and 
conducted extensive propaganda activities; the Supreme People's 
Court and some local courts also held many news conferences to 
announce the results of the trials of major economic cases. 
This had strong repercussions throughout the country and 
yielded good social effects. 
  Severely punish those who commit the crimes of 
corruption, bribery, and embezzlement of public money. In 
recent years, some public functionaries, including a small 
handful of leading cadres, have taken advantage of their 
positions to commit crimes of corruption, bribery, and 
embezzlement of public money. The situation was serious, and 
their behavior was hated bitterly by the masses. The people's 
courts stressed punishing some functionaries of party and 
government leading organs, judicial and administrative 
departments, and economic management departments who have taken 
advantage of their position to commit the crimes of corruption, 
bribery, and embezzlement of public money. During 1993, 
people's courts punished 11,388 people who committed such 
crimes. Among those people, Xue Genhe, former accountant of the 
Dongfeng Branch Office of the Haikou City Industry-Commerce 
Bank, collaborated with other people and embezzled 33.44 million 
yuan. The amount embezzled was the largest in any trial since 
the founding of New China. Xue Genhe and three other principal 
offenders were sentenced to death in accordance with the law. 
Li Xiaoshi, former vice minister of the State Science and 
Technology Commission, commited the crimes of taking bribes and 
corruption, and Shen Taifu, former president of the Beijing 
Changcheng Machano-Electrical and Scientific and Technological 
Products Corporation, committed the crimes of corruption and 
bribery. The two cases were followed with much interest by 
people of various circles. Taking advantage of his position, Li 
Xiaoshi supported Shen Taifu's illegal fund-raising activities 
and accepted bribes totalling more than 52,000 yuan from Shen 
Taifu and other people. In addition, he also embezzled 20,000 
yuan of public money. Li Xiaoshi was sentenced to 20 years 
fixed- term imprisonment in first instance by the Beijing 
Municipal Intermediate People's Court on 4 March this year for 
his crimes. Through illegal fund-raising activities, Shen Taifu 
collaborated with his wife to embezzle 1 million yuan, and he 
himself embezzled 2 million yuan and gave bribes totalling 
250,000 yuan. He was sentenced to death in the first instance 
by the Beijing Municipal Intermediate People's Court on 4 March 
this year for his crimes. Li Xiaoshi and Shen Taifu have 
appealed, and the Beijing Municipal Higher People's Court is 
hearing the case in the second instance. 
  Firmly crack down on the crime of smuggling. In 
recent years, the crime of smuggling, especially smuggling by 
some units, has been quite serious and the amount involed in 
smuggling has become bigger and bigger. The people's courts in 
various places severely punished those who committed the crime 
of smuggling in line with the arrangements made by the party 
Central Committee and the State Council on cracking down on 
smuggling. The people's courts handled a number of major 
smuggling cases involving some units, and resolutely punished 
some people who were directly responsible for those units and 
people directly involved in smuggling activities in accordance 
with the law. In the last year, 307 people who committed the 
crime of smuggling were punished. Liu Qishan, former director 
of the Commerce Bureau of Rushan city in Shandong Province, and 
others smuggled cigarettes. They collaborated with foreign 
smugglers and their smuggling activities involved a huge amount 
of money, creating a very bad impression in society. On 15 
February this year, the Weihai city Intermediate People's Court 
in Shandong Province sentenced Liu Qishan; Fan Zhanwu, former 
political commissar of the Weihai City Border Defense Subbureau; 
and Liu Ning, former deputy head of operations department of the 
Weihai City Border Defense Subbureau, to death in the first 
instance for their crimes of smuggling and taking bribes. Wang 
Jianzhi, former secretary of the party committee of Rushan city 
was sentenced to death with temporary stay of execution for two 
years for his crimes of taking bribes and self-seeking 
misconduct. The two defendents have appealed to the Shandong 
Provincial Higher People's Court, which is hearing the case in 
the second instance. 
  Harshly cracking down on the crime of manufacturing 
and marketing counterfeit and inferior commodities. This 
is the masses' strong wish and a demand and an urgent need for 
safeguarding the order of the socialist market economy. Last 
year, enforcing the NPC Standing Committee's "Supplementary 
Regulations for Punishing the Crime of Counterfeiting Trade 
Marks" and the "Decision on Punishing the Crime of Producing and 
Marketing Counterfeit and Inferior Commodities," people's courts 
in the country firmly punished the manufacturers and sellers of 
counterfeit and inferior commodities, imposed fines on them, and 
confisticated their property. Verdicts were pronounced on 314 
felons of this category in 1993. 
  Although significant success was achieved in cracking down 
on 
crime in the year, certain problems persisted as can be observed 
from the fact that certain criminal cases were not prosecuted or 
had their criminal liabilities determinated. This problem was 
particularly noticeable for cases relevant to smuggling, the 
manufacturing and marketing of counterfeit and inferior 
commodities, tax evasion, and nonpayment of taxes. Owing to 
local and departmental protectionism, the problem of "paying 
fines in lieu of serving prison terms" remained unresolved. To 
deepen the struggle against economic felons, problems must be 
dealt with according to law otherwise they cannot be resolved. 
  3. Judicial Means Should Be Employed To Regulate 
Relations Between Economic Sectors and Safeguard the Development 
of the Market Economy 
  As the reform of the economic system continues to deepen and 
the socialist market economy continues to develop, the area for 
people's courts to regulate relations between economic sectors 
through court hearings has expanded. The number of economic 
disputes soared substantially in 1993, and the nature of many 
cases was new. In 1993, people's courts accepted 894,410 cases 
of first instance, which was 37.15 percent higher than the 
number of cases accepted in 1992; and they finished handling 
883,681 cases, exceeding the preceding year by 36.08 percent. 
The total money involved in the litigation reached 70.5 billion 
yuan, an increase of 111.38 percent over that of the year before. 
  People's courts have intensified the handling of 
financial disputes and protected the state's macroeconomic 
regulation and control by means of judicial measures. 
After the CPC Central Committee and the State Council decided 
last year to strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control, 
the Supreme People's Court immediately came up with specific 
plans for ensuring macroeconomic regulation and control through 
court hearings. In view of the shortage of circulating funds in 
some banks and credit departments caused by the chaos of recent 
years concerning interbank loans and delinquent loan payments, 
people's courts at various levels have conducted special 
hearings on screening interbank loans and recovering unpaid 
debts. In 1993, they finished handling 267,853 cases concerning 
contract disputes, exceeding the preceding year by 46.38 
percent. People's courts also accepted the handling a large 
number of new financial disputes generated during the course of 
deepening reform and opening up wider to the outside world. In 
1993, they finished handling 1,838 cases of disputes concerning 
stocks, securities, negotiable instruments, loans, and leases, 
or an increase of 57.09 percent over that of the preceding year. 
Their efforts have helped the development of the financial 
market. 
  People's courts have safeguarded the order of commodity 
production and distribution by intensifying efforts in handling 
disputes over buying-selling contracts. Last year, 
people's courts in the country finished handling 308,240 cases 
concerning disputes over contracts about buying and selling, and 
the number surpassed that of the preceding year by 43.97 
percent. While handling cases of this category, people's courts 
insist on protecting litigants' legitimate rights and interests 
fairly as well as the contracts' validity according to law, 
making sure that obligations are strictly met, risks are borne 
reasonably; that legitimate competition is protected, 
illegitimate competition is outlawed, and cheating is punished; 
and that order in the consolidated and open markets is 
safeguarded. 
  Strengthen hearings of enterprise contract and 
bankruptcy cases to steer enterprises toward markets. Last 
year, people's courts vigorously accepted cases involving such 
economic activities as management contracts, leasing contracts, 
cooperative operation contracts, and merging of enterprises; 
they tried a total of 22,056 such cases, up 54.19 percent over 
the previous year, thus safeguarding enterprises' operation and 
management rights according to law and promoting the 
transformation of the operating mechanisms of state-owned 
enterprises. An increasing number of bankruptcy cases were 
filed as the reform of the economic structure and market 
competition deepened. Last year, a total of 478 enterprise 
bankruptcy cases were tried, up 80.38 percent over the previous 
year. Of the figure, 171 were bankruptcy cases filed by 
state-owned enterprises, and 307 were those filed by 
nonstate-owned enterprises. Practice has proven that handling 
bankruptcy cases according to law played a positive role in 
optimizing the industrial structure, rationalizing the 
allocation of resources, and establishing a modern enterprise 
system. 
  Strengthen hearings of cases involving intellectual 
property rightS disputes and technical contract disputes to 
promote the development of science and technology and the 
technology market. People's courts have attached great 
importance to protecting intellectual property rights through 
the application of judicial means. To meet the needs of trial 
work, some provinces, municipalities under the central 
government, and coastal open cities, including Beijing, 
Guangdong, Shanghai, Hainan, Fujian, and Shenzhen, have set up 
intellectual property rights trial courts. Last year, the 
country's courts tried a total of 2,777 cases of intellectual 
property rights and technological contract disputes involving 
patents, trademarks, and copyrights, up 16.39 percent over the 
previous year. The trials of these cases thus protected the 
legitimate rights and interests of domestic and foreign owners 
of intellectual property rights and accelerated the 
commercialization and industrialization of technological 
research results. 
  Strengthen hearings of cases of disputes over rural 
contracting agreements and cases of economic disputes involving 
town and village enterprises. Proceeding from the 
objective of stabilizing the responsibility system, the main 
form of which is the household contract with remuneration linked 
to output, and of promoting the dual management system 
comprising unified management and independent management, 
people's courts safeguarded, according to law, the stability of 
contract agreements by earnestly trying contract dispute cases 
involving rural areas. Last year, the country's courts tried 
47,452 such cases. At the same time, people's courts also 
promptly heard economic dispute cases which had emerged in the 
production and operation of town and village enterprises, thus 
playing a positive role in improving the contract managerial 
responsibility system for town and village enterprises, 
promoting the cooperative shareholding system, and accelerating 
the healthy development of town and village enterprises. 
  Strengthen hearings of cases involving maritime 
disputes and cases of economic disputes involving foreign, Hong 
Kong, Macao, and Taiwan businesses to render service to the 
country's opening to the outside world. Maritime disputes 
have increased yearly following the vigorous growth of China's 
economic and trade relations with foreign countries and the 
expansion of its ocean transport services. Last year, the 
country's maritime courts accepted 1,830 cases of maritime 
disputes of the first instance, up 10.64 percent over the 
previous year, and tried 1,607 such cases, up 11.91 percent over 
the previous year. People's courts also tried 1,311 cases of 
economic disputes involving foreign, Hong Kong, Macao, and 
Taiwan businesses, up 39.62 over 1922. In hearing cases 
involving foreign businesses, the people's courts upheld the 
principle of safeguarding state sovereignty, exercised fully 
China's right of judicial jurisdiction, and impartially 
protected the rights and interests of domestic and foreign 
litigants in accordance with international treaties in which 
China is a participating member or which China has concluded and 
in observance of international practices. The prompt and proper 
hearing of such cases has helped improve the investment 
environment in China and promote the development of economic and 
trade relations with foreign countries. 
  4. Protect the Legitimate Rights and Interests of 
Citizens and Legal Persons Through Trials 
  In 1993 people's courts attached greater importance to 
employing such judicial means as civil trials and administrative 
trials to protect the legitimate rights and interests of 
citizens and legal persons, and handled, according to law, a 
large number of cases involving individual rights and property 
rights. New progress was made in the judicial protection of 
human rights in China. 
  Effectively protect the civil rights of citizens and 
legal persons according to law. Last year, the country's 
courts accepted 2,089,257 civil cases of the first instance, up 
7.21 percent over the previous year, accounting for 61.18 
percent of the total number of cases of the first instance, and 
tried 2,091,651 cases, up 7.32 percent over the previous year. 
First, the number of divorce cases continued to rise. In 1993 
people's courts accepted 946,682 divorce cases, up 5.57 percent 
over the previous year, and tried 950,835 cases, up 5.91 percent 
over the previous year. In the course of handling divorce 
cases, disputes between spouses over the right to own or use 
property and real estate occurred frequently due to the increase 
of jointly owned property. This made it rather difficult to 
confirm and divide common property. People's courts solved 
these problems in line with the principles of equality for men 
and women, of seeking truth from facts, and of fairness and 
rationality. The people's courts also handled, according to 
law, a large number of cases involving the bringing up of one's 
children or the children of martyrs, and providing for one's own 
parents, thus protecting the legitimate rights and interests of 
women, children, and old people and promoting the socialist 
family relationship of married couples and the development of 
new socialist customs. Second, the number of cases involving 
the rights of reputation, honor, title, name, and personal 
photographs increased considerably. The situation regarding the 
major litigants also changed. They included citizens, legal 
persons, or other organizations in addition to residents of Hong 
Kong, Macao, and Taiwan, and foreigners. Many cases involving 
the right of reputation had a great impact on society because 
they were directly related to production, scienctific and 
technological, and business activities. Last year, the 
country's courts accepted 4,760 cases of this type, up 26.56 
percent over the previous year, and tried 4,650 cases, up 29.09 
percent over the previous year. Third, with the labor market 
becoming more active and the expansion of enterprises' rights to 
make their own decisions, labor contract disputes and other 
labor disputes involving wages, insurance, welfare benefits, and 
labor protection rose markedly. Last year, the country's courts 
accepted 1,092 cases of labor disputes, up 19.89 percent over 
the previous year. In handling these cases, the people's courts 
safeguarded the legitimate rights and interests of staff members 
and workers and protected their enthusiasm for production 
according to law, while at the same time protecting the 
independent right of enterprises in hiring workers in order to 
maintain normal production order. Fourth, in the development of 
the private and individual sectors of the economy, debt cases 
involving nongovernmental organizations or civilians have been 
increasing yearly. Last year, the country's courts accepted a 
total of 639,266 debt cases, up 12.61 percent over the previous 
year, and tried 638,318 cases, up 12.08 percent over the 
previous year. In handling these cases, the people's courts 
upheld the principle of creating favorable conditions for 
production and livelihood, thus protecting the legitimate rights 
and interests of lenders and borrowers. 
  Fifth, due to development of the real estate industry, 
court trial cases of land development, housing sales, and real 
estate mortgages cropped up continuously. They involved a large 
amount of money in lawsuits and complicated legal relationships. 
Last year, courts across the country handled a total of 82,024 
cases of real estate and housing sales disputes among the people 
and wound up 81,366 cases, up 10.8 and 8.07 percent respectively 
over the previous year. Upholding the principle of equality, 
voluntariness, honesty, trustworthiness, and compensation of 
equal value, people's courts properly handled these cases and 
promoted healthy development of the real estate market. 
  Protect the legitimate rights and interests of 
citizens, legal persons, and other organizations from being 
infringed upon according to law; uphold and supervise 
administrative organs' administration according to law. 
People's courts made new progress in exercising their 
administration of justice over the past year. They handled a 
total of 27,911 administration cases at first hearing and wound 
up 27,958 cases [as received] over the whole year. In 23.56 
percent of the cases mentioned above, they upheld the decisions 
made by administrative organs; in 20.39 percent of the above 
cases, they annulled and altered administrative organs' 
decisions; 41.31 percent of the above cases were withdrawn; and 
14.74 percent of the cases were handled by them in a way other 
than legal proceedings. The administration cases handled by 
people's courts involved over 30 fields of endeavor, including 
land, public security, industry and commerce, urban 
construction, environmental protection, and taxation. The 
courts focused attention on hearing administration cases 
concerning enterprises' transformation of operating mechanisms 
and [administrative organs'] adding to peasants' burdens. They 
corrected specific illegal administrative behaviors of 
administrative organs and supported their specific legal 
administrative behaviors. Through court hearings of the 
administration cases that had cropped up in the process of 
enterprises' transformation of operationg mechanisms, they 
corrected and put an end to such illegal behavior as unwarranted 
pooling of funds, arbitrary requisition of donations, and 
exacting fees from enterprises that infringed on their 
management decisionmaking power. Through court hearings of a 
small number of administration cases caused by administrative 
organs' adding to peasants' burdens and illegally demanding that 
peasants bear expenses or provide labor services, they protected 
peasants' interests and aroused their enthusiasm for production. 
Some courts made timely judicial suggestions for solving the 
problems existing in administrative organs' law enforcement 
which had been brought to light during hearings. For example, 
the judicial suggestions made by some courts to local 
governments were directed against the addition of burdens to 
peasants in their respective localities; they suggested that the 
expenses peasants ought to bear and labor services they ought to 
provide according to law and policy be brought into the orbit of 
control by a legal system through the signing of an agreement. 
If adopted, the suggestion shall be followed in the whole 
province. Based on applications submitted by administrative 
organs, courts at all levels enforced the implementation of 
88,147 administrative decisions, thereby effectively supporting 
administrative organs' administration according to law. At 
present, the main problems existing in administration of justice 
are: Some citizens dare not take legal proceedings against 
administrative organs for fear of retaliation; some 
administrative organs are unwilling to appear in court for fear 
of adversely affecting their prestige; and, for fear of 
adversely affecting their relationship with administrative 
organs, some judicial personnel are afraid of difficulty. To 
better carry out administration of justice, we should more 
intensely study and more extensively propagandize the 
administrative procedural law, and conscientiously solve the 
problems of understanding existing in people's minds as well as 
other realistic problems. 
  Strengthening the handling of complaints and 
petitions and protecting citizens' litigation rights. 
Courts in all parts of the country handled 1,838,254 letters 
and received 3,820,477 visits from people last year. Of the 
5,658,731 letters and visits, 785,802 were petitions, 3,508,562 
were complaints, and 1,364,367 were related to other matters. 
People's courts placed the petitions and complaints on file for 
investigation or trial on a timely basis after conducting 
preliminary review and examination of the cases, and they also 
transmitted cases not within court jurisdiction to proper 
authorities for handling. To improve the handling of complaints 
and petitions, some people's courts established special task 
forces, some enacted rules and regulations to facilitate 
litigation by the masses, and some took to the streets and 
villages to offer legal services or established petition 
stations in outlying areas. As a result, difficulties 
encountered by the masses in bringing litigation were further 
ameliorated. 
  5. Strictly Enforcing the Law Without Wavering and 
Strengthen Judicial Ranks 
  Courts across the country adopted a number of measures 
during 
the past year to strictly enforce the law, improve judicial 
standards, and strengthen judicial ranks. Fairly good results 
were achieved in this regard. 
  Holding fair trials in accordance with the law. 
In view of the failure to strictly adhere to the law in trial 
proceedings in some localities, the Supreme People's Court 
stressed that people's courts at all levels must uphold the 
policy of relying on facts as the basis and law as the criteria; 
handle cases strictly in accordance with the substantive and 
procedural laws; handle well every case with a strong sense of 
responsibility toward the people's interests and state laws; 
always exercise their judicial power independently in accordance 
with the law; resolutely oppose and resist local and 
departmental protectionism and various kinds of interference to 
safeguard the unity and authority of the law; and uphold the 
system of trials in public and place trial activities under the 
supervision of the masses through open investigation, debate, 
and sentencing. The results of the general law and discipline 
enforcement inspection conducted by courts across the country 
since late last year show that the quality of case handling was 
essentially good. To ensure strict enforcement of the law in 
trial, the Supreme People's Court strengthened supervision over 
local and special people's courts, and all other people's courts 
strengthened supervision over courts at the lower level. At the 
same time, people's courts at all levels also strengthened the 
mechanism to tighten internal supervision. Some courts 
implemented on a trial basis a system of accountability for 
wrong verdicts. Based on the principle of "seeking truth from 
facts and correcting mistakes whenever they are discovered," 
people's courts resolutely corrected unfair verdicts and 
mistakes in law enforcement in accordance with the law. They 
also subpoenaed, in accordance with the law, cases which could 
not be fairly tried by a lower people's court because of 
interference. Last year, following the trial supervision 
procedures, courts across the country reviewed 73,121 criminal, 
civil, economic, administrative, and maritime cases sentenced 
since the founding of the republic. Of the total, verdicts on 
14,271 cases were found to be wrong and reversed. Courts across 
the country also tried 226 criminal, civil, economic, and 
administrative cases brought by procuratorial organs protesting 
the verdicts. In addition, 1,715 criminal cases were tried in 
accordance with the procedures of trial at second instance. Of 
the 1,941 cases brought by procuratorial organs, 686 had their 
verdicts reversed in accordance with the law after it was found 
that the protest was justified; 792 had their verdicts upheld 
after the protest was found unsustainable; 219 were withdrawn by 
procuratorial organs themselves; and 244 were handled in other 
ways. 
  Further strengthen the work of enforcement. To 
ensure plaintiffs' right of entity recognized by judges, 
people's courts at all levels set up enforcement offices, 
replenished enforcement personnel, and strengthened enforcement 
measures in order to overcome the "difficulty in enforcement." 
The Supreme People's Court urged all local courts to earnestly 
do a good job in commissioned enforcement, and stepped up 
guidance and coordination of enforcement work by courts 
throughout the country. Efforts were made to, according to the 
law, resolutely enforce court orders, which plaintiffs were able 
to, but refused or procrastinated to comply with; to punish 
plaintiffs whose refusal to comply with orders constituted a 
crime; and to suspend or terminate court orders which the 
plaintiffs were indeed unable to comply with. People's courts 
at various levels also stopped and corrected in good time a 
number of irregularities involving coercion in some localities; 
and duly investigated and handled violations of the law by a 
handful of cadres and police in the course of enforcement. Last 
year the people's courts enforced a total of 912,354 civil, 
economic, and administrative judgments and orders, which 
accounted for 80.37 percent of the total accepted cases; and 
which involved a total of 21.2 billion yuan, up 132.16 percent 
from the previous year. Hence, some progress was made in 
enforcement work. 
  Strive to improve the quality of personnel. To 
strictly enforce laws, we must have a contingent of judicial 
personnel who are impartial and honest in performing duties. In 
the past year, we relentlessly promoted the construction of a 
contingent of impartial and honest personnel, while organizing 
all cadres and police to diligently study Volume 3 of the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping, intensifying the 
building of leading bodies, and conducting professional training 
of various kinds. In accordance with the central authorities' 
plans for the anticorruption drive, the Supreme People's Court 
successively issued the "Circular on Correcting Lax Law 
Enforcement and the Unhealthy Tendency of Arbitrary Exaction of 
Fees" and the "Circular on Launching a General Law Enforcement 
Inspection." People's courts at all levels earestly implemented 
the central authorities' plans, and leading cadres examined and 
corrected themselves in accordance with the "five regulations" 
for honesty and self-discipline. Special task forces were set 
up to investigate and rectify the unhealthy tendence of 
"arbitrary extraction of fees" in some courts. Efforts were 
made to seriously investigate and punish cases of violation of 
the law and discipline by a handful of cadres and police; and a 
total of 850 were puinshed, including 53 receiving criminal 
punishments (of these, 35 were judicial personnel). Among the 
cadres and police punished for violation of the law and 
discipline were those who accepted bribes and bent the law for 
the benefit of relatives or friends; who perverted the law and 
practiced favoritism; who accepted gifts and engaged in other 
unhealthy practices; and who led a dissolute life. Through 
seriously investigating and punishing lawless elements and 
discipline violators and correcting unhealthy practices, courts 
achieved some results in the anticorruption drive. Generally 
speaking, the quality of court personnel is relatively good. 
Last year court cadres and court police throughout the country, 
in spite of relatively poor working and living conditions, 
carried forward the fine tradition of arduous struggle, worked 
hard and conscientiously, and made their share of contributions 
to the work of people's courts. A number of advanced 
collectives and individuals were commended. Throughout the 
year, a total of 1,480 units and 5,606 judges and other state 
members received first, second, or third class merit citations, 
including six judges who received the honorific title of 
national model judge from the Supreme People's Court. 
  Deputies, in 1993, under the party's leadership and the 
people's congress supervision, courts across the country 
emancipated their minds, sought truth from facts, and carried 
out trial work in an all-around way to serve the needs of 
reform, development, and stability. A total of 3,406,467 cases 
of first instance in different categories were concluded during 
the year, a 11.69 percent increase over the previous year. 
Despite their achievements last year, people's courts at all 
levels and special courts also had shortcomings in their work. 
Their primarily shortcomings were: A number of cases were not 
handled on a timely basis; a few criminal cases were given 
sentences that were either too severe or too lenient; some 
courts failed to strictly enforce the law and, particularly in 
handling economic disputes, they were guilty of local 
protectionism and failed to conduct a fair trial; there were 
instances of improper compulsory measures or lack of forceful 
measures in executing court orders; there were increased 
violations of law and discipline by court cadres and police in 
some areas; the Supreme People's Court failed to conduct 
sufficient in-depth investigation and study on new developments 
and problems facing court work under the conditions of building 
a socialist market economy, and it failed to provide adequate 
administrative guidance to the lower people's courts and 
adequate supervision over their trial work to meet the needs of 
the development of the situation. In light of this, we plan to 
adopt effective measures in the new year to earnestly resolve 
these shortcomings. 
  6. The People's Courts' Primary Tasks in 1994 
  The year 1994 is important to the continuous development of 
China's national economy and the overall progress of its 
economic structural reform. The Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee established the basic framework of 
socialist market economic structure, and the National People's 
Congress and its Standing Committee have presented a preliminary 
blueprint for developing a legal system compatible with 
socialist market economy. Seizing the opportunity, deepening 
reform, opening up wider, promoting development, and maintaining 
stability represent the overall interests of this year's work 
for the entire party and nation. People's courts must recognize 
this and conduct their trial work in subordination of and serve 
these overall interests. In 1994, the guiding ideology for 
judicial work throughout the country is: To use Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line as the guide; 
earnestly implement the guidelines of the 14th CPC National 
Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee; adhere to the principle of "grasping two links at the 
same time, attaching equal importance to both;" strictly enforce 
laws; strive to improve judicial standards; and reform and 
perfect the judicial system so as to provide a strong judicial 
safeguard for maintaining social stability, accelerating the 
establishment of a socialist market economic structure, and 
maintaining a sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
national economy. This year, we will focus on carrying out the 
following work: 
  First, continue to unswervingly and sternly crack down 
on criminal offenses which pose a grave threat to public 
security, and on embezzlement, bribery, and other serious 
economic crimes. Currently, public order in some localities 
is poor, and the masses have a lot of complaints about this. 
Safeguarding stability, therefore, remains an important task 
for people's courts this year. We must uphold the policy of 
seriously cracking down on crimes; sternly punish criminal 
elements who seriously endanger national security and public 
order; resolutely crack down on kidnapping and selling women and 
children, drug trafficking, and other criminal activities known 
as the "six pests;" eradicate social evils; actively take part 
in comprehensively tackling problems of public order; and make 
all-out efforts to safeguard the country's and society's 
stability. 
  Along with the deepening of the current anticorruption 
drive, there will be an increase in economic criminals 
prosecuted by people's courts and serious economic crimes of 
embezzlement and bribery will be further brought to light. 
People's courts should focus the anticorruption drive on 
cracking embezzlement and bribery cases, concentrating efforts 
to meticulously organize trials of major and serious cases, 
firmly eliminating interferences, and severely punishing 
criminal offenders according to the law, thereby enhancing the 
masses' confidence in fighting corruption and continually 
deepening the anticorruption drive. 
  Second, it is necessary to use judicial means to more 
efficiently regulate relations between various economic sectors 
and protect the lawful rights and interests of citizens and 
corporations. This year, China will undertake major 
reforms of the economic structure. Conflicts and disputes of 
interests emerging during the transition from the old to the new 
system will more and more demand settlement through legal 
proceedings; and cases of economic disputes will continue to 
climb and involve an ever widening spectrum. Through 
administering justice, people's courts should standardize market 
activities, maintain market order, and promote the cultivation 
of markets, thereby bringing into play the role of ensuring 
justice. Meanwhile, it is necessary to handle properly, 
promptly, and according to the law a host of civil and 
administrative lawsuits and petitions related to the masses' 
production and everyday life, so as to prevent aggravation of 
contradicions, to protect citizens' personal rights and 
property, to safeguard and supervise the lawful exercise of 
functions by administrative organs, and to promote social 
stability and unity and the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization. 
  Third, it is necessary to go all out to step up 
investigations and study as well as work related to judicial 
interpretation. People's courts at all levels, especially 
the Supreme People's Court and higher people's courts, should 
organize personnel to conduct in- depth investigations and study 
focused on common and typical problems cropping up in judicial 
work under the new situation arising from the establishment of a 
socialist market economic system; and should summarize 
experiences in judicial work and propose suggestions for solving 
problems. Meanwhile, they should put forward legislative 
suggestions to people's congresses and judicial suggestions to 
relevant units concerning problems discovered in judicial 
trials. Along with the continuous promulgation and 
implementation of new laws, the Supreme People's Court should 
strengthen the work related to judicial interpretation and 
supervision and exercise guidance over the judicial work of 
courts throughout the country. 
  Fourth, it is necessary to strengthen reform and 
construction of the courts. The Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee has stressed the needs to reform 
and perfect the judicial system and to improve the quality of 
administering justice, thereby setting an explicit demand to 
reform people's courts. This year courts throughout the country 
must further reform the system of judges, perfect court 
structure and organization, improve judicial patterns, and 
intensify grass-roots construction. In conjunction with these 
tasks, it is necessary to do a good job in drafting or revising 
the "law on judges (draft)," "organic law on people's courts 
(revised draft)," and "organic laws on people's tribunals 
(draft)." These three draft laws have been incorporated into 
the legislative work plan of the current NPC Standing Committee. 
To successfully fulfill the tasks of judicial work and promote 
the reform of courts, people's courts at all levels should 
further improve the quality of personnel with focus on the 
promotion of honest administration of justice and the 
improvement of ideology and work style. They should continue to 
pay strict attention to studying Volume 3 of the Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping for strengthening and improving 
ideological and political work. They should step up education 
and training of cadres and strive to improve their political 
awareness and professional competence, seeing to it that laws 
are observed and strictly enforced and lawbreakers are punished. 
Essential material conditions are the guarantee for the 
fulfillment of judicial tasks. Last year, thanks to the kind 
concern and support of people's congresses and governments at 
all levels, working conditions of the people's courts were 
further improved. However, quite a few courts in the country 
are short of funds and have antiquated facilities. The lack of 
judicial tribunals in about 20 percent, and of office buildings 
in 31.8 percent of the people's courts has gravely impeded the 
strict enforcement of laws; and this problem must be resolved. 
We sincerely hope to receive the continued concern and support 
of the people's congresses and governments at all levels. 
  Fellow deputies! 
  In the coming year, the vast number of court cadres and 
police across the country, under the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the 14th CPC National Congress guidelines, 
and the leadership of the CPC Central Committee with Comrade 
Jiang Zemin as the core, will adhere to the party's basic line 
and work hard and with one heart and one mind in bringing into 
full play the judicial functions of people's counts and making 
fresh contributions to accelerating the construction of 
socialist democracy and the legal system and to ensuring the 
smooth progress of reform, opening up, and the modernization 
drive! 

