CSO 

  [Text] VDI-N,Duesseldorf--The quality of the 
groundwater is threatened to an alarming degree by toxins. 
Measures such as water protection areas are no longer adequate 
for protection against oil, halogen compounds, nitrates and 
pesticides. Numerous sources of toxins are unknown. This is the 
conclusion of the Bureau for Evaluation of Technology Effects 
(TAB) in the German Bundestag in the recently published report 
"Groundwater Protection and Water Maintenance." 
  About 70 percent of the drinking water in Germany is 
obtained 
from groundwater. In the last two decades it has become clear 
that the buffering and filtering capacity of the soil is no 
longer adequate to block out the multitude of toxins. The 
purifying powers of the groundwater itself are small; 
impurities, once introduced, are difficult or impossible to 
eliminate. 
  Protection of the groundwater through the designation of 
water protection areas is welcomed by the TAB in principle, but 
the bureau points out that according to statements by the 
Federal government about 50 percent of the necessary water 
protection areas have been planned, but not yet designated. In 
addition, so many toxins are introduced through the air that 
many groundwater protection aras had to be given up. 
  It is true that industry, agriculture and transportation are 
known as general sources of toxins, but it is rarely possible to 
assign a substance to its specific cause. For example, the 
construction industry is a sector with many unknowns: according 
to the TAB report more and more chemicals are being used whose 
effect on the environment has been investigated only very 
inadequately. 
  The TAB demands instead that the water be protected from 
toxins over its whole cycle. "Groundwater-endangering products 
and production processes should be more expensive," is one 
recommendation. In order to reduce the introduction of nitrogen, 
the experts recommend a price increase for fertilizers through a 
nitrogen tax which is to be paid by the manufacturers or 
importers of fertilizer. 
  The TAB has investigated the building industry more closely 
as a source of toxins. Construction sites could have a "toxin 
mortgage" imposed on them, which is used to cover the costs of 
cleanup during demolition. This would mean that the building 
contractor would already have an incentive to use building 
materials which are reusable and low in toxins. In addition, the 
TAB believes that it would be thinkable to introduce a use tax 
for chemical components, since in most cases the producers of 
the components are responsible for the creation of toxic wastes. 

