BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow April 6 ITAR-TASS --- No single topic is 
highlighted by the Russian national press on Wednesday. "The 
rejection of illusions is characteristic of Russia's foreign 
policy," NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA (independent newspaper) writes 
today. Chairman of the State Duma's Foreign Affairs Committee 
Vladimir Lukin believes that "Russia has begun to treat 
seriously its national interests which have acquired a new 
significance, and it tends to defend these interests more 
persistently. In short, this process normalizes the Russian 
foreign policy which is being pursued in a democratic manner on 
the basis of public opinion, political discussions and 
consensus. A new trend has become evident in Russian-American 
relations. It would be wrong to overlook this or delay even for 
a short time the familiarization of the general public with the 
latest developments, to say nothing about blacking this out. It 
would be wrong both in the foreign and domestic political 
contexts". 
  "It is quite clear, and (Kazakhstan's President Nursultan) 
Nazarbayev (who recently called for the creation of a Euro Asian 
union to replace the former Soviet Union) knows that with 
Yeltsin in Russia and Kravchuk in Ukraine no union will be 
created (the belowezhskaya pushcha syndrome). But Nazarbayev is 
looking ahead, to the future not of one or another president, 
but to the future of Russia and Kazakhstan. And in this 
respect, he sees farther ahead than the Kremlin. In addition, 
Nazarbayev has another good thing going for him--he did not 
participate in the liquidation of the USSR and in forming an 
emasculated commonwealth out of its shapeless fragments. And 
then Almaty does not have a sore western Ukraine which Kiev has, 
and it does not have the sick thirst for power next to God's 
(who does not exist in Yeltsin's atheistic educational 
background), which the Russian president is suffering from. [no 
closing quotation mark as received] 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA reports on the Tajik-Tajik dialogues in 
Moscow, it comments: "The pre-history of these negotiations 
makes it clear that they will not proceed easily. At least in 
the first round, the parties (the official Government of 
Tajikistan and the opposition) are hardly likely to achieve 
serious results". The same newspaper declares that "Washington 
is unhappy about the plan for restarting the Armenian nuclear 
power station". "Whereas Washington is striving to help Yerevan 
with bread supplies, its stance with regard to the intention of 
the Armenian Government to revive the nuclear power station is 
directly opposite". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an interview with the former 
deputy chairman (in charge of intelligence and 
counterintelligence) of the committee for the protection of the 
Soviet state border Lieutenant- General Boris Agapov, who is now 
vice president of the Ingush Republic. Agapov says that 
(Russia's) border troops are unable to ensure due protection of 
the border. For this purpose there exist border units of the 
land forces." 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI focuses on the country's national economy. 
"In a normal market economy, the trader is usually the first to 
give in by reducing prices and ensuring profits by stepping up 
turnover. When this mechanism begins operating in this country, 
it will be possible to say that another important component of a 
civilized market has taken root. But for the time being, it is 
impossible to do without an active intervention on the part of 
the state. This applies above all to the reorganization of 
loss-making enterprises". 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA published an interview with General 
Aleksandr Lebed, commander of the 14th Russian Army stationed in 
Moldova. "If you ask me whether it is normal for an army of one 
state to be located on the territory of another, I will reply: 
No, it is not normal. Should it be withdrawn? Undoubtedly. 
But when this should be done is another question. As soon as 
political and economic conditions are created for the 
withdrawal". 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (Red Star) carried an interview with a 
Russian Orthodox Church dignitary, Metropolitan Pitirim of 
Volokolamsk and Yuriyev. The metropolitan says: "In any 
situation we should set ourselves specific tasks that can be 
accomplished with a view to upgrading the dignity of the 
individual. A war is now underway not between the ideas of 
believers and their flesh and blood, but against the forces of 
darkness in this century. The individual is being depraved by 
all available means of economic, moral, technical and propaganda 
influence. The aim is to reduce man to the level of unthinking 
satisfaction of his vital needs and in contravention to the laws 
of communal living". 
  PRAVDA publishes an interview with Vasiliy Vershinin, 
chairman of a State Duma subcommittee, who predicts that "one 
half of all collective and state farms is doomed to collapse, 
there will be a sharp drop in food supplies. The intervention 
of western economies in our agrarian sector will grow. We shall 
have to spend huge resources to purchase food and finance 
foreign farmers. There will no longer be any need for the army, 
missiles and submarines. What are they good for? If the West 
suspends food supplies for two or three weeks, we shall 
surrender without resistance". 

