Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksey Chelnokov, IZVESTIYA: "Fighting Falcons </F>
From the Chief's Entourage"] 
  [Text] "The LDPR [Liberal Democratic Party of Russia] 
is the party of one man--Zhirinovskiy," say his loyal 
confederates who saw the leader all the way to the State Duma, 
only to be left behind. 
<H5>  The Marriageable Pensioner </H5>
  Looking through the list of candidates for the State Duma 
from the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, I discovered a 
horrible mistake that had found its way into it. Akhmet 
Khalitov, the party's general secretary and deputy chairman, and 
basically Zhirinovskiy's right hand man, was listed as No. 74! 
And on top of that identified as "an agricultural worker." 
  "So what is it, Akhmet Kharisovich," I ask him, "is it 
really 
an error? Or court intrigues?" 
  Kharitov is sitting across the table from me, and by the way 
he speaks--with an effort--I can see that he is also asking 
himself this question, for the millionth time. "They told me at 
the electoral commission that it was a computer error," the 
general secretary grasps a straw in order not to lose faith in 
his old comrade. 
  The general secretary has lived through a life that, as he 
puts it, would put Zhirinovskiy's in the shade. 
  "In 1989 I retired," says Khalitov, "and seriously got into 
politics. I believe that retirement affords you freedom of 
action, independence, and wisdom. In 1990, when I had already 
set up a social-democratic cell with other like-minded people, I 
met Zhirinovskiy and decided to merge with his party." 
  Zhirinovskiy made him the No. 2 person in his apparat, gave 
him the title of the minister of food in the shadow cabinet, and 
took him on a trip to Iraq. 
  "Akhmet Kharisovich, do you trust Zhirinovskiy? Can he be 
mean and cynical toward the people?" 
  "I have not seen any major unethical things on his part; as 
to minor everyday things, this is, of course, inevitable. 
Cynicism does occasionally raise its head in him. In 1991, when, 
as you recall, Zhirinovskiy was running for the president of 
Russia, he told me: "Akhmet Kharisovich, you are my most loyal 
comrade--you should go on the ballot as my vice president. While 
at the same time he proposed for that spot Andrey Zavidiya, a 
shallow man who later cheated the party of 100,000 rubles.... 
  "I have devoted three years of my life to him and him only, 
and I do not think he will do another mean thing to me. As to 
party work, there will always be enough for me to do--in 
particular, I want to organize a council of geniuses. We already 
have a draft solution for the ecological problem on a national 
scale, while at the same time doubling or tripling production." 
  At the end of the interview, Khalitov really warmed up and 
went on elaborating on the beauty of his draft projects; in his 
oratorical ardor, he stretched his arm out, pointing a finger 
somewhere between my eyes; he would suddenly bend his head 
forward, speaking in a disjointed and theatrical manner. A 
Zhirinovskiy in old age.... 
<H5>  Twice Unclaimed </H5>
  The deputy pie slid past the noses of two other key figures 
in the party apparat--the chief of the ideological department, 
Sergey Putin (for some reason he wanted to use his mother's 
surname), and the chief of the international department, Yuriy 
Vasyutin. There is a lot of resemblance: Both are about 50, 
white-haired, with nervous fingers, and nobly poorly clothed. 
Both are in the humanities and in addition to efforts on behalf 
of the party teach science. 
  Putin is a candidate of historic sciences, an assistant 
professor at one of the Moscow universities. In the past, as I 
was told, he taught at the Institute of Marxism-Leninism. Tall 
and youthful-looking, he asked me to delay the interview for a 
short while. "One of my graduating students will be here 
momentarily; she usually writes down my thoughts." This time, 
however, I had to write his thoughts down--the graduating 
student never showed up. 
  Putin joined the LDPR in 1991. He was attracted by 
"Zhirinovskiy's nonstandard views" on many problems, in 
particular on the ethnic issue. The author of one of the 
versions of the party program. Calls himself "more an ideologue 
than a politician." 
  "The LDPR is a party of a leader." he says. "As long as 
Zhirinovskiy is here, there is a party; Zhirinovskiy goes--there 
is no party. He is the first and the only politician in Russia 
capable of keeping the West on its toes. And therefore it is 
quite justifiable that Zhirinovskiy wants to become the father 
of the nation." 
  Until May 1992, Zhirinovskiy used the slogans of LDPR's 
extreme right wing; later, until the summer of 1993, he was more 
attracted to the rhetoric of the party's left-wing--the 
communists and social-democrats. 
  "By horoscope, Zhirinovskiy," continued the chief party 
ideologist, "is a Taurus and a Dog, which indicates that he has 
a strong personality. Unlike Yeltsin, he is a Personality, with 
a capital "P." He is also a master of political impromptu, and 
in principle he has his own political views." 
  "But, as you yourself said, he tends to change them...." 
  "If he goes back on his slogans in the Duma, the VPK 
[military-industrial complex] and the national industry will 
simply stop financing him." 
  The phenomenon of a Zhirinovskivite intellectual was 
explained to me by his colleague, Yuriy Vasyukov. He has been 
the party's member for a year and a half, has, as he says, four 
higher degrees--one technical and three in the humanities. He is 
a restless man--he has changed dozens of jobs and currently 
teaches in one of the capital city institutions of higher 
learning "on an hourly basis." 
  "Before perestroyka I, like most intellectuals," says the 
chief of international affairs, "thought a lot about the 
shortcomings of the existing state system, discussed with 
friends the ills of the social system. When Yeltsin was elected 
president, I thought: Here, our time has come, now we will be 
able to implement the ideas born in such labor pains. Alas, hope 
is what sustains the young. Once again we found ourselves 
unclaimed. A small group of people shifted from one set of 
chairs into another, while we remained outside the mainstream of 
active public life. 
  Meanwhile, continued Vasyutin, it turned out that the new 
leadership was unable to resolve many problems facing the 
nation. What were they supposed to do? Democratic Russia would 
not take them. Only the LDPR kept its doors open. Zhirinovskiy 
personally received everyone. He even placed ads with the 
employment bureau--to expand his staff. There is no question 
that Zhirinovskiy is a wonderful person. 
  Already on the way out, Vasyutin for some reason remembered 
his parents "suffering penniless in the Crimea." "You will not 
believe what a blow to my heart it was when the Soviet Union 
fell apart." Suddenly, two large tears rolled from his eyes. A 
glass of boiled water saved him from an imminent--as it looked 
to me--fainting spell. 
<H5>  The King's Tailors </H5>
  The LDPR apparat always consisted of about 10 persons. Three 
members of Zhirinovskiy's shadow cabinet held extreme right 
positions in it: All-Russia Investigations Agency's Director 
Eduard Limonov; Minister of Information Andrey Arkhipov, and 
Minister of Culture and Youth Affairs Sergey Zharikov. The two 
latter individuals are engineers by education, about 35 years 
old. Arkhipov used to do some work for ARGUMENTY I FAKTY when he 
met Zhirinovskiy in 1990 during the memorable "Solidarity March" 
from Moscow to the Baltics. Zharikov was a soloist in the rock 
group DK and joined the LDPR in the same year. 
  They penned the SOKOL ZHIRINOVSKOGO [ZHIRINOVSKIY'S FALCON] 
newspaper. The sharp-clawed bird on the front page spreads its 
wings over the territory from Alaska to Finland, inclusive. "At 
the first stage of the new policy," wrote Arkhipov, "there will 
be an accelerated return--perhaps even forcible--of the nations 
to their language traditions. Then they will gain great 
self-sufficiency." 
  Zharikov was tougher: "When only one or two representatives 
are left of the so-called minor ethnic groups, these insects 
will finally understand why they have been born onto this earth 
and that they have lost: They will prostrate themselves at the 
feet of the one they had insulted so long and with impunity. At 
the feet of the Russian Master." 
  Not too long ago the two ministers left the hospitable party 
in order to start one of their own. 
  "Almost all slogans spun out by Zhirinovskiy had been 
conceived by Zharikov and myself," says Arkhipov. "Ten minutes 
before a rally we would write in huge letters on pieces of 
paper, for instance: "America, return Alaska to Russia!" I would 
raise the piece of paper in front of Zhirinovskiy and he would 
deliver the slogan beautifully, right there on the spot. His 
chief trait is the ability to catch an idea in flight and 
immediately present it to the public in the right way. And 
another thing: Zhirinovskiy is an unfulfilled promise of a great 
saxophone player." 
  In Murom, says Zharikov, where two years ago the LDPR held a 
rally, the crowd was ecstatic over Zhirinovskiy. We were the 
conductors: As soon as he veered away, we would cross our arms, 
signaling him to stop--and Zhirinovskiy would stop. Generally, 
he is very good in sensing the mood of the crowd, and this, in 
return, gets him excited. I remember, he got a letter from some 
old woman, who wrote: Thank you, Vladimir Volfovich, you are our 
only defender. He got so sentimental over it that it took half 
an hour to get him back in shape. As a person, he is very, very 
lonely. He is a king, but a naked one. We were the ones who 
dressed him in our slogans. 
<H3>  From Sokolniki to the Indian Seas, Vladimir Volfovich Is the 
Strongest? </H3>
  Right-wing radicals have clearly exaggerated the extent of 
their service to the ordinary folk. Let us recall: It was only 
recently that TASS (!) reported on the first congress of the 
dwarf LDPSU [Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union], 
which was held in the....Palace of Congresses. This means that 
even then there were some serious forces behind the chief falcon 
of the country, forces that even today prefer not to come out 
into the limelight. In the spring of 1990, the party joined 
forces with an organization with an unreal name--the Centrist 
Moderate-Radical Bloc. Its gatherings took place in no less 
comfortable quarters, while considerably more representative 
meetings of informals huddled in basements (when they were not 
dispersed by the police). Some time later, the bloc turned into 
dust, its activists--apparently for good--disappeared from the 
political arena. Only Zhirinovskiy, who has honed his oratorical 
skills on a public rolling with laughter at his speeches, rose 
to the Olympus. 
  Over these years the "father of the nation's" arsenal of 
slogans expanded: It is now, "We will wash our boots in the 
Indian Ocean," and "We will close the oxygen valve to the near 
abroad," and as to further removed foreign countries--"stick it 
to them." Oh, all the things one can hear at rallies 
Zhirinovskiy holds every week in Sokolniki. 
  But the greater part of his initiatives Zhirinovskiy so far 
holds up his sleeve--"so that political rivals would not steal 
them." One such semifinished product designed to catch the State 
Duma dumbfounded--"the 'M'-right" (tentatively speaking, the 
"Master"). What is it? Each citizen of Russia ("if I am elected 
president") will receive a document attesting that the bearer is 
entitled to a share of every cubic meter of gas produced, each 
tonne of ore mined, and so on. For those who do not appreciate 
this right, their share will be cut--perhaps completely and for 
good. 

