BFN 

<F P=106> [Video report by unidentified correspondent; from the </F>
"National News Hookup" program] 
  [Text] During his inspection of grain work in Tianjin from 
2 to 4 April, Zhu Rongji, member of the CPC Central Committee 
Political Bureau Standing Committee and vice premier of the 
State Council, emphatically pointed out that we should conduct 
in-depth investigations and studies, seek opinions from people 
from all walks of life, and make a scientific decision, to 
develop as soon as possible a grain production and marketing 
system that is in line with China's national conditions and the 
socialist market economy. 
  Accompanied by leaders of the State Commission for Economics 
and Trade, the Ministry of Internal Trade, and Tianjin 
Municipality, Zhu Rongji inspected Tianjin's (Zhaofuli) Grain 
Store and (Zhishuidao) farm products marketplace, and heard a 
report on Tianjin's economic situation and on the production, 
supply, and marketing of grain and agricultural and sideline 
products. Zhu Rongji fully approved the Tianjin Municipal CPC 
Committee's and Government's placing great importance on 
agricultural and grain work. 
  Zhu Rongji said: Grain is the most treasurable thing and 
grain price is the base of all prices. Stability of grain 
market affects the entire social stability. Leaders at all 
levels must have a full understanding of this. Since grain 
prices were decontrolled on 1 April last year, the situation of 
grain markets in the country has been good in general. However, 
decontrolling grain prices does not mean that we can relax 
macroeconomic regulation and control over grain market. On the 
contrary, governments at all levels should truly tighten 
management of grain market, ensure ample grain supply, and 
prohibit grain speculators from reselling grain at a profit and 
driving up grain prices. Grain market must always be under the 
state's control. Food is the greatest concern of the people. 
All localities -- be they grain production areas or major grain 
marketing areas, and be they coastal or interior provinces -- 
should deepen their understanding of the importance of grain 
issue, and governments at all levels should regard it as an 
important part of their work, in order to ensure that grain work 
is properly done. 

