BFN 

  [Text] New Delhi, April 25 -- Nearly three billion US 
dollars worth of foreign investment has already been promised in 
the minerals sector in the country, Commerce Minister Pranab 
Mukherjee said here today. 
  Inaugurating a three-day international round table 
conference 
on foreign investment in exploration and mining in India, Mr 
Mukherjee said the Government had taken major steps to encourage 
direct foreign investment in the newly opened minerals sector 
after the amendment of the Mines and Minerals (Regulations and 
Development) Act. 
  Fifteen major minerals and 21 minor minerals are now open 
for 
investments in mining and exploration by foreign investors with 
equity participation upto 51 per cent, he said. 
  The Commerce Minister maintained that to encourage direct 
foreign investment the Government has brought about major 
changes in fiscal, industrial, trade and import-export policies, 
and opening up of the mining sector is only a part of the 
ongoing process. 
  Mr Mukherjee assured the foreign participants, representing 
the world's largest mining companies from about 10 nations, that 
present national policies were based on consensus and did not 
depend on changes in the political leadership. "India's 
democracy is transparent, agile and vibrant supported by a 
vigilant press and independent judiciary", he added. 
  He reminded the prospective foreign investors that way back 
when Indian banks were nationalised, foreign banks were not 
touched at that time. India has never failed in its debt 
repayment upto now and situation has become much better with 
regard to foreign exchange reserves, he added. 
  The Minister said the Indian economy is the world's seventh 
largest with the third largest pool of technical manpower and 
professional managers. India has a large network of railways 
and seaports and other infrastructure facilities - like the 
powerful stock exchange system with 25 stock markets and 6,250 
registered companies, which are available for collaboration. 
  He said already seven power projects are being set up in the 
country by foreign investors. Nearly 34 industrial sectors are 
open for foreign investment and collaboration. 
  Welcoming the delegates, Minister of State for Mines Balram 
Singh Yadav said the objective of the three-day conference is to 
familiarise investors with the mining potential offered by India 
and to present a forum for interaction between investors and the 
Central Government, the State Governments, the public and 
private sector units, Geological Survey of India, Indian Bureau 
of Mines and other agencies concerned with the minerals sector. 
  The Minister said potential areas for mining ventures are 
where exploration activities during the last four decades have 
resulted in identification of large resources, specially of iron 
ore, bauxite, chromite and manganese, as also several medium and 
small deposits of other mineral commodities. These resources 
have not yet been mined to their fullest extent largely for want 
of capital and appropriate technology and provide a ready 
opportunity for profitable investment in the mining sector, he 
added. 
  He maintained that over 94 per cent of India's area has 
already been mapped by the Geological Survey of India so that 
preliminary data is available for further development. 
Technical consultancy and geological services are also provided 
in the area of mining and preparation of geological plans by the 
Indian Bureau of Mines on a commercial basis. 
  Speaking on the occasion, Mr I. G. Thingran, Secretary, 
Ministry of Mines, said in the new deregulated environment which 
is investment friendly foreign investors would find great scope 
for investment in exploration and mining in India. 
  Many countries like China, France and Australia are already 
cooperating with India in the mining sector, he said. 

