BFN 

  [Text] The Society for Research of Party Building of 
Shandong Province was inaugurated in Jinan on 13 May. Jiang 
Chunyun, secretary of the provincial party committee, attended 
the inaugural meeting to extend congratulations and make a 
speech. He stressed: We should positively conduct joint 
research for the theory of party building by focusing on the 
difficult problems with regard to the overall situation of the 
whole party as well as the work of party building. We should 
also strive to achieve as more results as possible at an earlier 
date in order to make due contributions to promoting the 
province's economic construction and the development of all 
undertakings. 
  The Society for Research of Party Building of Shandong 
Province is a mass academic organization. Its purpose is to 
conduct a profound research for the major practical and 
theoretical questions concerning party building in reform, 
opening up, and modernization with a view to facilitating party 
building and economic construction of Shandong, under the 
guidance of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought and the theory 
of building the socialism with Chinese characteristics, and by 
centering on the party's basic line. 
  The society invited Jiang Chunyun, secretary of the 
provincial party committee, and Li Farong, veteran comrade of 
the province, as its honorary directors, and elected Li Wenquan, 
deputy secretary of the provincial party committee, as its 
deputy director. 
  The inaugural meeting was presided over by Comrade Li 
Wenquan. Comrade Jiang Chunyun said in his speech: The 
inauguration of this society is a major event in the political 
life of the province. The society will certainly play a 
positive role in further strengthening the research and 
propaganda of the theory of party building, in achieving success 
in party building, and in promoting the development of all 
undertakings of the province. 
  Jiang Chunyun pointed out: We should persistently use 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building the socialism with 
Chinese characteristics to guide the research and practice of 
party building. This society should give first priority to 
studying, researching, and propagating the theory advocated by 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping. At the moment, we should lay emphasis on 
studying well Volume Three of the "Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping" and on profoundly comprehending the essence of the 
guidelines of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory with a view to 
truly studying, mastering, propagating, and applying this theory 
well. At the same time, we should integrate the study of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory with the study of 
Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought, the study of guidelines of 
the 14th National Party Congress and the third session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee, and the study of theory of market 
economy and the knowledge concerning modern science and 
technology in an effort to improve our political and theoretical 
expertise and our skill to control the socialist market economy. 
  Jiang Chunyun pointed out: We should conduct research for 
party building closely around the implementation of the party's 
basic line. Like others, the work of party building and the 
research of the theory of party building must always be guided 
by the party's basic line. Practice proves that it will not do 
to merely grasp party building without economic construction, 
and it will also not do to merely grasp the economy regardless 
of party building. We must permeate the process of upholding 
the party's basic line with all the activities of strengthening 
and improving party building. We must use the practical results 
in implementing the party's basic line to examine and evaluate 
the performance of party building work and the research of party 
building theory. As indicated by the CPC Central Committee, the 
general task for the whole party is to seize the opportunity, 
deepen reform, open wider to the outside world, promote 
development, and maintain stability. Comrades of this society 
must clearly understand this general task and consciously 
subject themselves to it. Comrades of the society should also 
persist in the good study style of integrating theory with 
practice and attend to party building work by profoundly 
researching, answering, and resolving the current new problems 
facing party building work. 
  Jiang Chunyun stressed: We should continue to raise the 
level of the research of party building theory. The practice of 
party building urgently needs the guidance of party building 
theory and has set new and even higher demands on the research 
of party building theory. The vast numbers of party building 
theoretical and practical workers must conscientiously study the 
party building theory covered by Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong 
Thought and, in particular, study well the series of theoretical 
viewpoints and important ideas offered by Comrade Deng Xiaoping 
for the building of the ruling party in order to master the 
ideological weapon for achieving success in party building and 
in the research of party building theory. At the same time, we 
should energetically encourage the practice of conducting 
investigations and studies and go deep into the realities of 
life, the grass-roots units, and the midst of the masses to 
conscientiously summarize experiences gained from practice. 
Then, we should strive to find out regular things from these 
experiences, turn these regular things to rational knowledge, 
and use this rational knowledge to guide practice. We should 
conduct explorations and studies with a reformative and 
pioneering spirit and with a scientific and realistic attitude 
with a view to constantly raising the level of party building 
and the research of party building theory. 
  Jiang Chunyun demanded that attention should be paid to 
building the party building theoretical contingent. The 
province has already been furnished with a sizable party 
building theoretical contingent engaged in party affairs work 
and theoretical research. Generally speaking, this contingent 
is good in quality and has made positive contributions to 
carrying out reform, opening up, economic construction, and 
party building. However, this contingent is not strong enough 
become some comrades are not solid in theoretical foundation, 
are unexperienced in practice, and need further improvement in 
their foresight of work, their guidance to practice, and their 
quality of research. The organizational coordination of this 
contingent also need further improvement. Therefore, we should 
firmly and conscientiously grasp the building of this contingent 
by regarding it as a major task. Party committees at all levels 
in the province should attach importance to building this 
contingent by setting strict demands on in politically, giving 
vigorous support to it in work, showing concern for it in 
livelihood, and creating good working environment and conditions 
for it in order to raise the research of party building theory 
to a new level. 

