Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lanzhou, March 17 (XINHUA) -- Sand from the Tarim 
Basin in the heart of the Asian Continent can easily drift as 
far as the Hawaiian Islands and the mid-Pacific, just with the 
help of the wind. 
  Sand from the Sahara Desert in Africa can drift over the 
Mediterranean Sea to reach the European Continent and even North 
America. 
  These findings were made by Chinese scientists using oxygen 
isotopic comparison and analyzing sediments from the Hawaiian 
Islands and the Pacific Ocean floor. They said that they had 
discovered that most of the quartz particles on the ocean floor 
were dust particles from the heartland of Asia. 
  About five percent of the earth's land mass is covered by 
accumulations of flying and drifting dust. In the world's arid 
areas, 20 percent of which are covered by drifting sand, over 90 
percent of the fine sandy soil is carried away by air movements 
every year. And about 10 tons to 240 tons of sandy soil per sq 
km of land is transported afar every year. 
  Sandy dust from a windstorm in North China last year reached 
the Korean Peninsula and Japan. 
  Experts from meteorology departments and the Lanzhou Desert 
Institute of the Chinese Academy of Sciences have concluded that 
chronic aridity, high temperatures, the mutual impact of warm 
and cold air currents and the alternation of high and low 
pressure troughs can produce gales, which, once they enter areas 
with severe wind erosion of the earth's surface, can cause 
damaging sand storms. 
  According to researcher Liu Xianwan, wind tempo has a 
bearing 
on the movement of sandy dust. 
  He Shiliang, another researcher, said that sandy dust starts 
moving when the wind tempo is about four to five m [meters] a 
second. The bigger the wind, the quicker the dust moves and the 
more dust the wind carries away. 
  Scientists have warned that sand storms, which have over the 
past few years become more frequent, may have a significantly 
negative impact on the radiation of solar energy as well as on 
the thermal balance of the earth and the universal climate. 
  They suggested that the most effective way to curb drifting 
dust is to plant and safeguard grass and trees, stop 
over-exploitation of the land and eliminate industrial pollution 
sources. 

