BFN 

<F P=106> [Report delivered by Premier Li Peng at the national </F>
education conference on 14 June 1994: "Get Mobilized and Work 
Hard To Implement the `Outline of China's Education Reform and 
Development'"] 
  [Text] Comrades: 
  This is the second national education conference held by the 
party Central Committee and the State Council since the 
beginning of reform and opening up. It is also an important 
conference in the history of our country's development of 
education. The holding of this conference is bound to have a 
major impact on our efforts to plan and mobilize in an 
all-around way the implementation of the "Outline of China's 
Education Reform and Development," to study and resolve major 
issues in China's education reform and development, to realize 
the strategic goal of education reform and development in the 
nineties, and to promote China's socialist modernization. 
  General Secretary Jiang Zemin has just given an important 
speech. I hope everyone has an in-depth grasp of it and 
earnestly implements what has been said. I will now give my 
view on several specific points of the nation's education work. 
<H5>  1. The Current Situation and Task of Education </H5>
  At present, China's reform, opening up, and socialist 
modernization have entered a new period of development. To 
achieve the second-step strategic goal in the nineties, we must 
uphold the party's basic line, deepen reform, open the country 
wider to the outside world, and concentrate our energy on 
promoting economic construction. While strengthening the 
building of material civilization, we must earnestly strengthen 
the building of socialist democracy and the legal system and the 
building of spiritual civilization to promote all-around social 
progress. Fundamentally speaking, economic construction and 
social progress must rely on science and technology, and 
education. To meet the needs of establishing a socialist market 
economic structure and to take on the development opportunities 
and challenges in the 21st century, we must further deepen 
educational reform, accelerate educational development, raise 
the quality of the whole nation, and train cross-century 
personnel for realizing our strategic objective of economic and 
social development. This is an urgent task confronting us. 
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, guided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's thinking of valuing 
education and respecting knowledge and talent, the entire party 
and society have greatly raised their understanding of 
education. Major achievements have since been made in 
education. For the country as a whole, the nine-year compulsory 
education has advanced in an all-around way. Primary education 
has become basically universal, with 98 percent of school-age 
children enrolling in elementary school. Compulsory education 
has become basically universal in large cities and some 
economically developed areas. Vocational education has also 
developed rapidly, with student enrollment at secondary 
vocational and technical school accounting for 50 percent of the 
total number of senior-high-school-age students. Outstanding 
achievement has been made in adult education, with a large 
number of workers taking part in on-the-job training and a vast 
number of peasants accepting different types of literacy and 
technical education. Notable progress has been made in 
eliminating illiteracy, with the illiteracy rate among young and 
middle-aged people dropping to around 7 percent. Higher 
education has also seen great progress, with 4.39 million 
students enrolled in regular and special undergraduate programs 
at regular or adult institutions of higher learning, 89,000 
students pursuing master degrees, and 1,800 students enrolled 
for doctor's degree. In addition, a large number of students 
were sent abroad, and many have returned after completing study 
there. Institutions of higher learning have become China's 
important research venues of basic science, high technology, and 
applied science. Education, science and technology, and the 
economy have become increasingly integrated, complementing each 
other to the benefit of every one. Many localities have laid 
down the policy of "revitalizing the province or city through 
science and technology" and have brought forward a large number 
of advanced areas and units in reforming and developing 
education. Vast numbers of teachers, education workers, and 
people from all walks of life have made important contributions 
to developing education. 
  We must soberly realize that the development of our 
country's 
education still cannot meet the needs of modernization and that 
education reform still has a long way to go to meet the demands 
for establishing a socialist market economic structure. To 
varying degrees, phenomena of neglecting education, particularly 
basic education, still exist in some localities and departments. 
They lack a sense of urgency toward education reform and have 
failed to fully place education in a strategic position for 
priority development in practical work. They have not done 
enough to improve school facilities and teachers' remuneration, 
and there remains much difficulty and quite a few problems in 
this respect. The question of school dropouts is fairly 
prominent among elementary and middle school students in a 
number of localities. Party committees and government must pay 
greater attention to it and earnestly study and resolve it in 
practical work. 
  Education has been an important component and a strategic 
key aspect of China's modernization drive. In his report to the 
14th CPC National Congress, Comrade Jiang Zemin pointed out: "We 
must place education in a strategic position for priority 
development and make great efforts to enhance the entire 
nation's ideological, moral, scientific, and cultural levels -- 
a basic master plan in modernizing China." A faster and better 
development of our educational undertakings will have a direct 
impact on the smooth realization of the strategic objectives of 
China's modernization programs. The "Outline of China's 
Education Reform and Development" published by the party's 
central committee and the State Council is a programmatic 
document for developing China's educational undertakings. To 
achieve the developmental goals set by the "outline," it is 
essential to do the following tasks well: 
  To basically popularize the nine-year compulsory 
education and largely eliminate illiteracy among the young and 
middle-aged by the end of the century. These will be basic 
requirements in enhancing the quality of the whole nation and "a 
priority among priorities" in China's educational development 
for a certain period ahead. We should strive to popularize the 
nine-year compulsory education in regions inhabited by 
approximately 85 percent of the population by the end of the 
century, raising the literacy rate among the young and the 
middle-aged to about 95 percent. We may have difficulties in 
achieving these goals in the rural areas, particularly the 
remote frontiers and poor areas that make up about 20 percent of 
our population. For the vast rural areas, it is necessary to 
take local conditions into consideration before adopting a 
unified educational approach characterized by the integration of 
agriculture, science, and education. We should link up 
popularization of the nine-year compulsory education, 
eradication of illiteracy among the young and the middle-aged, 
and vocational and technical education; make them a fundamental 
measure in shaking off poverty and achieving prosperity; and 
draw up plans to be carried out in phases. We should attach 
importance to minority nationalities' educational undertakings 
by stepping up educational support for remote frontiers, poor 
areas, and minority nationality regions; to developing preschool 
education; to solving problems of sending girls to school; and 
to developing special education. Funds raised through the "Hope 
Project" -- a beneficial social involvement in education -- 
should be primarily used for keeping poor students in school. 
  Vigorously develop vocational and adult education. 
Vigorous development of vocational and adult education -- an 
important component of modern education -- will be a sure way to 
enhance labor equality and revitalize the economy, the 
importance of which has been proved by both the experiences of 
economically developed countries and that of China all these 
years. Currently, the overall quality of staff and workers in 
China has yet to meet the requirements of the modernization 
drive. It is essential to improve various types of vocational 
and adult schools by conducting more multilevel vocational 
training courses so new urban and rural workers will be able to 
receive the necessary vocational training and the vast working 
personnel be able to enhance their overall cultural quality, 
trade skills, and professional ethics. We should attach greater 
importance to education via television -- a highly efficient 
teaching means with low investment -- with emphasis on improving 
production of teaching materials. Other forms of education that 
also deserve our attention and support include correspondence 
courses, off-duty improvement classes, independent studies, and 
advanced in-service education. 
  Develop higher education with emphasis on enhancing 
educational quality and efficiency. Institutions of higher 
learning are important forces in training highly qualified 
professionals and in developing new and high technologies. 
Higher education should be developed along the route of reform 
and connotation with appropriate size and rational structure to 
ensure marked improvement in both quality and efficiency. For a 
certain period ahead, both highly specialized education and 
higher vocational training will be expanded appropriately with 
emphasis on training qualified personnel needed by the vast 
rural areas, small and medium-sized enterprises, and village and 
town enterprises. Undergraduate education should focus on 
raising educational quality. "Project 211," a key state project 
under which about 100 major institutions of higher learning and 
key research centers will be constructed in facing the 21st 
century, will be carried out in phases. Its implementation will 
help promote higher education reform and joint education 
management in various forms, rationalize distribution and 
structure of higher education, and raise education efficiency 
and quality. We should bring out the superiority of scientific 
research better by linking it to enterprises and by promoting 
industrialization of scientific research achievements, 
particularly in the development of high and new technological 
industries. 
  We should actively carry out international academic 
exchanges and cooperation. Candidates for master's and 
doctorate degrees should be trained basically at home. 
Meanwhile, we should further improve the work of sending 
students to study abroad. We should continue to implement the 
policy of "supporting students studying overseas, encouraging 
them to return, and letting them decide for themselves whether 
to come or go," encouraging them to serve the motherland in 
various ways. 
<H5>  2. Deepen Educational Reform in an All-Around Way To Promote </H5>
the Development of Education 
  The establishment of the socialist market economic structure 
has created an opportunity and motive force for educational 
reform and development, but at the same time it also calls for 
accelerating the pace of educational reform and the integration 
of education with economic development to gradually build a 
socialist educational system with Chinese characteristics. In 
education, China's basic national condition as a developing 
country calls for the promotion of comprehensive education. 
Therefore, under the premise that the government plays the 
central role in running schools, we should encourage all walks 
of life to pool their efforts to expand education. Meanwhile, 
we should improve the quality and efficiency of education 
through reform. In accelerating the pace of educational reform, 
it is necessary to pay particular attention to work in the 
following fields: 
  Readjust the education structure by giving priority to 
raising the quality of laborers and to vigorously developing 
vocational education. Judging from China's current level 
of social productive forces, we should base our education 
structure on nine-year compulsory education while energetically 
developing primary and secondary vocational education and adult 
education, appropriately developing higher specialized education 
and higher vocational education, and striving to raise the 
quality and level of students of schools of higher learning. In 
recent years, people's understanding of vocational school has 
been conspicuously enhanced; however, vocational education has 
not yet received due attention in actual work. We must overcome 
the outdated concept that belittles vocational education. We 
must clearly understand that for a long period of time, an 
important and urgent task of education in China is to vigorously 
develop vocational education on the basis of popularizing 
nine-year compulsory education. This is a fundamental method of 
training a large number of applied personnel, a method which 
conforms to the national conditions in China. Governments at 
all levels should utilize local resources and industrial 
advantages in running various types of vocational schools or 
training centers in the light of local conditions. Based on the 
demands for primary and secondary skilled personnel and on the 
degree to which basic education is popularized, we should 
promote vocational education at three separate levels, namely, 
post-primary, post-junior middle, and post-senior middle school 
vocational education. Post-primary school vocational education 
should be promoted mainly in areas where nine-year compulsory 
education has not been popularized yet and where primary 
vocational education is in demand. In some areas where 
nine-year compulsory education has been popularized, suitable 
courses of vocational education may be added to school curricula 
as deemed necessary. Post-junior middle school vocational 
education should be the centerpiece of vocational education. We 
must ensure step by step that 50 to 70 percent of junior middle 
school graduates enter secondary vocational schools or 
vocational training centers. Post-senior middle school 
vocational education should be provided for senior middle school 
graduates, except for those entering schools of higher learning. 
We must see to it that senior middle school graduates 
incrementally receive various types of vocational training or 
enter higher vocational schools. Based on individual 
aspirations, qualifications, and potentials, graduates having 
received vocational education should be allowed to pursue 
advanced education at higher levels. Through the aforesaid 
readjustment of structure, we should gradually set up a 
rationally proportionate educational system under which primary, 
secondary, and higher general and vocational education all 
develop side by side and are linked with each other. We should 
standardize vocational education enrollment to eliminate 
confusion arising among senior and junior middle school 
graduates' overlapping applications to various vocational 
schools, thereby raising the quality of education. We should 
introduce to the whole society a system of placing equal stress 
on both school diplomas and vocational certificates. The State 
Education Commission and local education administrative 
departments are responsible for making overall planning, 
coordination, and management of vocational education and adult 
education. Vocational and adult schools of all types and at all 
levels, which offer formal education, should in principle be 
managed by education departments at all levels. On-the-job 
training should in principle be managed by labor and personnel 
departments and relevant professional departments. Vocational 
schools should be aimed at training mainly skilled laborers of 
various trades and professions, as well as technical and 
managerial personnel in demand by society. At present, 
particular attention must be paid to training fiscal and 
taxation, banking, business administration, and other applied 
personnel urgently needed for the development of a socialist 
market economy. We must legislate on-the-job training in 
enterprises. Newly recruited workers must first complete 
training and obtain a certificate of qualification before 
assuming a job. 
  Reform the system for running schools. In the 
past, the system under which all schools were run by the 
government did play a positive role under the historical 
conditions then. Now, that system can no longer meet the needs 
of development of a socialist market economy and the increasing 
needs of the society, nor can it help arouse the enthusiasm of 
various sectors of the society for running schools. In recent 
years, the practice of the government running all schools has 
begun to change. From now on, we should deepen such reform and 
establish step by step a system for running schools, under which 
most schools are run by the government while some schools are 
run with funds raised by various sectors of the society. While 
basic education, particularly compulsory education, should be 
run mainly by the government, we should encourage enterprises, 
institutions and others of the society to run schools in various 
forms according to law and government policy. In some 
localities where conditions permit, schools may be run in such 
forms as "private school receiving government assistance" and 
"public school receiving nongovernmental assistance." 
Vocational education and adult education should be under 
government control, but run mainly by trades and professions, 
enterprises, institutions, and mass organizations, or run by 
certain sectors of the society or private citizens with 
appropriate government assistance. Vocational schools should 
take the road of integrating education with industry to enhance 
their ability of developing themselves. In higher education, we 
should practice the system under which schools are run by both 
the government and various sectors of the society, with the 
government playing the dominant role. Certain universities and 
colleges may be funded mainly with income from students' 
tuitions and with funds raised by the society, and subsidized by 
the government. The schools run by various sectors of the 
society should mainly be vocational schools. The primary and 
middle schools currently run by enterprises should continue to 
be run well. In localities where conditions permit, 
enterprise-run schools may be gradually turned over to local 
society under government's overall arrangements. Organizations 
and individuals outside China are welcome to donate funds to run 
schools in China, either alone or in cooperation with others, in 
accordance with China's law and education regulations. 
  Reform the system of educational management. It 
is necessary to straighten out the relations among the 
government, the society, and schools and establish a scientific 
school management system according to the characteristics of 
schools of various categories and levels. Since 1985, basic 
education has been put in the charge of local governments at 
various levels. The orientation of such a reform is correct, 
because it has added more responsibility to local governments 
and aroused the enthusiasm of various sectors of the society for 
running schools. However, in some localities, the 
responsibility for managing rural basic education has been 
assigned to townships and villages, causing certain difficulties 
in funding and in educational management. This is one of the 
reasons why the wages of some rural primary and middle school 
teachers were in arrears in last two years. We should take a 
further step to clarify the responsibility of the central, 
provincial, prefectural, county, and township governments in 
managing basic education; and properly readjust the 
responsibility at the county and township levels. The 
management of rural basic education is mainly a county-level 
responsibility in most localities, except a few economically 
more developed regions where counties and townships may share 
the responsibility. In poor regions where school funds cannot 
be guaranteed, education funds should be placed under overall 
management by county-level governments; and governments above 
the county-level should set up special funds to support 
compulsory education in these regions. In the reform of the 
education management system, the difficult part and the 
important part are in higher education. The existing higher 
education management system was basically arranged in the early 
fifties when the disciplines of colleges were readjusted 
according to major regions and trades and professions. Later, a 
number of universities and colleges were set up by various 
provinces to meet the needs of the local economy; and a 
considerable number of them are of the same nature as those run 
by central ministries and commissions. With the change of 
functional duties of various departments, the system for 
departments to run schools should be changed gradually. From 
now on, higher education should gradually be shifted onto a 
two-level management system -- the central level and the 
provincial (autonomous regional and municipal) level -- with the 
provincial-level playing the dominant role. 
  Universities 
and colleges under central ministries and commissions should 
expand their areas of service and discipline, broaden the 
channel of financial resources, gear themselves to the needs of 
the society, and operate independently. While central 
departments in charge of various trades should continue to run 
well a small number of universities and colleges which have 
distinct features of trades and meet special needs, most schools 
of higher learning run by central ministries and commissions 
should gradually be turned over to provincial-level governments 
or be run jointly in various ways by the central departments and 
provincial-level governments. Provincial-level governments 
should be given more responsibility for coordinating and leading 
the institutions of higher learning in the region and for making 
overall arrangements for them. It is necessary to remove the 
barriers between regions and government departments, change the 
"small but all-embracing" situation, and reduce 
single-discipline schools step by step. It is necessary to 
readjust or merge some schools, departments, courses, and 
disciplines and to promote cooperation among them. It is 
necessary to fully tap the potential of existing faculty and 
equipment and to improve educational quality and benefits. The 
educational reform, which involves a wide range of issues, 
should be carried out step by step after conducting experiments 
at selected localities and schools and after summing up 
experience. We must not be aroused to precipitate action, nor 
practice formalism. The number of institutions of higher 
learning should not increase. Instead, we should concentrate 
manpower, financial, and material resources on running existing 
universities well. We should deepen reform of internal 
management of universities and colleges and enhance the vitality 
of school management. It is necessary to make rational 
readjustment of departments, disciplines, and courses; widen the 
areas of specialized knowledge; and gradually introduce the 
"credit system." Besides required courses, it is necessary to 
set up and increase electives so as to broaden students' vision, 
arouse their initiative and creativity in study, and enhance 
their ability of engaging in social practice and conducting 
further study and research. 
  Reform the systems for student enrollment, tuition and 
fees collection, and placement of graduates of regular 
universities, colleges and secondary and higher vocational 
schools. Universities, colleges, secondary vocational 
schools, and skilled workers schools are currently practicing 
the student enrollment system which takes into account both 
national tasks and regulatory plans. After the labor market 
gradually becomes perfect and the system of paying tuition to 
attend school is implemented across the country, the major tasks 
of the government's education department will be to regulate and 
control the total number and the composition of enrolled 
students, manage well school diplomas, take part in the drawing 
up education budgets, supervise the use of education funds, 
supervise education quality, and supervise the implementation of 
administrative regulations of education. Regular higher 
education, regular senior middle school education, and secondary 
and higher vocational education are noncompulsory education. It 
is a general practice in many countries to pay tuition for these 
levels of education. Some of our schools have also adopted the 
practice on a trial basis and achieved quite good results; and 
the practice has gradually been accepted by society. While 
schools should collect tuition and fees in proportion to the 
costs of education, they should also consider the endurance of 
the society and parents. The system of collecting tuition and 
fees should be supplemented by relevant auxiliary measures. 
Tuition and fees are collected mainly for the purpose of 
changing the operational mechanisms and enhancing students' 
studiousness, not for reducing government's education funding. 
Student loans may be extended to more students with financial 
difficulties. Scholarships should be awarded to students who 
excel in both moral and academic performance; and the total 
number of scholarships may be smaller, but the amount of each 
scholarship should be bigger. Departments, localities, or 
organizations which need graduates to fill job vacancies may 
fund scholarships for certain students. However, a school 
should not lower enrollment standards for the scholarship 
recipients; and after graduation, the scholarship recipients 
must go to work for the department, locality, or organization 
according to contract. The government will practice a 
preferential policy on certain disciplines which meet special 
needs of the country. During the trial period of the tuition 
payment system, "the new system applies to new students only, 
while old students are still subject to the old system." After 
conditions are ripe, most graduates will select jobs by 
themselves under the guidance of government policy, while only a 
small number of them will be placed according to contract. The 
reform plan should be carefully formulated. It is necessary to 
improve propaganda and ideological and political work and handle 
properly the relationship between reform, development, and 
stability. 
<H5>  3. Strengthen and Improve the Moral Education in School and </H5>
Strive To Improve the Education Quality 
  The education quality is the vitality for the development of 
education. Schools of various categories and levels should 
seriously implement the policy that "education must serve 
socialist modernization, integrate with productive labor, and 
cultivate builders and successors who develop morally, 
intellectually and physically," and put the work of improving 
education quality in a prominent position. 
  In implementing the principles of education and raising 
the quality of education, we must attach great importance to 
moral education. At present, the ideological tendency among 
young students at large is generally good, positive, and 
forward-looking. The majority of students link their individual 
destiny with China's development, and study hard for the 
socialist modernization drive. However, a new "theory on the 
uselessness of schooling," money-worship, and other erroneous 
ideas have also emerged and caused harmful effects among young 
students. Faced with the new situation and new requirements, we 
must effectively strengthen party leadership, reinforce and 
improve moral education in schools, and strive to explore new 
ideas for improving moral education under the new situation. We 
must use simple and easy-to-understand terms to explain to 
students the Marxist theory; to conduct education on Mao Zedong 
Thought, especially Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics; to conduct ideological 
education on patriotism, collectivism, and socialism; to conduct 
education on Chinese history, especially modern and contemporary 
history, and on national conditions; and to conduct education on 
traditional Chinese virtues, revolutionary traditions, and the 
legal system. We must teach students to foster a scientific 
world outlook, a correct outlook on life, noble morality and 
sentiments, and the spirit of national pride, confidence, and 
self-improvement. We must help students build up their 
capability to resist the exploiting class' decadent ideas and 
life style so that the traditional virtues of the Chinese nation 
and glorious revolutionary traditions will be carried forward by 
the younger generation in conjunction with the spirit of the 
times. Moral education should be conducted in accordance with 
the demand of the development of the situation and with the 
special features in various stages of students' physical and 
mental development. Moral education for junior middle and 
primary school students should be focused on civility and 
decorum, observance of law and discipline, civic duties, and 
basic mores. Senior middle school and college students should 
be given brief lectures on the basic views of Marxism, and 
should study Comrade Mao Zedong's important philosophical works 
and Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. We should reinforce aesthetic 
education (including music, art, and craft) among junior middle 
and primary school students, because it is of great importance 
for comprehensively raising students' quality, exerting a 
favorable influence on students' temperament, and training 
talented people who develop in an all-around manner. Leading 
cadres at all levels should visit schools regularly to conduct 
investigation and study, attend discussions with teachers and 
students, listen to their opinions, give reports on the 
situation, and conduct vivid and practical education on national 
conditions. The whole society should show concern and should 
protect the healthy development of the young. Teachers and 
educators should display the spirit of dedication and be the 
role models for students. 
  We must make a determined effort to correct the tendency of 
studying for the sake of passing examinations, which has existed 
over a long period of time. Due to this unhealthy tendency, 
schools and students neglect moral and physical education, are 
divorced from reality and society, and fail to comprehensively 
raise their quality while blindly studying for the sake of 
passing examinations. This problem, if not earnestly resolved, 
will inevitably harm the younger generation and cause serious 
consequences. We must boldly absorb and draw on the advanced 
educational methods of the contemporary world, earnestly 
summarize China's successful experiences in education, and 
resolutely jettison outdated educational programs and methods 
that are incompatible with modern education. We must try hard 
to overcome the dislocation between education and the practice 
of society and production, and teach students to foster an 
enterprising spirit and creativity as well as a healthy 
mentality to cope with the demand of society. We must improve 
teaching materials, reform and perfect examination methods and 
systems, and effectively lighten the excessive curricular 
burdens on middle and primary school students so that the 
younger generation can develop in an all-around manner and grow 
to maturity. 
<H5>  4. Party Committees and Governments at All Levels Should </H5>
Further Strengthen Their Leadership Over Educational Work and 
Strive To Do Solid Work To Expand Education 
  Strengthening party and government leadership over 
educational work is the basic guarantee for making education a 
strategic priority of development. Since the implementation of 
reform and opening up, party committees and governments at all 
levels have attached much greater importance to education. 
However, we must notice that negligence of education continues 
to exist in some localities and departments. Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping incisively pointed out: "A leader who neglects 
education is an immature leader devoid of farsightedness." 
Principal responsible comrades of party committees and 
governments at all levels should apply Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
educational concept to evaluate whether their own locality or 
department has really made education a strategic priority of 
development. We must have a sense of urgency toward the goal 
put forward in the "outline." Leaders at all levels should 
proceed from local realities in strengthening overall planning 
for educational work, incorporate the development goal of 
education into the overall social development plan, and adopt 
effective measures to realize the goal. Attaching importance to 
education and doing solid work to expand education should be the 
important components for evaluating leading cadres' performance 
of responsibilities during their tenure. Governments at all 
levels should report the progress in educational development and 
reform annually to people's congresses at the corresponding 
level and accept supervision from all walks of life. 
  Governments at all levels must pay attention to solving the 
following real problems in education work: 
  Increase educational spending. Since China 
started reform and opening to the outside world, China's total 
educational spending has increased. Funding shortages, however, 
remain in the education sector, and we must improve the 
situation as quickly as possible. Party committees and 
government at all levels must embrace the idea that educational 
spending is a strategic investment, rationally adjust the 
investment structure, and give a higher priority to educational 
needs in drafting the budget, and see to it that the "three 
increases" [increases in teachers' salaries, the amount of 
public funds for each student, and financial allocations from 
the central and local governments] as contained in the "outline" 
are truly materialized. 
  State allocations, which make up the main source of 
educational funds, must be guaranteed. The "outline" suggests 
that the proportion of state allocations for educational funds 
in the gross national product should be increased to 4 percent 
of the latter by the end of the this century and that the 
relevant departments of the State Council should formulate 
corresponding policies and measures as they work in earnest to 
achieve this goal. As for the proportion of educational funds 
in financial expenditures at all levels, the Finance Ministry 
and the education commission should quickly set, on the basis of 
the reformed financial calculation formula, the ratio of central 
and provincial allocations and ensure a relatively big increase 
in real financial spending. 
  As for educational surcharges in urban and rural areas, it 
has been decided that educational surcharges for urban 
educational programs are set at 3 percent of the combined amount 
of the three types of taxes [product taxes, value-added taxes, 
and business taxes]. Procedures for collecting educational 
surcharges from village and township enterprises in rural areas 
that do not pay the three types of taxes should be implemented 
in earnest. It has been decided that 1.5 to 2 percent of the 
5-percent charge collected from farmers should be set aside as 
educational funds. The specific ratio should be set by the 
localities. Educational surcharges, which make up the main 
source of teachers' salaries, subsidies, and school expenses of 
community sponsored schools cannot be reduced or diverted to 
other purposes. Localities must establish strict and effective 
supervision and inspection systems in this regard. 
  It is primarily the responsibility of the government to 
implement compulsory education. Government at all levels must 
make solid arrangements with regard to input into education. To 
ensure implementation of compulsory education in 
poverty-stricken areas, government at the central, provincial, 
prefectural, and county levels should set up special funds for 
this purpose. Centrally financed special funds for compulsory 
education in poverty-stricken areas should be increased year by 
year. Provincial, prefectural, and county treasuries must also 
make corresponding arrangements. 
  A special fund should be set up for implementing "Project 
211." Government and relevant departments at all levels must 
make overall arrangements in this regard. The central treasury 
will set aside special money as the startup fund for this 
project, and funding will be increased year by year. Government 
and relevant departments at the provincial level must also 
implement corresponding measures. 
  The state education funds management system should be 
reformed. Educational funds should be listed separatly in the 
budget. Managerial powers over education and financial powers 
should be integrated. Budgets for educational outlay should be 
formulated by educational department at all levels, incorporated 
into government budgets at the corresponding level, and put into 
effect after they are approved. Beginning from this year, the 
State Statistics Bureau and the State Education Commission will 
compile and publish statistics of spending on education. 
  Further efforts should be made to fine-tune the system of 
raising educational funds through a multiple of channels. In 
light of the new situation in the reform of financial and 
taxation systems and the specific needs of localities, 
governments of the provinces, autonomous regions, and 
municipalities directly under the central government are allowed 
to collect local taxes exclusively for educational funds. 
Standards for miscellaneous fees for compulsory education and 
tuition charges for noncompulsory education should be adjusted 
in a timely fashion, taking into consideration the extent to 
which the public can afford such fees. Schools of all 
categories are banned from the indiscriminate collection of fees 
under one excuse or another. The state encourages schools to 
run work-study programs or operate school-run industries. A 
preferential tax policy will be continued for school-run 
industries, including those run by vocational schools of all 
kinds. We should continue encouraging industrial and mining 
enterprises, social organizations, and individuals at home or 
abroad to contribute funds for schools. Villages are also 
encouraged to raise funds for running schools. Renovating 
dangerous school buildings and construction of new ones should 
be incorporated into government plans for capital construction. 
Authority for approving fund raising for rural schools resides 
with the county level, and the funds raised should be used 
primarily on renovations and construction of school buildings. 
The indiscriminate raising of educational funds outside the 
aforementioned scope is strictly prohibited. Public-sector 
organizations are also banned from collecting illegal donations 
from schools. 
  Improve the competence of the ranks of teachers and 
raise the teacher's material benefits. Building up a 
contingent of teachers who are professionally competent and 
ideologically and morally sound is crucial to the development of 
educational undertakings. One of the fundamental starting 
points of China's education policy is to rely on and fully 
utilize the initiative and creativity of teachers. Since China 
started reform and opening to the outside world, the party and 
government has upheld the policy of respecting education and 
teachers and made great headway in building up the ranks of 
teachers and in continuously improving their social status and 
material benefits. Progress has been, however, insufficient in 
many areas. We must now take effective steps to implement the 
following practical tasks in earnest: 
  We should strive to improve the quality of teachers. Earnest 
efforts should be made to make a success of teachers' schools of 
all kinds and encourage outstanding students to apply for 
admission to teachers' colleges. Graduates of teachers' schools 
should willingly dedicate themselves to education. Teachers' 
training should be carried out in a well-planned way to raise 
teachers' ideological and political quality and professional 
level. 
  Teachers' pay should be raised in accordance with the law. 
The "Teachers Law" provides that the average wages of teachers 
shall be equal to or higher than those of government employees. 
Personnel, financial, and education departments at all levels 
must formulate effective measures to implement this provision in 
earnest. Effective mechanisms should be introduced to put to an 
end to the arrears in teacher's salary payments. Infringements 
on teachers' legitimate rights and interests and diversion of 
educational funds should be investigated to determine 
culpability. 
  It is necessary to improve housing for teachers. 
Construction 
of urban teachers' quarters should be incorporated into the 
overall urban development plans. We should implement a 
preferential policy for teachers so that families of teachers 
and other school employees in cities will have houses of a size 
equivalent to the average size of urban residents' homes. 
  Practical steps should be taken to solve problems in regard 
to medical services for teachers, especially teachers in rural 
areas. Medical benefits for teachers should be equivalent to 
those of local government employees. 
  Efforts must be made to properly solve problems of 
locally-run school teachers. Teachers of middle and primary 
schools run by local people in the Chinese countryside have made 
important contributions to developing education in rural areas. 
Governments of all localities should adopt effective measures 
to raise the remuneration of locally-run school teachers to 
gradually ensure that they receive the same pay for the same 
work as teachers of publicly-run schools. Qualified teachers of 
locally-run schools should be evaluated and transferred to 
publicly-run schools; and those who are not qualified should be 
reshuffled. Departments concerned should work out plans and 
implement them on a yearly basis, striving to basically solve 
problems of locally-run school teachers within the next six or 
seven years. Teachers must be employed on the basis of their 
qualifications and the authorized number of teachers, which must 
not be increased in the name of substitute teachers or other 
pretexts. 
  We should energetically commend and reward outstanding 
teachers. Governments at all levels must commend and reward 
outstanding teachers so that teachers and educators who perform 
meritorious deeds in education shall receive due spiritual and 
material rewards. We should continue to adopt various measures 
to foster a prevailing social atmosphere of respecting teachers 
and valuing education. We should improve the work related to 
retired teachers and administrators. 
  Strengthen the construction of the education legal 
system. The establishment and improvement of socialist 
market economic structure requires the guarantee of a complete 
legal system, while the realization of the goal of educational 
development and reform hinges upon an adequate legal system. 
Since the implementation of reform and opening up, China has 
successively promulgated the "Regulations on Academic Degrees," 
the "Law on Compulsory Education," the "Law on Teachers," and 
other major laws and administrative rules. In the future, we 
should speed up the pace of education legislation and formulate, 
as soon as possible, the "Law on Education" the "Law on 
Vocational Education," the "Law on Higher Education," and 
supplementary rules and regulations for the "Law on Teachers." 
All local governments should also draw up and improve local 
education laws and statutes so as to incrementally set up a 
system of education laws and regulations suitable for China's 
national conditions. Local governments at all levels should 
take the lead in enforcing the laws, while people's congresses 
at various levels should step up the inspection and supervision 
of law enforcement. 
  Comrades! 
  Realizing the goal and tasks set out in the "Outline Program 
for the Reform and Development of Education in China" is a 
glorious and yet arduous mission. Under the guidance of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the party's basic line, let us rally closely 
around the party Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as 
the core, work hard, make no empty talk, do more solid work, and 
unswervingly implement the "outline," striving to push the 
reform and development of Chinese education to a new stage and 
making greater contributions to the socialist modernization 
drive! 

