CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I.V. Belov, professor, doctor of Economic </F>
Sciences, Honored Scientist of the RSFSR, and V.A. Persianov, 
professor, doctor of Economic Sciences: "Russian Transport: 
Basic Tasks and Prospects (The Standpoint and Thoughts of 
Scientists)"] 
<H5>  [No 9, Sep 93 pp 2-8] </H5>
  [Text] The complexity of the transport situation 
which has formed on Russian territory was impressively 
elucidated at the Applied Science Conference of the RF Academy 
of Transport, which was held in September 1992, with 
international participation. The content of the basic reports 
and speeches, however, went beyond the framework of simply 
informing the transport community of the state of affairs on 
Russian railways. Proposals on the directions for development of 
the Federation's transport system and on the concept for drawing 
up the "Transport Rossii" [Russian Transport] Program and the 
principles on which it should be based were advanced at the same 
time. 
  A considerable place was devoted to scientific support of 
developments, and the new demands which our transport policy 
must meet under market conditions were formulated. The main 
report rejected the principle of the "primacy of means of 
transport," which transfers the center of gravity from the 
organization of a commodity-producing system as a whole and its 
infrastructure to selection of the methods for operating rolling 
stock for each individual form of transport. It was noted that 
today we need specialists, thinking in general transport terms, 
without whom we cannot form an efficient commodity- and 
passenger-carrying system for the Russian Federation. 
  The rates of development of the comprehensive state program, 
"Transport Rossii," in which the Academy of Transport is 
assigned a prominent place, are picking up. The first stage of 
development is essentially completed. About 50 scientists and 
experts from abroad took part in it, and forces and resources of 
the International Monetary Fund were drawn in. One of the 
reports noted that in the past the Union "had never had programs 
like this, it was being done for the first time." In reality, 
perhaps, our country had not had such an accompaniment for a 
sectorial national economic program since the 
mid-1920's-beginning of the 1930's, when it was considered the 
norm to draw in foreign specialists and resources. It is another 
question as to how effective this will be in modern-day Russia. 
After all, our scientific potential is fully adequate for us to 
cope with any task ourselves. The mechanical transfer of Western 
experience to domestic soil is particularly inadmissible. 
  Another general aim, based on principle, and expressed at 
the 
conference, was the need to provide the program with a reliable 
foundation -- scientifically verified ideology, which should be 
incorporated into the basis of Russia's transport system. This 
will be our topic below, and moreover, our main attention will 
be paid only to problems and questions which remain in the 
background, but are of decisive importance for the development 
of Russia's transport system. 
<H5>  Analysis of the Problematic Situation </H5>
  It is impossible to determine the strategic and tactical 
goals correctly, and to formulate Russia's transport policy, 
without objectively evaluating the situation which has formed. 
The destruction of the unified political space inevitably led to 
the dismemberment of the country's economic wholeness and a 
breakdown of the traditional transport-economic ties. In 
evaluating the general course of the process of disintegration 
of the USSR transport system, the results of this process, 
condensed to the maximum, can be characterized in a single word 
-- degradation -- which has encompassed almost the entire 
transport industry of all the former Union republics, including 
Russia. 
  Russia's sacrifice in favor of the other republics was 
obvious, constant and significant in former years, but is not 
appreciated to this day. Russia was regularly allotted too low a 
volume of supplies of transport funds and material-technical 
resources. With respect to the density of the railroad network 
(about 5 km per 1,000 km[.sup]2[/] of territory), Russia gave 
way to many of the former Union republics --Ukraine (38 km), 
Belarus (27 km), Kazakhstan (5.4 km), Uzbekistan (7.8 km). 
Russia also found itself in last place with respect to density 
of paved roads (about 23 km per 1,000 km[.sup]2[/] of 
territory). Right now it has only about 460,000 km of these 
roads, while the total need for them is estimated as 2.5 million 
km. 
  On the whole for Russian transport, the volume of freight 
conveyance in 1992 was reduced by 20 percent, including river -- 
by 37 percent and air -- by 40 percent, as compared with 1991. 
In the last few years the development of the transport network 
has slowed down, as is evidenced by the data in Table 1. 


Table 1. Extent of the Transport Network (at the beginning of the year, thous. 
km) 

Type of            1986        1991        1992        1992 as % of 
transport 

                                                       1986         1991 

Railroads for      84.9        87.2        86.8        102          99.5 
general use 

Inland             106         103         102         96           99.0 
navigation 
routes, served 
by Rosrechflot 

Highways for       466         455         456         98           100.2 
general use 

Main oil and gas   64.9        66.2        65.1        100.3        98 
pipelines 


  In 1992 the transport construction volume was cut back 
sharply. In 9 months of 1992, of the planned 90 km of new 
railroad lines for the Russian Ministry of Railways, not a 
single kilometer was put into operation. Only 40 km of second 
tracks were turned over for operation, instead of 208 km. In 
January-September 1992, 2,900 km of paved highways for general 
use were built, as against 5,900 km in the same period of 1991 
and, respectively, 25 km as against 87 km of main petroleum 
products pipelines. No main oil pipelines were put into 
operation in this period (in 9 months of 1991, 705 km of them 
were put into operation). The unsatisfactory state of many of 
the railways creates emergency situations, leading to losses 
during transport and a reduction in the speed of freight 
delivery. 
  Railroad transport. The railroads of the Russian 
MPS have an increasing number of defective rails and rails that 
have worked out their service life laid on their tracks. The 
extent of main tracks using these rails has reached respectively 
11,000 km (9 percent of the total extent) and 22,000 km (18 
percent). Some 22,000 defective switches and 23,000 defective 
crossings (11 percent of their total number) are in operation on 
the tracks. 
  There is an urgent need to replace R-65 rails on the most 
freight-intensive roads, which account for 83 percent of the 
developed length of main tracks in Russia, with the stronger 
R-75 rails. Only 4 percent of the main tracks have rails of this 
type at present, and such freight-intensive roads as the 
Sverdlovsk, East Siberian and Transbaykal have no R-75 rails at 
all. 
  The deterioration in the state of the track on the railroads 
stems to a considerable extent from the double or triple cutback 
in supplies of rails, ties and other permanent way elements. The 
main reason for the nonfulfillment of the schedules for supply 
of materials for the permanent way tracks is the railroads' 
shortage of funds to settle with the suppliers. The price of 
rails, ties and sets of switch ties rose by a factor of 35-50 as 
compared with 1991, and of sets of switch assemblies -- by a 
factor of 160. 
  Because of the poor state of the track, the roads have been 
forced to introduce speed restrictions for train traffic on a 
number of sections. According to the condition on 20 November 
1992, on sections 8,000 km long, 5,500 speed restriction 
warnings were in effect, and of them, 1,500 were not provided 
for by the traffic schedule. 
  Motor vehicle transport. The highway network of 
the Russian Federation is inferior in all indicators, not only 
to the leading foreign countries, but also to the former Union 
republics. According to the data of the Motor Vehicle Transport 
Department, only 10-12 percent of the trucks and buses for 
general use from the motor vehicle fleet of the former USSR were 
left on Russian territory. 
  Over 40 percent of Russia's rural population centers have no 
connections with the network of routes for general use. The 
situation is particularly critical in Yaroslavl Oblast, where 
only 17 percent of the rural population centers have this 
connection. The situation is analogous in Tver, Kostroma, Orlov, 
Kursk, Volgograd, Omsk and Tyumen oblasts and the republics of 
Mari El, Mordovia, Chuvashia, Kalmykia, Khalmg-Tangch and Tuva, 
where no more than [sic] half of these population centers are 
located. 
  The quality of the highway network for general use is not 
good: 11 percent of the highways are dirt roads, which become 
virtually impassable in the fall and winter. Over one-third of 
the paved roads are gravel, crushed rock, slag and cobblestone, 
which do not meet the technical norms, traffic intensity or 
loads of today's means of transport. The poor quality of the 
road pavement and its tendency to wear rapidly make frequent 
highway repair necessary. A cutback in the repair work volume 
has recently begun, however (Table 2). 


Table 2 

Indicator         1990        1991        January-September 

                                          1991             1992 

Repaired          38.2        35.7        29.8             24.4 
highways for 
general use 
with hard 
pavement, 
thous. km 

Relative          9.6         8.8         7.5              6.0 
proportion of 
them in total 
extent of 
highways with 
hard pavement, 
% 


  River transport. By the beginning of 1992, the 
extent of inland waterways served by Rosrechflot had dropped by 
3,400 km, or by 3.2 percent, as compared with the beginning of 
1986. The length of the navigable inland waterways was greatly 
reduced (by 5.5 percent). The extent of waterways with 
guaranteed depths has also dropped somewhat. The reason for this 
is the lack of demand for certain sections of the waterways, 
mainly on small rivers, because of the reduction in the volumes 
of cargo and passenger transport. 
  By the beginning of this year, there were 2,600 mooring 
places in Russia with the total extent of the mooring front 
being 182,200 linear m, of which shipping company cargo berths 
account for 58 percent. The total extent of the cargo berths is 
tending toward reduction: it has dropped by 2 percent as 
compared with 1986. This is because some of the obsolete wooden 
berths have been taken out of operation. The length of the 
berths equipped with transhipping equipment, was reduced by 
1,300 linear m during this period, which is because of the sharp 
drop (by 65-70 percent of the 1986 level) in freight conveyance 
by river transport and dismantling of the transshipment 
equipment from inactive berths. 
  Maritime transport.Thirty-nine seaports and 22 
port centers with a total mooring front length of 60,500 linear 
m, which constitutes about 50 percent of the length of the 
berths in the former Union, are located on Russian territory. 
The production capacity of the Russian ports is estimated at 187 
million t (42 percent of the capacity of the USSR ports) and 
provides only 54 percent of the need for cargo handling. The 
rest of Russia's export-import cargo is handled at ports of the 
Baltic countries, Ukraine, Georgia and Azerbaijan. At the same 
time, Russian ports transship about 13 million t of the 
contiguous states' cargo. 
  The berths are equipped with 216 transshipping complexes for 
dry cargo and 26 complexes to handle bulk cargo, which is 
respectively 45 and 40 percent of the transshipping complexes of 
the former Union. With the break-up of the USSR, Russia was 
deprived of modern complexes to transship potassium salt, 
petroleum cargo and liquefied gas, and was left without railroad 
ferries to Germany and Bulgaria. Today the country has only one 
portside elevator to accept imported grain and one specialized 
complex to transship imported raw sugar. 
  The port industry must be developed and modernized. About 60 
percent of Russian ports are unable to accept modern large ships 
because the berths are not deep enough. Over one-fourth of the 
berth front and fenced-in structures are in an unsatisfactory 
technical condition. No new transshipping complexes for seaports 
were envisaged or being put into operation in 1989-1991. 
  The structure of the transport fleet is extremely 
inefficient. It includes only 27 percent of all the reefer 
ships, 29 percent of the grain carriers, 18 percent of the 
ferries, 25 percent of the LASH ships and 35 percent of the 
passenger ships of the former USSR Ministry of the Maritime 
Fleet. 
  Air transport. The former Aeroflot, one of the 
world's major air associations, no longer exists. It has been 
broken up into dozens of small companies. The Russian Aeroflot, 
which was an international carrier, transported 3 million 
passengers in 1992 (or 700,000 fewer than in 1991), including 
500,000 passengers by charter flights. The shipment of cargo by 
this air company's planes increased from 54,000 t (1991) to 
75,000 t (1992). The technical strength of the ground base is 
about 60 percent of the normative level, and not over 50 percent 
with respect to air terminal complexes. The wear and tear on the 
fixed capital in air transport was particularly high and reached 
70 percent. 
  An objective analysis of the above figures leaves no doubt 
that the first and main task of the "Transport Rossii" Program 
being worked out should be to re-establish the Federation's 
transport potential at today's scientific-technical level. This 
urgent task should be given priority over other tasks and plans 
for transport newbuildings, including the construction of 
high-speed railroad lines, construction of new seaports, 
superhighways through uninhabited or sparsely inhabited regions, 
etc. 
<H5>  Does the Russian Federation Need an ETS [Unified Transport </H5>
System] 
  The answer to this question seemed to be provided at the 
above-mentioned applied science conference, and this answer was 
absolutely affirmative. The "Transport Rossii" Program should be 
worked out as a unified, objective-oriented complex, 
encompassing the entire Russian territory, all levels of 
management, including regional, and all forms of transport 
(although the problems of municipal and industrial-technological 
transport, it appears, have been dropped from this complex). 
  The unification of Russia's transport system, however, 
should 
not mean cutting it off from the routes of the neighboring CIS 
territories. Another question arises in connection with this: 
can Russia work out a realistic program for its transport 
development without the participation in it of its closest 
neighbors, with whom its transport network (for example, 
railroad) has been (and continues to be) in unity, not just 
formally, but in actuality, for the last one-and-a-half 
centuries and more? 
  The problem of forming a unified Russian transport system, 
with a narrow, and therefore erroneous, conception of it, would 
signify the destruction of the super-national, "trans-boundary" 
unity of the railroad network, which in reality does exist. The 
overall nature of the "Transport Rossii" Program, therefore, 
gains yet another dimension, the weightiness of which is 
determined by the fates of the CIS. Neither rapid nor slow 
disintegration of the CIS is advantageous to Russia's transport 
workers, and the most farsighted politicians and managers, 
fortunately, realize this. 
  Economic isolation inevitably leads to the creation of 
differentiated transport markets, stagnation in the sphere of 
technical progress as a whole and a reduction in the efficiency 
transport use. The experience of the West European countries in 
particular convinces one of this. The Common Market countries, 
for example, due to isolationism in the transport policy at the 
end of the 1980's lost about 400 billion Marks yearly. According 
to calculations made by German scholars in connection with the 
intention to create a unified European market in 1993, as N.S. 
Konarev informed us in his report at the conference, the Common 
Market countries are losing over 15 billion Marks a year at 
border crossings. The average speed of freight delivery, from 
Belgium to Greece, for example, is only 12 km/hr, because of all 
the border procedures that have to be performed. At the same 
time, with the creation of a unified European market, all the 
border formalities will become unnecessary and the delivery 
speeds should sharply rise. 
  Making a realistic and considered evaluation of the 
advantages of transport integration, Kazakhstan, for example, is 
consistently following the policy of strengthening cooperation 
with Russia, within the framework of the CIS, and on a bilateral 
basis as well. In an interview for the newspaper GUDOK (No 21 of 
4 February 1993), N.K. Isingarin, minister of Transport for the 
Republic of Kazakhstan, spoke with understandable anxiety about 
the "rolling wave of technical and technological lagging behind 
in the development of railroad transport on almost all the 
railroads of the Commonwealth".... In order to avoid this 
danger, the director of Kazakhstan transport feels, it is 
advisable to "think up variants for the future development of 
the railroads." The conclusion is fully justified, and one 
cannot help but heed it when working out the "Transport Rossii" 
Program. The experienced engineer, scientist and director looks 
even farther: "Kazakhstan is prepared for the Russian MPS, based 
on its scientific potential, to boldly dictate, with their 
instructions and recommendations, the policy for the development 
of the railroads." 
  Unfortunately, not everyone can see the advantages of this 
cooperation for Russia. Some people think that by isolating 
itself, Russia will gain the possibility of radically improving 
its socio-economic situation. It needs at least in some way to 
compensate for the loss of time and pace, to be determined, 
finally, in its domestic and foreign policy, to concentrate on 
solving its own problems and to obtain a legal freedom of 
actions, not just of appeals and declarations. Russian transport 
will lose scarcely anything from the break-up of the CIS --they 
think. Right now the unified transport system of the CIS 
countries exists only in name. To preserve the visible, 
displayed unity of the CIS, Russia will, as before, have to pay 
in some way, and some mercenary-minded partners throughout the 
commonwealth wish to obtain quite a large payment. Is it not 
better to let them experience and comprehend, and quickly, all 
the disadvantages of living in discord? 
  After all, though, the isolation of Russia's transport 
system, isolation consolidated in an individually worked out 
program, and the additional political erosion of its 
administrative-territorial structure, whether we like it or not, 
will lead to a loss of its status as a great power. Then the 
unenviable role of a raw material appendage to the "civilized" 
states awaits the country, naturally, with all the attributes of 
such a condition -- overwhelming poverty of part of the 
population, economic dependence on the outside world, and 
political instability. This course of events will become reality 
unless the CIS countries (first and foremost Russia) display 
political wisdom and a will to true cooperation. 
  Strengthening the Commonwealth is the best of the possible 
outcomes, and should be achieved, but not at the price of 
endless economic and political concessions on Russia's part. 
There is always a dominant in any system, and Russia is this 
dominant in the CIS. Acknowledging its natural supremacy (just 
as in the West, the United States is the generally acknowledged 
dominant) and authority is an indispensable condition for the 
existence of a unified transport area. 
  Preserving and strengthening the commonwealth of former 
Union 
republics, even if this process takes several years, may prove 
to be the salvation of both Russia and the other CIS countries. 
A unified economic and transport area is preserved, and the 
re-establishment of the declining transport communications will 
take considerably less time and fewer material, labor and 
financial resources. The political disagreements related to 
establishing interstate boundaries will be smoothed over, the 
conflicts about the distribution of means of transport among 
republics which only recently lived as a unified family will be 
alleviated, and the chance of making the transition from the 
eight-year-long destructive phase of reforms to its creative 
phase will be promoted. 
  Unfortunately, some republics were in a hurry to give up the 
idea of Russia's natural supremacy in the commonwealth of 
independent states, which did not prevent them from finding an 
"older brother" in the far abroad. The existing transport 
infrastructure, however, was quite conservative, and it will not 
be easy for these republics to quickly reorient their 
transport-economic ties toward new partners, passing over Russia. 
  At the stage of programming the development of transport, 
Russia should not rule out the participation of the former CEMA 
member countries, and even the European Community (EC) in its 
transport structures. It is very unlikely, however, that there 
will be a major breakthrough on this level of cooperation in the 
near future, although such interaction in solving individual 
problems is possible right now. In the final analysis, a great 
deal will be determined by the foreign policy goals of the new 
Russia, but the decisive factor is the domestic socio-economic 
policy. 
<H5>  Questions of State Importance </H5>
  In the program being worked out, the following extremely 
important questions must be given a precise answer: 
  The first of them: will efforts be continued to 
ensure the unity of the transport system, not only on the scale 
of Russia, but also beyond its limits, on the level of each form 
of transport? 
  In solving this problem, it seems that only railroad 
transport was precisely determined: the MPS of the Russian 
Federation virtually took on the coordination of railroad 
service on the entire territory occupied by the Soviet Union 
until the end of 1991. Considering the specific nature of 
railroad work, to examine and approve the basic statutes 
ensuring stable transport service for the national economy and 
the people under the conditions of a market economy, a Council 
for Railroad Transport was set up as the highest authority for 
coordinating the work of the railroads and its permanent 
executive body -- the Board of Directors. Agreements on the 
basic principles of the operational work of the CIS railroads, 
on the procedure for transit, on dividing up the railcar and 
container fleets, and other important decisions were made. 
  The property of the Soviet railroads, marine and other forms 
of transport as a whole, however, was essentially divided up 
among the sovereign republics "on the spur of the moment," 
virtually by self-usurpation. Russia, as was noted, lost exits 
to the largest and technically best-equipped seaports and was 
deprived of its share in the capacities of the railcar building, 
locomotive building and shipbuilding enterprises. Air transport 
suffered tremendous losses. The transport repair base was 
unevenly distributed among the CIS countries. For example, in 
the sphere of capital repair of freight cars, Russia has a 
13,400 deficit of boxcars, Ukraine has a surplus of 5,700, 
Kazakhstan a deficit of 2,700 cars a year, Armenia has no such 
base at all, etc. 
  In working out the "Transport Rossii" Program, which has 
gained the status of a state program, one must not let this very 
acute problem go unheeded. In this respect, the program can be 
neither deideologized nor depoliticized. One cannot agree with 
the point of view of those who judge according to a "no use 
crying over spilt milk" scheme. This problem must be solved on a 
fair, strictly scientific, state basis. 
  The riches accumulated by our fraternal nations should not 
be 
let go after the destruction of their common home, but should 
unite the people and the economy of the CIS countries. There are 
opportunities for this, and we must time and time again go back 
to the problem of dividing up the transport production 
capacities, which deserve individual, unhurried, thoughtful 
consideration. We need solutions which will make it possible to 
make joint use of the transport capacities created in the past 
for a direct purpose. "We must decisively prohibit the 
overproliferation of production facilities. Everyone will gain 
from this in the long run." This point of view, expressed by 
N.S. Konarev in the course of discussing the program at the 
conference, gives true guidelines to its developers. 
  The task of dividing up the transport capacities should be 
achieved in consideration of the fact that, for example, in the 
years of the early five-year plans, over 50 percent of the 
transport newbuilding sites were located outside Russia's 
limits. About 4,000 km of railroads were turned over for 
operation on the territory of Kazakhstan alone in those years, 
which almost tripled the extent of its railroad network. The 
capital of Tajikistan was joined to the railroads of the 
country, and the networks of Azerbaijan (Mindzhevan-Alyat line) 
and other republics were intensified. 
  The tendency toward outstripping development of the 
transport 
network outside the territory of the Russian Federation was 
maintained in the postwar years. Of the railroads built in the 
period from 1945 to 1975, 40 percent of their total extent fell 
to Kazakhstan, Central Asia, the Caucasus and the Transcaucasus. 
As a result, by the beginning of the 1980's, the railroad 
network of Kazakhstan, for example, approached 15,000 km and 
constituted 10 percent of the total operational extent of the 
Union's railroads, whereas in 1913 it was not over 2,700 km (4 
percent of the extent of Russia's railroad network at that 
time). In the postwar years, new mainlines were built on the 
territory of Turkmenia and Uzbekistan (the 1,000-kilometer 
Chardzhou-Kungrad-Beyneu line), Tajikistan and other republics. 
Tens of billions of rubles were allotted from the Union budget 
for the construction of these lines and other facilities. The 
time has come for these assets to be fairly "divided up," 
meaning by this, the right of joint use of the common production 
capacities of each republic in a certain proportion. 
  The Second question: how will Russian transport 
participate, in the coming difficult stage of development of our 
multi-ethnic republic, in achieving the most important all-state 
tasks? 
  As before, the agrarian problem is one of these tasks. There 
is little determination of the agrarian sector's need for 
transport and expression of this need in additional transport 
production capacities. We must have a well thought out system of 
transport provision for the rural area, guaranteeing the success 
of Russia's agrarian policy. 
  It is not clear what will compensate for the closing down of 
unprofitable and low-activity stations and lines serving the 
rural hinterlands. Many rural towns and villages that have been 
abandoned will undoubtedly be rehabilitated and inhabited. We 
must seriously think about how transport will support the new 
agrarian policy and will contribute to the revival of spiritual 
and economic life on the vast expanses of Russia. We also need a 
clear-cut stand on problems of developing ecologically pure 
electric transport and reducing the adverse effect of transport 
and road construction on the natural environment and man. 
  One of the most important socio-economic tasks for all types 
of transport should be provision of passenger transport in large 
cities and urban agglomerations. All the countries of the world 
are intensively seeking to accomplish this task, but it is not 
even designated in the plans for development of Russian 
transport. One cannot count on the way this was done in the 
past, by widescale construction of subways: that requires 
tremendous expenditures. The problem is insoluble without rail 
transport. 
  As studies of the transport laboratory of the State 
Management Academy imeni S. Ordzhonikidze showed, in many large 
Russian cities (Nizhnyy Novgorod, Volgograd, Samara, Ufa, Perm, 
Novosibirsk, Krasnoyarsk, etc.), railroad lines with an extent 
of 35-40 km and more run within the city boundary, connecting 
the peripheral areas of the city with its central section. These 
mainline intra-junction routes, radially approaching the cities 
and intersecting the urban sites being built up, have gradually 
"grown into" the city structure. Now, however, these lines are 
used mainly for freight transport, and only partially for 
suburban and intra-city passenger service. In the future there 
will be an opportunity to create, on the basis of these 
intra-junction lines, highly efficient systems of surface rail 
transport, to radically improve the quality of suburban 
passenger transport and to make through trips in the 
"city-suburbs" zone. 
  Transit and local (intra-junction) freight transport must be 
gradually carried out to by-pass junctions or other parallel 
intra-junction connections, using the lines thus freed mainly 
for passenger traffic. This would make it possible to solve 
several problems at once. In the first place, to release here 
the throughput capacity of the railroads located in the city for 
more intensive suburban and, especially important, urban 
passenger transport, to assist traditional types of city 
transport. In the second place, it will make it possible to 
reduce dust pollution of the air basin and city territory, and 
lower the level of transport noise and vibration. In the third 
place, the cardinal point, the problem of the throughput 
capacity of the most important railroad junctions and the 
reserve of production capacities and capital investments in the 
development of transport will be solved for many years ahead. 
  Mainlining transport on the basis of electrified surface 
railroads will make it possible in practice to begin developing 
unified networks of rail transport in Russia's large cities and 
to organize through service between the city and its suburbs by 
more economical methods. 
  It is expedient to begin realizing this task in the next few 
years. Particularly needed for this are: evaluating the 
possibility and expediency of more complete use of surface 
railroads for the needs of the population, on the basis of 
inspecting the rail transport networks in large Russian cities 
(first stage); intensifying research which will make it possible 
to determine the conditions and sphere of use of surface 
electrified railroads in Russian cities, for organization of 
intra-urban and suburban transport, and will also make it 
possible to evaluate the socio-economic effectiveness of these 
roads (second stage). 
  The RF MPS has already begun research in this sphere, and 
its 
results should be incorporated in the "Transport Rossii" 
Program. This will make it possible to draw up proposals and 
begin the radical rebuilding of rail transport for the large 
cities of Russia. 
  The third question: what should be the state 
policy in developing technical means of transport, including the 
entire complex of devices and structures ensuring the normal 
operation of the railways? 
  Here, in particular, we must make clear whether nuclear 
power 
for transport should be further developed and if it should, then 
on what scale and in which regions of the country. 
  The prospects for further electrification of transport as a 
whole, and of railroads in particular, must be outlined. The 
main heavily traveled railroad mainlines have already been 
electrified. What principles will be incorporated in choosing 
the sections subject to further electrification and on what 
energy-carrier and traction parameters it will be reckoned 
remain unclear. 
  The problem of selecting the weight and speed of the rolling 
stock units, particularly in railroad transport, should be 
solved on the basis of a whole group of present-day 
socio-economic and ecological requirements. So far there are 
virtually no substantiated decisions in the sphere of efficient 
methods of raising the transport potential of the railways. 
  The fourth question: will Russian transport take 
real steps toward intercooperation among forms of transport and 
also among related sectors of the national economy? 
  The transition of transport, particularly railroads, to 
market relations is not simple and not easy. It is, however -- 
today's reality, and is not being solved by the tariff policy 
alone. Transport should be more actively included in 
intersectorial cooperation (integration), but this does not even 
exist within transport itself (between the forms of it), not to 
mention cooperation with industry, agriculture, etc. Meanwhile, 
the tasks of improving transport administration as a whole and 
of ensuring efficient interaction between forms of transport in 
passenger and freight conveyance (development of transshipping 
junctions, construction of combined terminals, etc.) have now 
become even more urgent than they were two or three years ago. 
  The main principle incorporated into the basis for 
development of Russian transport in the past was the idea of the 
wholeness of the country's transport-road complex, the 
centralization of management and the creation of super-large 
transport monopolies. In the course of one-and-a-half centuries 
and more, a unique transport structure of the monocentric type, 
based on state ownership, formed on the territory of Russia. 
This historical fact is of great importance in practical work. 
Powerful, but insufficiently flexible, this structure today is 
not in a position to satisfy fully all the requirements of a 
market economy. The objective necessity and possibility have 
arisen of increasing the efficiency and improving the quality of 
transport work, by supplementing it with a network of 
small-scale and medium-scale business enterprises. 
  Any market is hard to control, particularly at the stage of 
coming into being and in the absence of the necessary 
regulators. The point is not only this, though. An efficient 
transition to a market is possible on condition that a surplus 
of commodities and services is available (or may be ensured in a 
very short time). Only in this case will competition ensure the 
normal action of market regulators. 
  Some forms of transport and categories of enterprises 
possess 
the characteristics of a natural monopoly. Even in capitalist 
countries (Germany, France and, until recently, Japan), the 
railroads essentially find themselves outside the market, 
regularly receiving billions in subsidies from the state budget. 
Competition does exist in them, though, since the production 
capacities of state and private railroads have accumulated there 
in the course of one-and-a-half centuries and today cover the 
real demand for transport by a factor of two to three. 
  It is a different matter in our country. The need for 
transport in our homeland is potentially tremendous, and there 
can be no question of a surplus of transport products of the 
proper quality in the next few years. The development of 
small-scale and medium-scale business enterprises would make 
possible a noticeable reduction in the gap between demand and 
supply of transport products and services. 
  By the beginning of the 1990's, there were three segments of 
small-scale and medium-scale transport business in the Russian 
Federation: state, leased and private. The sphere of 
entrepreneurship continues to expand, although the volume of 
conveyance by mainline forms of transport, as compared with 
1985, was cut at least in half and continues to drop. The 
development of small-scale and medium-scale transport business 
is connected not so much with transport work (this mainly 
relates to railroad transport, which occupies the dominating 
position in Russia's transport system) as with 
transport-dispatch service for the population and customers, 
performance of loading-unloading work and freight-sorting 
operations, and also with activity in the sphere of repair and 
service of means of transport and hoisting-transporting 
equipment. 
  In the first quarter of 1993 in Russia, there were over 300 
privatized motor vehicle transport enterprises, about 150 air 
companies, and approximately 130 water transport enterprises 
with several hundred ships. Private persons and cooperatives 
became owners of over 122,000 trucks and over 11,000 motorbuses. 
  Despite the growth of entrepreneurship in Russia's 
transport, 
its scale looks modest as compared with other sectors of the 
country's economy. This is not only because of the corresponding 
instructions of the RF Goskomimushchestvo, issued in the autumn 
of 1992 and in January of 1993 (as we know, they specify a 
special procedure for privatization in transport and do not 
permit turning the transport infrastructure over to private 
ownership), but also because of a number of other economic, 
legal and organizational reasons. These reasons include the 
slump in production and the reduction in demand for the 
transport of freight and passengers, the rise in prices for 
means of transport, fuel and spare parts, the imperfection of 
the legal base and undeveloped nature of the mechanism for state 
regulation and support of entrepreneurship. 
  It appears that, with the elimination of these reasons, 
small-scale and medium-scale business in Russian transport can 
accelerate its development. The correct choice of their spheres 
of activity on the transport market will contribute to this. In 
our opinion, these spheres are: delivering passengers and small 
consignments of freight to cities and suburban zones; technical 
service, repair of motor vehicles and the offering of a full 
range of services on the country's main highways; 
transport-dispatch service for the population and for 
enterprises of various forms of ownership; setting up 
small-scale and medium-scale transport firms on low-activity 
railroads and at stations, marine and river ports, and 
industrial transport enterprises; setting up intersectorial 
transport firms which complete the transport process in mixed 
service and at the "customer-transport" juncture; fulfilling the 
orders of major transport enterprises in the sphere of 
subsidiary-ancillary activity. 
  The choice of these directions in the development of 
small-scale and medium-scale business is substantiated: it 
promises a true improvement in the quality of transport service. 
There are over 1,400 cities in Russia with a population of from 
50,000 to 250,000 persons, in which it is expedient to carry out 
regular transport of passengers and small consignments of 
freight, which is unprofitable for enterprises of the state 
sector. Despite the creation of a network of company-serviced 
centers, almost 8 million private owners of motor vehicles 
cannot satisfy their need for technical service and repair of 
their vehicles. Even on Russia's main highways, there is no 
basic vehicle service, which makes normal operation of motor 
vehicles difficult. 
  As for the development of entrepreneurship on low-activity 
railroad lines and stations, Russia has over 3,300 km of lines 
and about 1,000 stations included in this category, the 
operation of which brings the roads large losses. 
Commercializing the work of these facilities on the basis of 
small-scale and medium-scale entrepreneurship can make them 
profitable. Positive changes can also be made at the juncture 
points of transport and customers, which so far remain a "no 
man's land," and also in the sphere of the subsidiary-ancillary 
activity of large transport enterprises. 
  Success in small-scale and medium-scale business in these 
spheres is impossible, however, without the support of the 
state, a point which should be reflected in the program for the 
development of Russia's transport. 
  The fifth question: what should be Russia's 
strategy and tactics in the sphere of transport when following a 
new regional and national policy? 
  The density of the road network and the quality of the 
transport service are different in different regions of the 
Russian Federation. In some autonomous republics, krays and 
oblasts, the trend toward isolation of transport and other 
sectors of the economy is intensifying. Therefore, using 
transport to integrate autonomies and other administrative 
subdivisions within the framework of the Russian Federation is a 
task of tremendous state importance. 
  The sixth question: On what principles will Russia 
be guided in the sphere of transport when implementing an 
investment policy and foreign economic relations? 
  First of all, effective general transport goals and scale of 
priorities must be worked out. The former theory of the 
effectiveness of capital investments is now inadequate as an 
answer to this question. Practical experience in solving 
specific economic problems will, as before, outstrip the theory. 
Moreover, the existing theory itself, on which the investment 
policy for transport was built, is in many ways obsolete. It is 
extremely important today, until there is a proper theoretical 
basis, to formulate, at least roughly, the general principles of 
the new investment policy in transport, just as it is important 
to work out a new approach to purchasing technical assets 
(ships, locomotives, railcars, other equipment) abroad. It must 
be determined using the prices for these products burdening the 
fixed production capital of all forms of domestic transport, 
deforming our domestic transport market and inhibiting progress 
in domestic machine building. 
  Since May of last year, the Ministry of Transport has been 
cooperating with the World Bank, discussing large-scale projects 
for the development of Russia's route network, with foreign 
capital drawn in. It is a question, in particular, of building 
highways in Siberia and the Far East with their subsequent 
connection, through Chukotka, the Bering Straits and Alaska, 
with the North American highway network. The project is, of 
course, a grand one, but its implementation would lay too heavy 
a burden on Russia's economy. It would also be useful to 
consider other projects of this type in the light of expediency 
and potentials of the economy. 
  As for drawing in foreign capital, Russia has a wealth of 
pre-revolutionary experience in this sphere, and should not 
forget about it. Many business people from abroad have worked in 
the field of transport construction in the country in their 
time. A large syndicate of French and Dutch bankers were the 
founders of the not unknown Main Society of Russian Railroads. 
It was famous not only for its successes in railroad 
construction, but also for large-scale financial machinations. 
The concession holders literally robbed the Russian treasury, 
and got rich on stock-exchange speculation with shares. Private 
companies would build railroads, and then operate them until 
redemption by the treasury -- primarily through funded loans 
abroad under government guarantee. This led to an influx of 
foreign capital, and moreover, the average profit norm for it 
was double or triple that in the countries of Western Europe. In 
this way, foreign capital elicited fabulous profits from the 
Russian treasury -- 3 billion gold rubles. 
  Now as never before it is useful to think over the words 
spoken by S.Yu. Witte a century ago: "Until Russian life works 
out its own national economy, based on the special individual 
features of Russian soil, until then we will be in the process 
of vacillating between various fashionable doctrines, falling 
for first one and then the other; until then we will hear from 
the same lips and read... logically incompatible judgments and 
projects; until then what was created yesterday will be 
considered bad tomorrow, and what is being created today is what 
was abolished yesterday; ... until then we will not have a 
correct economic existence, but will go along in the tow of 
foreign influences and all kinds of speculations, at the cost of 
national well-being." 
  In working out the "Transport Rossii" program, greater 
attention should be paid to its social guidelines and 
scientific-methodological basis. We will attempt to shed light 
on these important problems in the next issue of the 
journal. 
<H5>  [No 10, Oct 93 pp 7-10] </H5>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Social Guidelines </H5>
  It is difficult to present the "Transport Rossii" Program 
without social components. The human factor in transport is 
especially important: over 13 percent of the workers in the 
national economy are employed in the basic and "auxiliary" 
activity here. It is therefore impossible to separate the social 
policy in the Program from the economic policy. We will show 
this, using the example of railroad transport. 
  The key problems of the social development of the country's 
railroad transport were recently examined in detail at the 
network conference organized by the Economic Main Administration 
of the MPS and TsNIITEI [Central Scientific Information and 
Technical-Economic Research Institute] in May-June 1991. 
Representatives of the main administrations of the MPS, 
railroads and Central Trade Union Committee took part in the 
conference. The conference evaluated the general state of the 
social sphere of railroad transport, revealed its shortcomings 
and outlined ways to solve the two major, key problems -- wages 
and housing construction. Both these problems are closely 
connected with the general economic condition of the sector and 
prospects for its development under market conditions. 
  In the past two years, the situation in railroad transport 
has changed radically. In the first place, it does not have the 
object -- Soviet railroads as a unified whole -- for which 
social guidelines were worked out. In the second place, the 
slump in freight transport volumes continues, and under the 
conditions of hyperinflation, the tariff level lags behind the 
growth rates of expenditures for transport. This leads to a drop 
in the profitability of the roads and displacement of the 
emphases in the criteria for evaluating the efficiency of 
transport production, and makes achievement of the formerly 
outlined goals in social development of the roads become highly 
problematical. 
  Consequently, a correction must be made in the roads' 
economic policy and their social programs, with orientation 
toward the actual trends and prospects for development of market 
relations, both outside the sector (in the national economy as a 
whole) and within it (between individual roads and enterprises 
within the framework of the roads). The urgent need for the 
Russian Ministry of Railways to solve this problem is caused by 
two special features of the present day. The first one is the 
lack of a new mechanism for state regulation of the development 
and work of the sector on the macro-level (the old mechanism was 
almost completely destroyed, and the new one has not yet 
acquired precise outlines). The second feature is the 
uncertainty of the periods, paths, forms and methods of 
including the railroads in genuine market relations on the 
micro-level, by virtue of their production and social 
specificities (these relations are of a quasi-market nature 
right now). 
  In the new program, therefore, the question should, first 
and 
foremost, be that of working out the basic principles of the 
economic policy of the Russian Federation MPS as a basic sector 
of our national economy. Guided by this policy as a firm 
foundation, we can count on solving the social problems, bearing 
in mind the fact that railroad transport under our Russian 
conditions was and remains a sort of center of gravitation for 
the entire national economy. 
  The sector's economic policy should meet a number of 
requirements. They include: multi-dimensionality; striving for 
the quite distant future, giving as full consideration as 
possible to the special features of the present moment and the 
transitional period; balance. The last term means considering 
the sector as simultaneously the subject and the object of 
economic and social planning, implemented in a force field of 
action of state and market interests. 
  As the subject of the economic and social policy, Russian 
Federation railroad transport must first of all formulate its 
own main goals, tasks and preferences (priorities). They should 
be directed, on the one hand, toward satisfying the needs of 
other sectors of the national economy (including the state and 
private sector) and the population, and on the other hand -- 
toward providing for its own economic and social needs (economic 
growth and social guarantees). 
  As the object of the state's economic and social policy, 
railroad transport is interested in a scientifically 
substantiated and carefully worked out legislative base. The 
following should be regulated in it: the legal status of 
railroad transport, meaning its central position in Russia's 
transport infrastructure; financial relations with federal, 
republic and local budgets (price policy, taxes, benefits). 
  There are a number of other important questions, which are 
to 
be answered in the course of substantiating the economic and 
social policy of railroad transport. These questions include: 
combining different forms of ownership; the preference for 
freight transport (in its sectorial, territorial and other 
aspects); whether it is advisable (under what conditions is it 
advisable) to retain or expand tariff benefits for passenger 
transport on trains in long-distance and suburban service; who 
will cover the roads' losses from suburban transport, and how; 
will the state orders for transport and the conditions for 
performing this transport be maintained; on what principles will 
the sector's investment policy be based; the share participation 
of enterprises of the state, municipal and private sectors in 
new construction, expansion and re-equipment of the railroads, 
including electrification; the conditions for drawing in foreign 
capital (including the republics of the near abroad); the 
measures for social protection of railroad transport workers; 
whether it is advisable to maintain its own social structure 
(health care, national education and housing construction) and 
what will be the sources of its financing; whether the principle 
of extraterritoriality of the railroads will be preserved 
(boundaries of the effect of this principle). 
  Because of the transition to the market and the extreme 
disorder of the country's economy, the railroads may run into 
mass unemployment and the need for biological life support of 
the railroad workers and members of their families. The 
probability of this outcome remains high, and the number of 
urgent social problems is doubling: wages and housing in 1991; 
wages, housing, finding jobs and food supply -- in 1993. 
  Deserving special attention, therefore are: working out 
measures to support (increase) the profitability of 
unprofitable, but socially significant enterprises and types of 
activity; choosing the most effective forms and methods of 
diversifying the production capacities of railroad transport 
enterprises and organizations. These two practical tasks, which 
are vitally important, need thorough scientific substantiation. 
<H5>  The Scientific-Methodological Basis of the Program </H5>
  Laying the foundations of a national policy in the sphere of 
transport is a problem of tremendous practical importance, and 
such problems have no abstract, theoretical solution. 
Nevertheless, the construction of the program itself should be 
prefaced by basic scientific premises and certain theoretical 
elaborations. 
  In speaking of the theoretical support of the "Transport 
Rossii" Program, it should be acknowledged that in solving this 
problem we are still far from being in a position which could be 
considered fully satisfactory. The following convince us of 
this: the lack of a serious theoretical basis in studying 
Russian transport as an organized system on a state level; the 
lack of a unified information base, based on research carried 
out, unified initial prerequisites and unified methodology. As a 
result, there is today no complete scientific way out that is 
useful for the practical work of state planning. 
  Research on the program is carried out by scientific 
subdivisions in parallel and, essentially, independently of each 
other, which deprives the scientific product of any serious 
practical value. Substantiation of promising solutions to the 
problems of the transport network using models is produced "in 
fragments" for individual forms of transport. In this case, 
neither the special features of a market economy nor changes in 
the technology of the transport process, the organization of 
freight flows or the placement of transport junctions are 
properly taken into account. The positions of researchers on a 
certain specific question of the overall problem are determined 
primarily by experience accumulated in the past and by personal 
taste and inclinations. As before, a great deal is subordinated 
to low-content manipulation with models, formulas and 
algorithms, which often quite seriously, but not always 
noticeably, falsify transport reality, and substitute imaginary 
difficulties for real ones. 
  The history of science attests to the fact that a serious 
statement of scientific problems in ordinary language should 
precede their mathematical, formulaic expression. Models and 
model study may deepen our understanding of the nature of 
transport, but they cannot solve the practical problem of 
creating a highly efficient transport system. It is unreasonable 
and impractical to study the details without solving the main 
problems. This is precisely why the "Transport Rossii" Program 
needs a fundamental theoretical basis. The attempt to outline 
the boundaries of the program and to determine the means, 
methods and potentials for its realization is the first and main 
condition for the success of all the studies being made right 
now. They, however, as in the recent past, are closely connected 
with an evaluation of the effectiveness of scientific-technical 
progress in transport. 
  A difficult period of rehabilitation lies ahead, and the 
problem of correctly evaluating effectiveness takes on special 
meaning. We have in mind, of course, not the content of various 
methods of selecting investment decisions, although they too 
must be improved. It is a above all a question of a systematic 
approach to evaluating the technical, technological and 
administrative innovations being outlined. 
  The practice of planning the development and technological 
use of the achievements of science and technology through 
developing target-scientific-technical programs makes sense. The 
programs are often formed, however, outside their natural 
interrelation. For example, important target-oriented 
scientific-technical programs for increasing the railcar load, 
the weight of the train, the speed, labor productivity, etc. 
were in their time worked out for railroad transport. These 
programs were not mutually intercoordinated, however. This is 
perhaps one of the reasons why they were not fulfilled. 
  Our goal, however, is not to establish culprits, but to seek 
optimal solutions. The point is, that at the time these programs 
were drawn up, there was not a sufficiently reliable method to 
intercoordinate them. Each program and its elaborations was 
aimed at increasing only one, important but partial, indicator. 
It would seem that all the uncoordinated partial elaborations of 
this type could be intercoordinated in a unified comprehensive 
target-oriented program. 
  Two groups of problems must be distinguished in it. The 
first 
group includes building a mechanism relating technical, 
technological and administrative innovations to the indicator 
"productive force of the transport system," through the factors 
(indicators) determining it. The second group is the working out 
of the actual rules for managing the productive force of the 
transport system. 
  Following these rules should make it possible to serve the 
freight owner well, to earn the maximum income possible, to save 
on expenses, to raise the profitability and mass of the profit, 
to pay taxes, settle with creditors and introduce an insurance 
contribution. At the same time, it will become possible to 
substantially raise wages and increase the well-being of one's 
workers (and consequently, social protection of children, 
pensioners and the disabled) and to allot funds for creative 
purposes in the sphere of culture and education. The conditions 
will also be created to provide material, labor and financial 
resources to up-date the productive forces of the transport 
system according to the demand for transport. 
  Let us dwell on the first group of problems, since the 
second 
is an independent subject, meriting special consideration. 
  At present, the transport resource and the productive force 
of transport systems are among the scarcest resources in 
society. Meanwhile, to eliminate the shortage of the productive 
force of transport, particularly railroad, takes not only a 
large amount of funds, but also a long time. Therefore, we must 
take the maximum increase in productive forces per ruble of 
expenditures as the criterion for choosing the solutions to 
modernize and develop railroad systems for the future, at least 
up to the year 2000. 
  The connection between the productive forces of the 
production-economic systems and the technical, technological and 
administrative innovations used to up-date them is obvious. In 
fact, the productive force of the railroad transport system is 
equal to the product of the capacity of one productive cycle of 
it multiplied by the number of cycles, for example, per year. In 
turn, the capacity of the cycle is the function of the average 
freight capacity of a railcar, the coefficient of its use and 
the normative need for a working fleet of railcars. 
  It is obvious that the elements of scientific-technical 
progress are in some cases separate, and in other cases -- 
combined, related to the factors of the capacity of the 
transport cycle. For example, new railcars are related to the 
indicator of freight capacity and the coefficient of its use. 
Technological innovations, let us say, methods of loading and 
transporting, are connected with the average coefficient of use 
of the freight capacity and the working fleet. Administrative 
innovations, such as complete regulation of loading, 
organization of train work, etc., are related to the static 
load, i.e., to the product of the freight capacity multiplied by 
the coefficient of its use. The quality of regulating the 
railcar fleet on the network and roads affects the normative 
need for it, etc. 
  Under specific operating conditions, all the relations of 
technical, technological and administrative innovations to the 
factors of the capacity of the cycle can be expressed 
quantitatively. The same thing applies to the degree of 
influence that the quality of the innovations and scales of 
their production use has on the increase in the productive force 
of the system. 
  The relations between scientific-technical progress and its 
production cycle are also viewed as fully determined, and the 
measure of these relations can also be expressed numerically. 
Scientific-technical achievements resulting from applied science 
(and through it, as the result of basic sciences) with their 
technological application directly affect, in some way or other, 
the operations of the production cycle. This is a natural 
result, or else the creative function of applied science is 
lost. To some extent this influence will lead to shortening the 
production cycle. In this case, the number of cycles of the 
system increases beyond the period estimated and, consequently, 
its productive force increases. 
  If one has railroad transport in mind, then the 
scientific-technical programs developed by the MPS, "Nagruzka" 
[Load], "Skorost" [Speed], "Ves" [Weight] and "Proizvoditelnost 
truda" [Labor Productivity], provide for, as was noted, a 
numerical increase in individual indicators. These indicators 
are used in determining the productive force of the system. 
Consequently, all these programs can be intercoordinated and 
reduced to a unified program to up-date the productive forces of 
the railroad transport system. This is essentially important, 
since a unit of increased productive force of the system 
requires different expenditures to maintain and use -- depending 
on through which factors (load, weight, speed, etc.) this 
increase was achieved. If the price of a unit of productive 
force on the transport market is the same, then to obtain the 
greatest profit, the productive force must be increased through 
factors requiring lower expenditures. 
  In determining the efficiency of transport system 
modernization, its price is traditionally measured as the 
adjusted expenditures calculated by means of a normative 
coefficient of efficiency. In our opinion, it is advisable to 
choose solutions in the sphere of production-economic systems 
being guided by the sum of the expenditures of fixed and working 
capital during the period of time within the limits of the 
period of obsolescence of the fixed production capital -- the 
life cycle of the system. The result of its functioning during 
that same period is measured by the total value of the 
productive force. For a number of practical tasks, one should 
take into consideration the intensiveness with which the total 
productive force is used during the period, which is also 
determined by the period of obsolescence. 
  The theory of choosing investment decisions for railroad 
transport is in many cases based on the fact that there are many 
century-old structures on the roads, and the fixed part of the 
fixed production capital (locomotives and railcars) can be used 
for dozens of years. This has influenced the views of scientists 
and practical workers in different ways, especially in the 
management sphere. After the railroads were converted to new 
forms of traction, those of them that had resources at their 
disposal interpreted the theory quite specifically. The choice 
of decisions on minimum transport expenses and a long physical 
service life for the capital was often understood as the need to 
reduce the share of expenditures to develop transport. We know 
the result -- the deplorable state of the railcar fleet and 
locomotive service, tracks and man-made structures and the 
critical situation with respect to automating labor-intensive 
processes and developing the social sphere. Such basic tasks of 
scientific-technical progress as accelerating the fixed 
production capital turnover were left unrealized. 
  Meanwhile, in world practice the length of time for fixed 
capital turnover is now, on the average, 7-10 years and less. 
The periods for introducing scientific-technical innovations is 
being sharply reduced. A number of data, characteristic in this 
respect, were presented in the collection of international 
predictions by H. Weinhauser and E. Schmakk, "The World in the 
Year 2000." More discoveries and inventions appeared in every 
decade of the second half of the 20th century than in the 
preceding 2000 years. At the same time, in every subsequent 
decade, the number of inventions and discoveries doubled as 
compared with the preceding one. In the process of space 
research, in one decade 12,000-15,000 new products and 
technology, which had not existed before, were developed. 
Structural changes also took place in the economy which were 
related to scientific-technical progress in general, but affect 
the sphere of transport. 
  It is generally known that, in many directions of 
scientific-technical progress, Soviet science, technology, 
equipment, education, the vocational skill of the workers, and 
culture held a worthy position in the world. The 
political-economic crisis in Russia and the countries of Eastern 
Europe has as its prologue the deterioration in the general 
world situation. The predictions of H. Weinhauser and E. 
Schmakk, apparently, were not destined to come true. 
  The future of world economics and the development of 
transport depend on the conditions under which the people of 
Russia and other sovereign states on the vast expanses of the 
Eurasian area will live. Seven years of "perestroyka" once again 
confirmed the very close interrelation between transport and the 
state of the country's political, economic and social daily life. 
  According to students of the ancient "universal cosmic law," 
the transformation of a condition of disorder into an ordered 
condition also ensures the preservation of the basic conditions 
for the existence of the universe, man and morality. On the 
basis of this law, the condition of our country today should be 
evaluated as clearly one of disorder. We have not followed the 
advice of N.M. Karamzin, who wanted "...to unite what had been 
committed to us for centuries into a system, made serene through 
a harmonious rapprochement of parts." Unfortunately, in the 
years of perestroyka, no harmonious rapprochement of parts has 
been taking place in "what was committed to us for centuries" 
(read, in our past, powerful Motherland). 
  It would be appropriate here to remember that each 
politician, director, scientist, business executive, each of us 
is powerful not as a critic of the shortcomings of his 
predecessor, but through his deeds, creative work and 
housebuilding. We all answer for this before the people and our 
own conscience. 
  Railroads and transport are most closely involved in all 
this. For the economic market area, i.e., for a territory within 
the limits of which commodity exchange is carried out between 
market constituents, there is no stronger organizing material 
basis other than good railways. The influence here, of course, 
is mutual. On the one hand, transport for the territory is a 
necessary condition for forming the market area. On the other 
hand, the potential market area is an incentive to create new 
transport systems, in particular, for new railroad construction. 
A good example of this is the building of a railroad in the 
western part of the "Great Silk Route," re-establishing the 
ancient market area which includes China, India, Kazakhstan, 
Central Asia, Iran and Turkey. Transport appears here as a 
market participant with full rights and as a major product 
consumer. We also know how, in the last third of the past 
century, intensive railroad construction actively contributed to 
Russia's economic development. 
  The transition from an "area" to the Motherland is thorny 
and 
long. In this profession, both the roads and the means of 
movement can be most varied. In any case, however, it must be 
borne in mind that the power methods of the social structure 
have already completely exhausted themselves. For us, the 
historically proven road to human well-being entails steady 
movement to an organized, free and just society. This will be 
the new, well-ordered state of relations between different forms 
of ownership, interests and human duty. It will embody our 
values (scientific knowledge, faith, social protection, culture, 
morality), the achievements of West and East (particularly in 
the matter of developing and using the productive forces), and 
also the values of world religions and faiths in the sphere of 
charity and mores. 
  On the path from the present "area" to a well-ordered 
Motherland, few people take with them (in the words of Pitirim 
Sorokin) knowledge, labor and charity. We need an idea which 
would unite the peoples. An idea which possesses this ability, 
in our opinion -- is the idea of re-establishing our statehood. 
A historic mission has again befallen Russia -- to unite, on a 
new basis, the parts of a unified whole, scattered by 
centrifugal forces, to create a powerful economic field of 
centripetal forces. This is difficult, it takes a long time, but 
is historically inevitable. The states surrounding Russia (and 
not only they) will themselves, voluntarily, strive toward a 
union with Russia --developed and rich, free and 
multi-ethnically reborn. It has been that way in history more 
than once, and not just with the peoples inhabiting the 
territory of the former USSR. 
  History would like to arrange things so that it falls to 
Russia's lot to stand at the head of the educated world, and not 
only in the sphere of science and art, but also to head the 
rescue of today's civilization from fascism. Our state, its army 
and people accepted the tribute of the respect of progressive 
humanity. It is remarkable in this case that the grateful 
epistles were signed not only by friends and like-thinkers, but 
also by staunch anti-communists -- Franklin Roosevelt, Winston 
Churchill and Charles de Gaulle. This is also part of our 
history, part of the people's permanent memory, and a very 
essential part for an understanding of the future. The future, 
to a major extent, will be such that striving to know the Truth 
-- the meaning of life -- to evaluate the full-valued daily life 
of man and society in a new system of coordinates will 
increasingly become the main all-deciding factor: "Without a 
firm conception of self, and of what he is to live for, man 
cannot consent to live, and would rather destroy himself than 
remain living on earth, even if all around him be bread" (F.M. 
Dostoyevskiy). 
  "Zheleznodorozhnyy transport", 1993 

