Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Liu Guoguang (0491 0748 0342), From the Chinese Academy </F>
of Social Sciences, edited by Lin Li (2651 4539): "Study Mao 
Zedong Economic Thought, Open Up a Road Which Will Make the 
Country Strong and the People Prosperous"-- first paragraph is 
author's note] 
  [Text] In the course of writing this article, I received 
the assistance of Comrades Mao Liyan [3029 4539 6056], Xiang 
Qiyuan [7309 0796 3293], Yu Zuyao [0060 4371 1031], Fang Liubi 
[2455 3966 4310], and I offer them my sincere thanks. 
  Mao Zedong economic thought is an important component part 
of 
Mao Zedong Thought. It is a theory founded on the basic 
principles of Marxism-Leninism which Mao Zedong used to examine 
and understand the nature of the Chinese social economy and 
through the grasping of which a gradual revolutionary 
transformation of the Chinese economy was effected. It is a 
theory which determined the economic form which was adopted 
after the victory in China's revolution and the way in which 
this was to be transformed into a higher form. It was a theory 
by which China was to shake off poverty and backwardness and 
move towards industrialization and modernization. This theory 
was produced during the revolutionary struggle, developed 
through a process of continual expansion, and is the 
crystallization of the collective wisdom of Communist Party 
members represented by Mao Zedong. 
<H6>  I. </H6>
  The revolutionary movement under the guidance of Marxism was 
for liberating and developing the social productive forces and 
promoting the progress society. Thus, if there was a desire to 
promote change and development in Chinese society, it was first 
necessary to clearly understand the nature and characteristics 
of Chinese society. As Mao Zedong said: "Clearly understanding 
China's national situation is the basic foundation for clearly 
understanding all problems of the revolution." (Footnote 1) 
("The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party" from 
Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol 2, p 633) If one 
wanted to scientifically understand the nature of society and 
the national situation of China, it was necessary to uphold the 
only correct cognitive avenue of combining the basic principles 
of Marxism-Leninism with the realities of China. 
  Mao Zedong creatively used the stand, viewpoint, and methods 
of Marxism to examine and understand the China's society and 
economy. At the end of 1939 and the beginning of 1940, he summed 
up the results of research in the 1920's and 1930's on the 
question of the nature of society in our country. In "The 
Chinese Revolution and the Chinese Communist Party," "On New 
Democracy," and other such works, he provided a complete and 
scientific understanding and representation of the nature of the 
modern Chinese socioeconomic pattern. 
  Mao Zedong pointed out that the historical development of 
China's society was also governed by the common laws of 
socio-historical development and that the disintegration of 
China's feudal society was the inevitable result of 
socio-historical development. "The development of the commodity 
economy within China's feudal society already carried within it 
the sprouts of capitalism. Even without the influence of 
foreign capitalism, China would still have slowly developed into 
a capitalist society." (Footnote 2) (Ibid, p 626) 
  The invasion of foreign capital played a role in breaking 
down China's feudal economy and promoting the development of 
capitalism. It created various objective conditions and 
possibilities for the emergence and development of Chinese 
capitalism by breaking down the natural economy base and 
developing an urban commodity economy. Thereby, the sprouts of 
capitalist production relations which had long been carried 
within the feudal society saw a certain development. On the 
other hand, the invasion of foreign capital also obstructed the 
development of Chinese capitalism. The imperialists, for their 
own interests, linked up with China's feudal forces and 
constricted China's national capitalism, so that it could not 
develop and expand normally. Thus, it was unable to become the 
main form in China's social economy and China did not become a 
capitalist society. In this way, modern China gradually evolved 
into a semi-feudal society where a weak capitalist economy and a 
major semi-feudal economy coexisted. 
  Mao Zedong also pointed out that the invasion of foreign 
capitalism not only changed China into a semi-feudal society but 
also changed an independent China into a semi-colonial country. 
"The aim of the imperialist powers in invading China was 
certainly not to change feudal China into a capitalist China. 
The aim of the imperialists was the opposite of this. They 
wanted to change China into their semi-colonies and colonies. 
(Footnote 3) (Ibid, p 628) 
  The 100 years of history following the Opium War was a 
bloodthirsty one whereby the imperialists used all sorts of 
measures to change a feudal China into a semi-feudal, 
semi-colonial society. 
  The nature and situation of China's society determined that 
the main contradictions was that between feudalism and the 
masses of people and also determined that the main targets of 
the Chinese revolution were imperialism, bureaucratism, and 
feudalism. On the basis of a scientific analysis of the nature 
of China's society and a knowledge of the processes of history 
worldwide, Mao Zedong accurately grasped the basic historical 
process of the new-democratic revolution led by the Chinese 
proletariat and revealed the most basic patterns of China's 
revolution. He pointed out that as the task of the revolution 
in semi-colonial, semi-feudal China was to oppose imperialism 
and feudalism, this determined that the historical course of the 
Chinese revolution must be divided into two steps. The first 
step was the democratic revolution and the second step was the 
socialist revolution. These were two revolutionary processes of 
different natures. The first step was for overthrowing the 
imperialist powers and the rule of feudalism in China, and 
changing the colonial, semi-colonial, and semi-feudal forms, so 
that they would constitute an independent, democratic society. 
The second step would be, in accordance with the principles of 
scientific socialism and the laws of social development, to push 
the revolution forward and establish a socialist society, 
thereby truly realizing the dream of a strong country and a 
prosperous people, a dream which all persons with lofty ideals 
and all Chinese people have had for the last century. 
  The aim of the new-democratic revolution which was led by 
the 
Communist Party was to liberate the productive forces. Thus, 
when deciding on the stages and targets of this revolution, it 
was done strictly in accordance with the demands of developing 
the productive forces. Mao Zedong pointed out: "The policies 
and practices of all political parties in China, and whether or 
not their effects on the people are good or bad and great or 
small, can, in the end, be decided by observing whether or not 
they are helpful, and how helpful they are, to developing the 
productive forces of the Chinese people and observing whether 
they fetter the productive forces or liberate them." (Footnote 
4) ("On Coalition Government" from the Selected Works of 
Mao Zedong, Vol 3, p 1079) The economic program for the 
new-democratic revolution and the economic construct for the 
new-democratic society put forward by Mao Zedong were both 
formulated in accordance with this basic principle of Marxism. 
  The economic program of the new-democratic revolution was 
the 
basic program for carrying out revolutionary transformation of 
the economic system of the semi-feudal, semi-colonial society. 
The formation of this program involved a long process of 
exploration and deliberation. After the new-democratic economic 
thinking sprouted during the land reform period, through arduous 
exploration and the accumulation of positive and negative 
ideological materials, by the time of the Anti-Japanese war 
period, a basic system had been formed. During the war of 
liberation this was further enriched and it gradually moved 
toward maturity. The putting forward of the three major 
economic programs was the centralized manifestation of Mao 
Zedong's new-democratic economic thinking which had moved toward 
maturity through a long period of development. In "The Present 
Situation and Our Tasks," which he wrote in December 1947, Mao 
Zedong pointed out: "Confiscating the land of the feudal 
classes and returning it to the peasants, confiscating the 
monopoly capital headed by Jiang Jieshi, Song Ziwen, Kong 
Xiangxi, and Chen Lifu, and returning it to new-democratic state 
ownership, and protecting national industry and commerce are the 
three major economic programs of the new democratic revolution." 
(Footnote 5) ("The Present Situation and Our Tasks" in 
Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol 4, p 1253) The 
three major economic programs from the high level of overall 
policy, overcame the "Leftist" and rightist tendencies, 
especially the continually appearing "Leftist" tendencies, which 
had existed for a long time. Thereby, they laid a firm base for 
victory in the new democratic revolution 
  The basic economic idea and basic economic policy of 
confiscating the land of the feudal landlord class and returning 
it to the peasants had long been put forward and realized by our 
party and by Comrade Mao Zedong. The changing of the feudal 
land system was one of the basic tasks of the new-democratic 
revolution and was a change of huge historical significance for 
the basic structure of Chinese society. This change in the 
basic economic structure not only meant that the reactionary old 
politics and the corrupt old culture lost their basis for 
existence but also opened a road for the new politics, new 
economics, and new culture of the new democracy. This created 
the necessary preconditions for China to make the changeover 
from a long-stagnant agricultural country to an industrial one. 
  The semi-colonial and semi-feudal nature of China's society 
resulted in the emergence, existence, and activities of 
capitalism becoming extremely complex. This complexity 
determined that it was extremely difficult to understand and 
handle this question. In the three economic programs, Mao 
Zedong put stress on analyzing the different natures of 
bureaucratic capital and national capital and the different 
roles they played in the development of the productive forces. 
On this basis, he formulated different policies in respect of 
bureaucratic capital and national capital. Bureaucratic capital 
was monopoly-nature, compradore, feudal, state-monopoly capital. 
It was also capital which was joined with autocratic political 
power and which engaged in supra-economic exploitative plunder. 
This characteristic determined that it played a seriously 
obstructive role in respect of developing the social productive 
forces. The program involving the confiscation of bureaucratic 
capital and returning it to the the new-democracy state was put 
forward in accordance with the nature and historical role of 
bureaucratic capital and on the basis of the principle of 
"exploiting the exploiters." It was an extremely important 
program for eradicating, in an overall way, corrupt relations of 
production, to switch the direction of development of the entire 
national economy. As its targets had multiple links in the 
semi-feudal, semi-colonial economy and had special natures, this 
program had a dual democratic-revolution and 
socialist-revolution nature. 

    The program to safeguard national industry and commerce was 
a 
centralized summary of the CPC's understanding of the position 
and role of national capital in a semi-colonial, semi-feudal 
society and in the process of transformation to the future 
society. National capitalism could still play a full and 
positive historical role in the development of the Chinese 
economy. Mao Zedong pointed out that because of the 
backwardness of the Chinese economy, "even with the victory of 
the revolution throughout the country, for a long time, it will 
still be necessary to allow it to exist and, in accordance with 
the division of work of the national economy, all such industry 
and commerce which is beneficial to the national economy will 
need to see development." (Footnote 6) (Ibid pp 1254-55) 
  Another important component part of Mao Zedong's 
new-democratic economic thought was his ideas on the 
new-democratic economic structure. The new-democratic economic 
structure was a result of engaging in a new style of democratic 
revolution in respect of the semi-feudal, semi-colonial 
socioeconomic forms. Mao Zedong pointed out that the 
characteristic of the new-democratic economic structure was that 
diverse economic components coexisted. He believed that during 
the new-democratic revolution stage, and after the new- 
democratic revolution achieved victory, the social economy would 
be constituted through three components -- state operations, 
private operations, and cooperative operations. The state 
operations would, under the leadership of the proletariat, be 
"jointly owned by the ordinary people" and controlled and 
operated by the new-democratic state. This type of economy was, 
in its nature, already socialist. The cooperative operations 
also already had socialist elements. The private operations 
included both private capitalist operations and individual 
operations by the people. In addition, there was also state 
capitalism whereby the state cooperated with private enterprise. 
In this way, the five components of state-run economy, 
cooperative economy, private capitalist economy, individual 
labor economy, and state capitalism formed the new-democracy 
economic pattern. The abovementioned general concept of the 
new-democratic economy put forward by Mao Zedong had already 
been put into effect in the revolutionary base areas and very 
great achievements had been realized. The full development of 
the new-democratic economic theory in practice formed the base 
area economic construction thought which was rich in contents. 
The base areas' new-democratic economic construction thought 
and practice made a major contribution to victory in the 
revolutionary war, providing valuable experiences and lessons 
for economic construction after victory in the revolution. Mao 
Zedong pointed out that the nature of the new-democratic economy 
was noncapitalist and that it was a "transitional stage" in the 
switch from semi-colonial, semi-feudal society to socialist 
society. (Footnote 7) ("The Chinese Revolution and the Chinese 
Communist Party" from the Selected Works of Mao 
Zedong, Vol 2, p 647) 
<H6>  II. </H6>
  After victory in the democratic revolution, how would the 
semi-colonial, semi-feudal society make the transition to 
socialism? Proposing a transitional new-democracy society as an 
intermediate step in the switch towards socialism was an idea 
put forward by Mao Zedong prior to victory in the new-democracy 
revolution and this is where the special nature and creativity 
of this theory of revolutionary change lay. Back in March 1940, 
Mao Zedong had pointed out that new-democracy would be temporary 
and transitional. It was a "step ladder" and that later we would 
proceed "upstairs." As to the conditions determining and 
controlling this change, Mao Zedong also provided clear answers 
on the theoretical level at a very early date. In December 
1935, he pointed out: "Before we have reached a stage where all 
due political and economic conditions are available, and before 
we have reached a time where the changes will be advantageous 
and not disadvantageous to the vast majority of people 
throughout the country, we should not lightly discuss 
transformation." (Footnote 8) ("On the Policies for Opposing 
Japanese Imperialism" from the Selected Works of Mao 
Zedong, Vol 1, p 160) In March 1949, in his report to the 
Second Session of the the Seventh CPC Central Committee, Mao 
Zedong noted that in the economy of Old China, modern industry 
constituted only about 10 percent of the total, while 
agriculture and handicraft industries constituted about 90 
percent of the total. He pointed out that this was the 
manifestation on the economic level of China's semi-colonial, 
semi-feudal society and that this would be the basic point of 
departure in handling all issues during the Chinese revolution 
and for quite a long time after victory in the revolution. 
Proceeding from this point, it was believed that after the 
establishment of our new state, we should establish a 
new-democratic economic form. Mao Zedong pointed out: As 
China's economic legacy is backward, for quite a long time after 
victory in the new- democracy revolution, it will be necessary 
to carefully, gradually, and positively guide the dispersed 
individual agricultural economy and handicraft industry economy 
to develop in the direction of modernization and 
collectivization. Through putting efforts into developing the 
productive forces, we will have to change China gradually from 
an agricultural country into an industrial country and create a 
strong economic base. Otherwise, it will be impossible to 
develop from a new-democratic society into the future socialist 
society. Although at this time we cannot say that our 
understanding and grasp of the economic conditions necessary to 
effect this change are very specific, we do already have a quite 
real and concrete understanding and grasp of the actual contents 
and basic standards for realizing industrialization. This 
understanding and grasp are firmly based on the process of the 
development of the productive forces. Mao Zedong and other 
party leaders estimated that this would require at least 10 and 
perhaps 15 to 20 years to realize. 
  By 1952, the national economy had recovered and surpassed 
the predicted targets but some new contradictions in economic 
life had appeared and accumulated. These contradictions were 
mainly manifested in the fact that, after the land reforms, the 
dispersed and backward individual operations by farmers were 
having difficulty satisfying the continually increasing demand 
for grain and agricultural product raw materials by cities and 
industries. Also, the appearance of polarization between the 
rich and the poor forced CPC members to think about the problem 
of which direction the individual economy was developing. In 
the cities, the struggle between the working class, the 
state-owned economy and the bourgeoisie over whether or not to 
restrict had gone through several rounds. The struggle had not 
been resolved and at that time was seeing fluctuations which 
greatly affected the the state's economic life. The large-scale 
development of industrialization led to an exacerbation of these 
contradictions, meaning that the party and Mao Zedong had no 
option but to consider speeding up and expanding the mutual-aid 
and cooperation movement in the rural areas and the measures to 
restrict capitalism in the cities. This inevitably pushed the 
task of socialist transformation onto the agenda. It was with 
this background that the party's general line for the period of 
transition was put forward. This was: For quite a long period, 
the socialist industrialization of the country will be gradually 
realized and there will be gradual implementation of the state's 
socialist transformation of agriculture, the handicraft industry 
and capitalist industry and commerce. This general line clearly 
put forward to the people of the whole country the great task of 
building socialism. The party central committee held that 
clearly setting down for the whole party and the people of the 
whole country the task of gradually achieving the transition to 
socialism and predicting that this would be completed in 15 
years or longer, was appropriate and necessary. The original 
plan was, after establishing the state, to continue to engage in 
new democracy for a time and only after some years to consider 
the question of making the changeover to socialism. Putting 
forward the general line meant that the original theoretical 
idea saw a certain degree of change and the schedule was brought 
forward. The stage of new-democratic construction which was 
referred to originally, at the same time, also became the period 
for making the transition from new democracy to socialism. 
  The party's general line for the period of transition was an 
organic unity involving the development of the productive forces 
and the changing of production relations. It was a line by 
which socialist construction and socialist transformation saw 
concurrent progress. Gradually realizing socialist 
industrialization of the country and developing the productive 
forces was the main part. Engaging in socialist transformation 
of agriculture, handicraft industries, and capitalist industry 
and commerce constituted the change of the production relations. 
These two wings were for the task of serving industrialization. 
At that time it was estimated that completing this task would 
require three five-year plans, or 15 years. A further 
three-year recovery period totaled 18 years. As compared with 
the originally envisaged 15 or 20 years for new-democratic 
construction, and further implementation and completion of 
socialist transformation, while the specific steps and methods 
saw some change, the amount of time that it was estimated the 
task would take was about the same. 
  The socialist transformation of China's agriculture was a 
huge and extremely wide-ranging and deep-going socialist reform 
by which, in an economically and culturally backward large 
eastern country, an individual-ownership system involving 500 
million peasants, was changed into a collective-ownership system 
involving cooperative members. After the peasants, led by Mao 
Zedong and the CPC, eliminated the system of feudal 
exploitation, they were quickly guided along the road of 
mutual-aid and cooperation. This proceeded from the aim of 
combining agricultural development with the industrialization of 
the state, so that peasants engaged in small-scale production 
would gradually become large-scale producers and, thereby, they 
would move from poverty towards prosperity. It also proceeded 
from the idea that, by guarding against polarization in the 
rural areas and consolidating the worker-peasant alliance, it 
would be more effective in struggling against private capitalism 
and, therefore, in eliminating systems of exploitation in urban 
and rural areas. This point of departure, developing the 
productive forces and establishing a public-ownership system, 
reflected the direction of historical progress and the demands 
of the masses. The strategic deployment relative to 
agricultural cooperativization was established under this 
guiding idea. 
  In the process of implementing socialist transformation of 
agriculture, Mao Zedong followed the basic principles of Marxism 
in respect of individual peasants; upheld the channels of 
education, demonstration, and social assistance; followed the 
principle of voluntary participation; and created a 
Chinese-style road to agricultural cooperativization. On the 
basis of concretely analyzing and scientifically grasping the 
nature and trends of the small-scale agricultural economy and 
the peasants, the peasants were led in a gradual transition from 
mutual-help organizations, to primary cooperatives, and then to 
high-level cooperatives and achievements were realized in this. 
The transitional form constituted by the primary-level 
cooperatives in particular, was marked by Chinese 
characteristics. They were characterized by the division of 
land into shares and the joint operation of the land. This was a 
transitional form which drew the peasants, voluntarily and 
without coercion, into moving towards socialism. However, the 
abovementioned correct principles and methods of gradual 
progress were not followed from beginning to end. After the 
summer of 1955, and especially following the high tide of the 
socialist transformation of agriculture, the policy of gradual 
progress was not upheld. Rather, there was over-impatience for 
results and thereby "Leftist" mistakes appeared. 
  The socialist transformation of handicraft industries also 
involved a three-tier division from low level to high level 
forms. That is, there were handicraft industry production 
groups, handicraft industry supply and marketing cooperatives, 
and handicraft industry production cooperatives. Thereby, there 
was gradual progress along the road of cooperativization. Like 
the trend which occurred in the process of agricultural 
cooperativization, there was also initially healthy and stable 
progress in the cooperativization of the handicraft industry but 
later, some problems appeared. This was mainly due to there 
being excessive centralization and too large a scale, with no 
attention being given to the characteristics of handicraft labor 
whereby it is dispersed, flexible, and highly adaptive. 
  After the proletariat wrested political power, the method of 
peaceful "buying out" was adopted in respect of carrying out 
socialist transformation of capitalist industry and commerce. 
This was quite an ideal form which did not require the payment 
of a high price and which had been put forward by Marx, Engels, 
and Lenin. As the Russian bourgeoisie did not accept this 
policy, Lenin's plan to buy them out could not be realized. 
However, Mao Zedong and the CPC opened a road of socialist 
transformation with Chinese characteristics. This involved 
peaceful transformation of the exploitative system of the 
bourgeoisie under the conditions of an alliance between the 
proletariat and the national bourgeoisie. Our party has always 
adopted distinct policies in respect of our country's national 
bourgeoisie. After victory in the democratic revolution, the 
national bourgeoisie still had the dual character of exploiting 
the working class while safeguarding the constitution of the 
socialist state and willingly accepting socialist 
transformation. In a situation where the people's democratic 
regime and the state-run economy were becoming increasingly 
strong, a powerful alliance between the working class and the 
broad masses of people had been established. Thus, the peaceful 
transformation of capitalist industry and commerce was both 
necessary and possible. 
  The party's general line for the period of transition 
clearly 
put forward the policies of using, restricting, and transforming 
capitalist industry and commerce. It also clearly adopted, as 
the necessary avenue for transformation of capitalist industry 
and commerce, various types of state capitalism, ranging from 
low to high levels and including the purchase of products, 
placing orders for processing, unified purchase and guaranteed 
sales, and joint public-private operations with individual 
enterprises and whole industries. By the end of 1956, the 
socialist transformation of capitalist industry and commerce had 
been basically completed. In this process, there were 
deficiencies and these were mainly manifested in the fact that 
there was over-impatience in the requirements and that the speed 
of transformation was too swift. There was excessive stress 
placed on centralization and inappropriate "transformation and 
merger." A large number of small merchants and small handicraft 
industry operators were considered to be "bourgeoisie industry 
and commerce operators" and were drawn into public-private joint 
operations. This confused the distinction between the 
exploiters and the laborers. 
  When we look back at the course of development during the 
early period after the establishment of the PRC, we can 
certainly feel that, in this quite short period of time, there 
were some changes in the theoretical ideas about the timing and 
pace of the switch from new democracy to socialism and that the 
actual progress of the switch and transformation towards 
socialism was greatly accelerated. 

    On the basis of the standard that the goal of revolution is 
the development of the productive forces, the pace of 
transformation of the production relations should be in accord 
with the development of the social productive forces. However, 
the actual course was one whereby the transformation of the 
production relations transcended the development of the 
productive forces. As the originally envisioned new-democratic 
society was a transitional one, there was no essential clash 
between the contents of the general line of the period of 
transition and the idea of a new- democratic society. 
Furthermore, in terms of the general trend, socialist 
transformation was also in accord with the basic trend of 
development of our country's social development. The objective 
environment at that time also encouraged the acceleration of the 
pace of the transformation. However, the "over-anxious demands" 
and the "excessive pace of change" during the socialist 
transformation must be said to have been deviations from the 
productive forces standard. In terms of the theoretical 
origins, Mao Zedong had begun to shift from his previous stance 
when formulating the new-democratic economic theory strictly in 
accordance with the demands of the productive forces and 
upholding the productive forces standard. He did not have an 
accurate grasp of all aspects of the relationship between the 
development of the productive forces and the reform of the 
production relations. This point can only be recognized clearly 
today and this is a basic thread in the process by which we are 
summing up the overall process of the development of this 
theory. Of course, seen overall in such a vast complex country 
as China, the huge historical significance of maintaining 
basically stable economic development while maintaining the 
widespread support of the people and smoothly and creatively 
realizing this huge social reform, is not something which can be 
easily obliterated. 
<H6>  III. </H6>
  The basic completion of the socialist transformation of the 
private ownership of the means of production in 1956 marked the 
establishment of a new social system and the opening of a new 
road of social development. Establishing the socialism for 
which our party had long struggled, and to which the masses had 
long looked forward, was a great event which inspired the whole 
party and heartened the people. However, because of the lack of 
sufficient theoretical and ideological preparation, the new 
theory of socialist construction could only be explored and 
developed through practice by continually summing up experiences 
on the basis of the principle of combining the basic principles 
of Marxism-Leninism with the realities of China. It was 
inevitable that we would have to travel a rough and rugged road 
along which there would be both successes and failures. 
  Mao Zedong, who was very original in terms of theoretical 
creativity, put forward the idea that we had to follow our own 
road in building socialism very early on. Although, at the 
beginning of the construction, the party made the call to "study 
the Soviet nion," Mao Zedong quickly put forward the idea that 
it was necessary to adopt an analytical attitude regarding the 
Soviet Union's experiences and that it was necessary to engage 
in such study in the light of China's situation. In April 1956, 
Mao Zedong gave his speech "On the Ten Major Relationships," in 
which he pointed out that the experiences of foreign countries 
could not be uncritically rejected or copied entirely. "What is 
particularly worthy of note is that in recent times, in the 
Soviet Union, some of the defects and mistakes made in the 
process of building socialism have been revealed. Do you want 
to take the detour that they took?" (Footnote 9) ("On the Ten 
Major Relationships" from Selected Readings From the Works 
of Mao Zedong, last volume, pp 741-742, 720-721) 
  "On the Ten Major Relationships," with the background of 
affirming that it was necessary for China to travel its own road 
in building socialism, engaged in analysis of the basic social 
contradictions and various economic relationships following the 
basic completion of socialist transformation. Although this 
analysis was only an initial and general one, and the logic and 
levels were not always clearly distinguished, its contents were 
rich in dialectical thought. The first three sections of "On 
the Ten Major Relationships" engaged in analysis of industrial 
relationships and regional economic relationships. Actually, 
this was intended to open up a Chinese road of industrialization 
different from that of the Soviet Union. The fourth and fifth 
sections spoke of the the relations among the state, production 
units, and individual laborers and the relationship between the 
center and the localities. This actually touched on the 
question of reforming the excessively centralized economic 
structure. The last five sections looked at the question of 
mobilizing the various positive elements in the political, 
ideological, and cultural lives. Mao Zedong himself held that 
by putting forward the 10 major relationships, he began to find 
his own road of construction suited to China. "In principle, it 
is the same as that of the Soviet Union but its methods are 
different. It has our own set of contents" and it "begins to 
reflect China's objective economic patterns." (Footnote 10) 
(Cited from Bo Yibo's Answers on Various Major Decisions 
and Events, Vol I, p 471) 

    In its own movement, socialist society gradually saw the 
appearance of some new phenomena and new problems. Not only did 
the convening of the 20th CPSU Congress and the eruption of the 
Polish and Hungarian incidents reveal, on the international 
level, many contradictions in socialist countries but also, 
within our own country, there also appeared problems which 
caused people to ponder. Mao Zedong adroitly grasped these 
problems and, through his command of the overall nature and 
contradictions of socialism, he posed and resolved a series of 
important theoretical questions and made a major theoretical 
contribution. In "On Correctly Handling Contradictions Among 
the People," Mao Zedong summed up the historical experiences of 
the international communist movement and, using the law of the 
unity of opposites to analyze socialist society, created a 
theory of concretely handling contradictions among the people. 
The main contents of this theory were: 1) The basic 
contradictions of socialist society and their essential 
characteristics. Mao Zedong affirmed that contradictions were 
still the motive force in the advance of socialism and pointed 
out that the basic contradictions of socialist society were 
still those between the production relations and the productive 
forces and the between the superstructure and the economic base. 
Between these elements exists one aspect which is basically in 
accord and another aspect which is not. He held that through 
the transformation of the socialist system itself, these 
contradictions could be continually resolved. This idea laid a 
basis for subsequent reforms of the economic structure and the 
political structure. 2) Socialist society has two types of 
social contradictions: Those between the enemy and ourselves 
and the contradictions among the people. Correctly handling the 
contradictions among the people is a major element in the 
political life of a socialist state. 3) In handling 
contradictions among the people, it is necessary to use 
democratic methods; in concrete terms, this is the formula 
"unity -- criticism -- unity." On the basis of this general 
method, he also put forward a series of specific principles and 
policies which, in the economic sphere, included implementing 
overall arrangements and plans, concurrently considering the 
interests of the state, the collective and individuals, and 
taking the Chinese road of industrialization. 
  The issue of the Chinese road of industrialization was an 
important question with which Mao Zedong concerned himself and 
thought about early in the democratic revolution period. After 
entering the period of socialist construction, Mao Zedong 
attached even more importance to this question and put forward 
many major ideas which have guiding significance to this day. 
Mao Zedong pointed out: "Our country is a large agricultural 
country and the rural population constitutes over 80 percent of 
our total population. The development of industry must be 
accompanied by the development of agriculture." (Footnote 11) 
("On Correctly Handling the Contradictions mong the People" from 
the Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol 5, p 400) He 
thought that we should not follow the road of the Soviet Union 
and some of the East European countries, whereby there was 
one-sided stress placed on heavy industry. He raised the 
question of the relationship between heavy industry, light 
industry, and agriculture and the question of the Chinese road 
of industrialization. Mao Zedong pointed out: "Heavy industry 
is a focal point of our country's construction." (Footnote 12) 
("On the 10 Major Relationships" from the Selected Works 
of Mao Zedong, Vol 5, p 268) On the other hand, he 
stressed that the development of industry had to be based on 
agriculture. From the angle of the mutual constraints and 
coordinated development of agriculture, light industry, and 
heavy industry, he put forward the idea of achieving development 
in agriculture and light industry in order to truly develop 
heavy industry. He said: "With the development of agriculture 
and light industry, heavy industry will have a market. With 
funds, it will then see faster development. In this way, it 
might appear as if the speed of industrialization will be 
slower. However, it will not be slower and may actually be a 
little faster." (Footnote 13) ("On Correctly Handling 
Contradictions Among the People," from the Selected Works 
of Mao Zedong, Vol 5, p 400) Practice has proved the 
correctness and importance of this idea put forward by Mao 
Zedong and the subsequent economic development has repeatedly 
proved this point. 
  In terms of the economic management structure, Mao Zedong 
held that after the resolution of the ownership system question, 
the major issue will be the management issue, that is, the 
question of how to manage the whole-people ownership enterprises 
and the collective enterprises. This is also a question of the 
relationship between persons under a specific ownership system 
and much can be done on this. On this theoretical basis, Mao 
Zedong put forward the incisive idea that in building socialism, 
it is necessary to handle the relationship between the center 
and the localities well and also the relationship between the 
state and the enterprises. With respect to the relationship 
between the center and the localities, he pointed out: "In a 
country as big as ours, with its huge population and complexity 
of situations, having the enthusiasm of the center and the 
localities is much better than having the enthusiasm of just one 
side. We cannot do as the Soviet Union has done, commanding 
everything from the center and tightly controlling the 
localities so that they do not have even a little flexibility." 
(Footnote 14) ("On the Ten Major Relationships" from the 
Selected Works of Mao Zedong, Vol 5, p 275) 

    Rather, under the precondition of consolidating unified 
leadership by the center, he urged the expansion of local 
powers. On the relationship between the state and enterprises, 
he pointed out: "Centralizing everything at the center or in 
the provincial capitals and not giving factories any power, or 
any leeway for flexibility, or any interests, is I am afraid, 
not the right way of doing things.... Every production unit 
must have some independence in its relationship with the unity, 
as only thus will they be able to see more vigorous 
development." (Footnote 15) (Ibid, p 273) However, the question 
of how, in the end, this nature and these rights and interests 
of the enterprises were to be appropriately established, was not 
fully resolved. Mao Zedong also admitted that our experience 
was insufficient and that there was a need for further research. 
  The question of the commodity economy and the law of value 
in 
a socialist society is one of great theoretical and practical 
importance in terms of the basic operational mechanism of the 
socialist economy. When Mao Zedong was correcting the confusion 
between collective ownership and whole-people ownership, and the 
dividing line between socialism and communism, which had 
appeared in 1958 and correcting the "communist wind" by which 
there was "egalitarian and indiscriminate transfer of 
resources," he proposed that cadres at all levels study 
socialist political economics, "so that they have sober minds, 
as this will be beneficial to the leadership of our great 
economic work." (Footnote 16) (Collected Letters of Mao 
Zedong, p 552) Mao Zedong took the lead in studying and, 
in light of the realities of China's economic construction, 
soberly and deeply considered this major theoretical question 
and, in response to the mistaken ideas which negated commodities 
and money, put forward and expounded various valuable viewpoints. 
  First, proceeding from the angle of history and the role of 
commodity production, Mao Zedong pointed out: China was 
initially a very undeveloped commodity producer, more backward 
than India and Brazil, and it needed a stage whereby commodity 
production was developed. He put stress on proving that 
maintaining commodity production and commodity exchange, which 
was the sole link between the urban and rural economies, was the 
only road by which a country in which small-scale peasants 
constituted the majority, could achieve socialist victory. He 
believed that in a situation where the level of the productive 
forces was quite low, if commodity production and commodity 
exchange was negated and the collective ownership system was 
changed into a whole-people ownership system, and if the state 
allocated the products of the peasants without compensation and 
there were insufficient industrial products to satisfy the 
production and livelihood needs of the broad number of peasants, 
it would in essence be exploiting the peasants and would 
inevitably lead to the peasants being dissatisfied. It would 
also obstruct the development of production and affect the 
worker-peasant alliance. Mao Zedong did not limit himself to 
understanding the origins of the existence of commodity 
production from the level of the two different ownership systems 
but considered this question from a much deeper level. He held 
that the fate of commodity production is, in the end, tightly 
connected to the level of the productive forces. Thus, even 
after making the transition to a unitary socialist whole-people 
ownership system, if commodities were not plentiful, then 
commodity production and commodity exchange would still likely 
exist over various ranges. This view was quite deep and touched 
on the root of the issue. Unfortunately, he did not do further 
research. 
  Everyone knows that for a long time people have been 
suspicious of the idea of commodity production and commodity 
exchange under a socialist system. In respect of some people's 
apprehensions, Mao Zedong pointed out: "At present, there are 
some comrades who fear commodities and this is nothing but a 
fear of capitalism." However, "we cannot confuse commodity 
production and capitalism" because commodity production is not 
something which necessarily leads to capitalism. It requires 
special socioeconomic conditions and the socialist system no 
longer has those conditions. On the negative effects of 
commodity production, Mao Zedong felt that where they existed 
they should be restricted. As to developing commodity 
production and commodity circulation, here he actually began to 
break away from the debate about whether it "was socialist or 
capitalist" and put stress on developing the productive forces. 
Through commodity production, it would be possible to mobilize 
people's enthusiasm for production, increase social wealth, and 
satisfy the daily-increasing demands of society and it was from 
these angles that he understood commodity production. It was on 
this basis that Mao Zedong put forward the famous judgement that 
"the law of value is a great school." He firmly warned the 
whole party that the law of value and exchange at equal value 
are objective laws and if we violate these we will hurt 
ourselves. This law is a great school. If we use it, we will 
be able to teach our hundreds of thousands of party cadres and 
hundreds of millions of people and build socialism and 
communism. If we do not, nothing will be possible. This 
reflected the quite high degree reached by Mao Zedong in his 
thinking on the socialist economy and indicated a breakthrough 
in relation to the understanding of Marx, Engels, Lenin, and 
Stalin on the fate and role of the commodity economy in 
socialism. The sad thing is that while Mao Zedong, with an 
attitude of dealing concretely with work matters, proceeded from 
the angle of promoting the productive forces and achieved his 
results and high level through engaging in theoretical 
exploration, he was unable to sustain and continually develop 
these ideas and another ideological line gradually expanded and 
developed. 
  Previously, from the changes which occurred in Mao Zedong's 
understanding of the transition to socialism, we have already 
seen that his ideas of socialism's need for highly developed 
productive forces and a material base had already seen some 
dilution. When he began to explore the road of China's 
socialist construction, the trend to stress production relations 
became even more pronounced. In January 1962, Mao Zedong said: 
"What I tend to pay more attention to are systems questions and 
issues connected with the production relations." (Footnote 17) 
("Speech at the Expanded Central Work Conference" from the 
Selected Readings From Mao Zedong's Works, last 
volume, p 829) When this line of thought further developed into 
the worry that the superstructure and state political power 
would turn revisionist he mistakenly assessed the domestic class 
struggle situation and put forward the need to take class 
struggle as the key link. He gradually diverged from the center 
constituted by socialist economic construction. After 1957, 
"Leftist" ideas began to show themselves and gradually assumed a 
commanding position, suppressing the correct ideas. The 
accumulation and development of these "Leftist" mistakes finally 
led to the eruption of the "Great Cultural Revolution," which 
interrupted the exploration for a Chinese-style road to 
socialism. 
  Because of the diversions, the mistakes, and the sudden 
break 
in the exploration of the Chinese-style road to socialism, the 
realization of the beautiful hopes put forward by Mao Zedong and 
our party whereby we would turn our country as quickly as 
possible into a strong modern socialist country, suffered a 
setback. 
  Building a strong modern socialist country was a strategic 
target put forward by Mao Zedong and our party following the 
establishment of New China. At the national meeting of party 
deputies and the first NPC convened in 1954, Mao Zedong put 
forward the following idea: We will build our country, which is 
at present backward both economically and culturally, into a 
great industrialized country with a high degree of modern 
civilization. Regarding the steps by which we would realize 
this strategic target, Mao Zedong's idea was to first use three 
five-year plans, that is about 15 years, to lay down a base and 
afterwards, use seven five-year plans, up until the year 2000 to 
build our country into a great and powerful modern socialist 
state. At the Eighth CPC National Congress convened in 1956, he 
made concrete the first stage tasks. He noted that within three 
five-year plans or a bit longer, we would build a basically 
complete industrial system. Despite the occurrence of the 
"Leftist" mistake of the "Great Leap Forward" in 1958, and the 
Great Cultural Revolution which commenced in 1966, this 
strategic goal of building a strong modern country, which was 
pursued by the party and Mao Zedong, has never changed. Under 
Mao Zedong's instructions, at the First Session of the Third 
NPC, in December 1964 and the First Session of the Fourth NPC in 
1975, Zhou Enlai expounded on this strategic target more 
completely. He said: "Our general goal is, within a historical 
period which is not too long, to build our country into a strong 
socialist country with modern agriculture, modern industry, 
modern national defense, and modern science and technology." At 
the same time, he also clearly pointed out the two- step idea 
for realizing this strategic goal. The first step was within 15 
years, that is before 1980, to build an independent and quite 
complete industrial system and national economic system. The 
second step was, within this century, to realize in an overall 
way, the modernization of agriculture, industry, national 
defense, and science and technology, so that our country's 
national economy was in the world front ranks. What causes 
people to ponder is that, over these 20 years, while many 
achievements have been realized in economic construction, 
speaking overall, development has been slow and fluctuating and 
this great strategic target has not been realized as 
planned. 

<H6>    IV. </H6>
  The 3d Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee 
constituted a major shift of deep-going significance in the 
history of our party and, following this, our country's 
socialist modernization entered a a new historical period. Mao 
Zedong economic thought also entered a new stage of 
development--a stage of eliminating "Leftist" mistakes, 
criticizing the "two whatevers," bringing order out of chaos, 
summing up historical experiences, seeking truth from facts, 
liberating thought, and further establishing a theory of 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. As Deng Xiaoping said: 
"Since the Third Plenary Session, we have been restoring the 
correct things advocated by Mao Zedong and applying Mao Zedong 
Thought correctly and in an integrated way. The basic points of 
Mao Zedong Thought are still those noted. In many respects, we 
are doing things that Comrade Mao suggested but failed to do 
himself, setting right his erroneous opposition to certain 
things, and accomplishing some things that he did not. All this 
we shall continue to do for a fairly long time. Of course, we 
have developed Mao Zedong Thought and we shall go on developing 
it." (Footnote 18) ("Remarks on Successive Drafts of the 
`Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party 
Since the Founding of the PRC'" from the Selected Works of 
Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982), p 264) Deng Xiaoping, as the 
overall architect of our country's reforms and construction in 
the new period, has made outstanding contributions to the 
building of a theory of socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
This theory is a new development of Mao Zedong Thought. 
  Since the 3d Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, Deng Xiaoping and our party have upheld and developed 
Mao Zedong economic thought in many respects and the contents of 
this work are very rich. However, one of the most basic 
elements is that they have upheld that basic point in Mao Zedong 
Thought of combining Marxist theory with the realities of China. 
That is, they have again revived that basic idea of examining 
and judging all questions by proceeding from the requirement of 
developing the social productive forces. Under the guidance of 
this basic principle and this basic line of thought they have, 
in an overall way, constructed a theory of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. Deng Xiaoping has clearly pointed out 
this point: "We must integrate the universal truth of Marxism 
with the concrete realities of China, blaze a path of our own, 
and build a socialism with Chinese characteristics--that is the 
basic conclusion we have reached after summing up long 
historical experience." (Footnote 19) ("Opening Speech at the 
Twelfth National Congress of the CPC" from the Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-82), p 372) From the Third 
Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee till the 13th 
CPC National Congress and then again till the 14th Congress, our 
party has realized the second historic leap in combining Marxism 
with the concrete realities of China. This leap has also been 
realized on the basis of a long period of exploration and 
accumulation of experience and by summing up the positive and 
negative experiences over the more than 30 years since the 
establishment of the PRC. With a theory of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics it was possible, for the first time, to 
provide quite systematic primary answers to a series of 
questions such as how such an economically and culturally 
backward country as China was going to build socialism and how 
we were to consolidate and develop socialism, using new ideas 
and viewpoints to carry forward and develop Marxism-Leninism-Mao 
Zedong Thought. 

    In developing Mao Zedong Thought during the new period, it 
has been necessary first of all to re-establish some of the 
basic points of theory in order to make them more clear and firm. 
  On the question of the road of development, we have more 
consciously upheld the idea put forward by Mao Zedong a long 
time ago that China must follow its own road in revolution and 
construction. Following one's own road means being innovative 
and having one's own characteristics. What this means is: On 
points of theory, we must not accept what the books say as dogma 
or mechanically copy foreign modes but must take Marxism as 
guidance and practice as the sole criterion for testing truth; 
in terms of the ideological line, we must persist in 
emancipating our minds and seeking truth from facts; on the 
point of departure, we must always put the fundamental interests 
of the masses of the people before everything else and respect 
the creative spirit of the masses; and in the great practice of 
reform and construction, the party must lead the masses to 
explore and create together. 
  On the question of the stages of development, it is 
necessary 
to uphold in a more sober manner the idea of taking the basic 
conditions of our country as our point of departure, advocated 
by Mao Zedong as early as the period of the democratic 
revolution. In our new-democratic revolution, we were able to 
open up a unique road which proved to be successful precisely 
because we had upheld the principle of taking the basic 
conditions of our country as our point of departure and were 
thus able to correctly grasp the nature of the revolution and 
the stages of development. When we were groping our way along 
in socialist construction, we made the "Leftist" mistake of 
skipping over certain stages primarily because we had not 
soberly and objectively grasped and understood the conditions of 
our country and the basic stages of social development. Now, 
after many twists and turns, we have finally come soberly to the 
scientific conclusion that China is still at the primary stage 
of socialism. We now emphasize that this will be a long 
historical period which will last at least 100 years. Thus, in 
our formulation of general and specific policies, we must base 
ourselves on this basic national condition and must not skip 
this basic stage no matter what. 
  On the question of the fundamental task, we must 
re-establish, with reinforced theoretical firmness, the 
theoretical basis of Marxism, that is, the yardstick of 
productive forces, and resolutely discard the wrong "Leftist" 
principle of "taking class struggle as the key link," which is 
inappropriate in a socialist society. We must shift the focus 
of the work of the party and state onto economic development, 
determine that the fundamental task of the socialist society 
should be to develop the productive forces, and determine that 
the target for struggle of the people of the country should be 
to centralize their strengths in realizing modernization. Deng 
Xiaoping has clearly pointed out: Socialism essentially refers 
to the emancipation and development of the productive forces, 
the elimination of exploitation and polarization, and the 
ultimate realization of common prosperity. He emphasized that 
the principal contradiction in Chinese society at the present 
stage is the contradiction between people's growing material and 
cultural needs and the backward social productive forces. Thus, 
we must put the development of productive forces before 
everything else, take economic construction as our central task, 
and promote all-round social progress. This determines that, in 
the final analysis, the criterion for the assessment of work in 
all fields is whether it is conducive to the development of 
productive forces in the socialist society, whether it is 
conducive to enhancing the overall strength of the socialist 
state, and whether it is conducive to the improvement of 
people's living standards. 
  As regards the provision of political guarantees in building 
socialism, it is necessary to put forward, in a more centralized 
and overall way, the requirement that the four cardinal 
principles be upheld. Deng Xiaoping said: "To carry out 
China's four modernizations, we must uphold the four cardinal 
principles ideologically and politically. This is the basic 
prerequisite for achieving modernization." (Footnote 20) 
("Uphold the Four Cardinal Principles" from the Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982) p 150) The Report of 
the 14th CPC National Congress also pointed out: "The four 
cardinal principles are the foundations of the country and the 
guarantee for the healthy development of reform, opening up, and 
modernization." 
  All these are, of course, the development of Mao Zedong's 
economic thought under new historical conditions. However, the 
most important, outstanding, and creative development since the 
3d Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee is reform 
and opening up. In summing up the basic practice and basic 
experience of the last 14 years, the 14th CPC National Congress 
pointed out in its report that the most striking characteristics 
of the new period is reform and opening up. What we have done 
during those 14 years was to build socialism with Chinese 
characteristics through reform and opening up and the 
emancipation and development of the productive forces. 

    Socialism has scored amazing success as it has turned from 
theory into a reality. However, the problems that have emerged 
in its own contradictory movements, such as the lack of 
vitality, poor efficiency, chronic bureaucracy, and corruption, 
have become increasingly serious. As a great revolutionary and 
theorist, Mao Zedong was sharp-eyed enough to see the 
seriousness of these problems. Although he always adhered to 
the fundamental stance of working for the interests of the 
people and did his best to find solutions to these problems, he 
betrayed increasingly serious signs of "Leftist" deviation in 
his approach. He tried to resolve these problems through the 
"Great Cultural Revolution," with the result that the whole 
society suffered a great catastrophe while the problems remained 
unresolved. As the most innovative strategic thinker and 
Marxist thinker in the contemporary world, Deng Xiaoping turned 
his unparalleled political foresight and theoretical courage, 
his scientific spirit of seeking truth from facts, and his great 
insight into the course of historical development, to good 
account in summing up the historical experience of the 
international communist movement and opening up the only road 
for ridding our country of its ills and building China into a 
rich and prosperous nation, namely, the road of reform and 
opening up. Deng Xiaoping said: "There is no way out if we do 
not carry out reform. Practice over the past few decades has 
proved that the old system does not work. We mechanically 
copied the experience of other countries in the past and this 
resulted in us obstructing the development of the productive 
forces. On the ideological level, it led to ossification and 
this obstructed the bringing into play of the enthusiasm of the 
people and the grass-roots levels. In addition, we made our own 
mistakes.... In the 20 years from 1958 until 1978, China's 
society was actually stuck for a long time in a stagnant and 
wavering situation and the national economy and the people's 
livelihood did not see much development or improvement. Could 
such a situation continue without reform?" (Footnote 21) ("The 
Pace of Reform Must Be Accelerated" from the Selected 
Works of Xiaoping Deng, Vol 3, p 237) "Apart from the road 
of reform, China has no other option because only through reform 
can China flourish." (Footnote 22) (XINHUASHE report 23 Oct 1985) 
  Reform and opening up is based on a more profound and 
comprehensive understanding of the basic contradictory movement 
of socialism and economic laws. It was precisely on this 
theoretical basis that Deng Xiaoping scientifically defined the 
nature and significance of reform and unequivocally put forward 
the basic formulation that "reform is a revolution." 
  In "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the 
People," Mao Zedong put forward his doctrine on the basic 
contradictions of socialist society and further came up with the 
scientific argument that the relations of production and the 
productive forces, and the economic base and the superstructure, 
are concurrently suited to each other and contradictory. The 
basic economic system of socialism is suited to the productive 
forces and so is the basic political system suited to the 
economic base. However, the specific form and links of the 
relations of production and the superstructure still leave much 
to be desired and readjustment and transformation are in order. 
Due to historical limitations, Mao Zedong was unable to 
accurately define these imperfections. Subsequent historical 
complications made it impossible for this reform-oriented notion 
to develop in greater depth, thereby deferring the pressing 
historical task of structural reform in China. Deng Xiaoping 
has carried forward and developed this idea of Mao Zedong's. He 
has not only put forward for the first time the need to carry 
out comprehensive reform of the existing economic and political 
systems but based this reform on the comprehensive, concrete, 
and profound analysis and grasp of the actual movement of the 
basic contradictions in society. He pointed out that the 
principal form of expression of the basic contradictions in 
society at present is the contradiction between the developed 
productive forces and the ossified economic, political, 
cultural, scientific, technological, and educational systems. 
Thus, he argued that "this constitutes a revolution.... Our 
intention is not to overthrow anyone but to transform the 
organizational structure of our party and state. If we do not 
carry out this revolution... not only will the four 
modernizations fail but the party and state will face a mortal 
trial and perhaps perish." (Footnote 23) ("Streamlining 
Organizations Constitutes A Revolution" from the Selected 
Works of Deng Xiaoping (1975-1982), p 352) The possibility 
that the party and state will perish stems from the fact that 
the prolonged existence of an ossified system which fails to 
bring the superiority of socialism into full play has seriously 
fettered the productive forces, generated pessimism in social 
and political life, and is in danger of affecting the very 
existence of the basic socialist system. By scientifically 
putting forward the great theoretical formula that "reform also 
means the emancipation of the productive forces" on the basis of 
such a profound theoretical understanding and truthful admission 
of the fact that there are elements in our traditional system 
that seriously fetter the productive forces, we are able to see 
the significance of reform and opening up from a new height. 

    Reform and opening up have not just opened up a road of hope 
in developing the productive forces, realizing modernization and 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics. They have also 
opened up a broad road for developing socialist economic theory. 
Under the guidance of the basic theory and basic line set down 
by Deng Xiaoping and our party on the basis of the new rich 
theoretical nourishment provided by the continually developing 
practice of reform, in the process of the mutual roles and 
mutual promotion of theory and practice, socialist economic 
theory has broken through the fetters of the various dogmas and 
straightjackets, bravely borrowed and absorbed scientific 
elements from the various economic theories around the world, 
and achieved considerable development. The theoretical basis of 
this development was a re-understanding of socialism. In this 
process of re-understanding, we broke through the dogmatic, 
simplistic understanding of socialism which had existed in the 
past, discarded the "Leftist" voluntarism which produced very 
great harm, and soberly examined the defects which existed in 
the traditional planned economy. The theoretical centering 
point in this development was the seeking of a new target model 
for the economic structure. Since the 3d Plenary Session of the 
11th CPC Central Committee, we have gradually escaped from the 
traditional concepts of the market economy being a specific 
trait of capitalism, and the planned economy being the basic 
characteristic of a socialist economy; we have begun new 
explorations and formed new understandings of the relationship 
between socialism and the commodity economy. The 12th CPC 
National Congress put forward the idea that the planned economy 
should be the main part of the economy and that regulation 
through the market mechanism should form a supplement. The 3d 
Plenary Session of the 12th CPC Central Committee pointed out 
that the commodity economy is a stage which socioeconomic 
development cannot skip over and that our country's socialist 
economy is a planned commodity economy based on the public 
ownership system. The 13th CPC National Congress pointed out 
that a socialist planned economy structure should be one in 
which planning and the market form a unity. After the 4th 
Plenary Session of the 13th CPC Central Committee, the idea was 
put forward that we should establish an economic structure and 
operational mechanism in which the planned economy and 
regulation through market mechanism are combined and which is in 
accord with the development of the planned commodity economy. 
In particular, Comrade Deng Xiaoping's speeches during his trip 
to the south in 1992 further clearly pointed out that planning 
and the market are both economic measures and that whether there 
is a little more planning or a little more of the market is not 
indicative of whether a system is socialist or capitalist. This 
incisive judgement essentially broke free from the ideological 
fetters which saw the planned economy and the market economy as 
categories of basic social systems and allowed us to take a 
great leap forward in our understanding of the relationship 
between planning and the market. In this way, the 14th CPC 
National Congress was able, on the basis of practical 
development and deepening of understanding, to clearly point 
out: The aim of our country's economic reform is to establish a 
socialist market economy system. 
  A socialist market economy system is in accord with the 
basic 
system of socialism. This overall goal of a socialist market 
economy system is a theoretical combination realized through our 
new understanding of all aspects of socialist production 
relations and the economic operational mechanism. Over the last 
10 years or more, the theoretical achievements we have realized 
in our exploration of the various spheres of socialist 
production relations, including ownership structures, enterprise 
systems, market systems, income distribution systems, and 
macroregulatory and control systems, are all contained within 
this target model. The "Decision by the CPC Central Committee 
on Some Issues Concerning the Establishment of a Socialist 
Market Economic Structure," passed by the 3d Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee, also manifested these results of 
long-term exploration in its exposition on the overall framework 
of the new structure and the socialist market economy, providing 
a guiding blueprint for the deeper development of the 
reforms. 

    As noted previously, establishing a strong, modern, 
socialist 
state was a strategic target set down long ago by Comrade Mao 
Zedong and our party. The realization of this great strategic 
goal not only requires strong determination but, more 
importantly, a correct line and policies and a rational economic 
structure as a guarantee. Prior to the 3d Plenary Session of 
the 11th CPC Central Committee, "high speed" and "high targets" 
continually appeared in our country's economic development. 
Although these manifested intense hopes and determination, 
because they did not proceed from reality and did not have 
structural guarantees, added to which was the interference from 
the mistaken line of "taking class struggle as the key link," 
the strategic deployments for modernization could not be 
implemented. Thus, the hoped for economic growth did not 
materialize and, instead, we saw a 20-year period of 
fluctuations and wavering. The 3d Plenary Session of the 11th 
CPC Central Committee set those things to rights which had been 
thrown into disorder. It also decided to shift the focus of the 
work of the whole party and the whole people to economic 
construction and, accordingly, set down modernization goals to 
be realized in steps and by stages. It also adopted the policy 
of reform and opening up, and put great efforts into providing 
the necessary structural conditions for modernization. In all 
these respects, Deng Xiaoping made great and outstanding 
contributions. Over the last 10 years and more, the 
achievements in our country's reform, opening up, and 
modernization were all achieved under the guidance of the theory 
of socialism with Chinese characteristics, which was a new 
development of Mao Zedong's economic thought. This theory will 
be continually enriched and developed in the great practice of 
reform, opening up, and construction in the future and will 
guide the Chinese people in moving from victory to victory, 
until we finally achieve the goal of a strong, modern, socialist 
state. 

