Year 

<F P=102>   94UM0389A Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK in Russian No 1, 1994 
(Signed to press 28 Dec 93) pp 3-9 </F>

<F P=103> 94UM0389A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MORSKOY SBORNIK </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Admiral F. Gromov: "Summing Up the Results of </F>
the Past Year and Looking to Next Year"] 
  [Text] Thanks to fundamental changes in the domestic and 
foreign policies of the world's leading countries and the 
expansion of their political and economic cooperation, the 
current military political situation is characterized by a 
reduction of the probability of nuclear missile war and also of 
a large-scale armed clash using conventional weapons. At the 
same time, the danger of the outbreak of military conflicts in 
individual areas of the world and on Russia's southern borders 
remains, including on the territories of the former Soviet 
republics. Its basis has economic, social, political and 
religious roots. 
  While taking into account the current trends of the 
development of the military political situation, the leading 
countries of the West and East are examining the goals of their 
foreign policies, their international obligations, military 
doctrines and strategies. In the process, primary emphasis is 
being made on ensuring regional security and preventing crises 
in various regions and a special role is being assigned to naval 
forces with the implementation of a thorough review of the 
concepts of their structural development and employment. 
  The Russian Navy is totally engulfed by this process. The 
missions of the fleets in peacetime and wartime have been more 
precisely defined, the Navy's composition and effective combat 
strength is being reduced, new methods have been developed for 
manning the fleets with highly professional cadres, a series of 
measures is being conducted to improve the organizational 
structure of combined formations and formations, and the 
development of new elements for basing them on the country's 
territory. A great deal of work has been accomplished while 
substantiating the prospects for development of both the Navy as 
a whole and also the component services that are part of it. 
Views on the operational employment and training of the fleets 
have changed substantially. The scope of the measures being 
conducted and the sequence and duration of their accomplishment 
have been made more precise. Specific implementation of these 
plans will depend to a significant extent on the stabilization 
of the economy and budget appropriations for the development of 
the Navy. 
  Confidence-building measures continue to be strengthened 
between the navies of Russia and other countries. Reciprocal 
visits and joint training for missions at sea attest to this. 
Last year, detachments of our ships visited ports of the United 
States, Canada, Great Britain, China, France, Norway, Germany, 
Denmark, Turkey, and South Korea. Joint tactical exercises were 
conducted with the navies of Canada, the United States and Great 
Britain, some of them with the accomplishment of combat drills 
and the employment of weapons. These cruises had not only 
political significance but also promoted the further improvement 
of the naval proficiency of the crews of our ships. 
  The missions assigned to the Navy in 1993 on the whole have 
been accomplished. In the complex conditions of the 
reorganization and limited financing of the Navy, we have 
managed to maintain the specified level of combat readiness of 
the fleets' primary combined formations and formations, their 
capability to carry out the transition from a peacetime to a 
wartime footing in a timely and organized manner and to 
accomplish primary operational missions within the established 
time periods. 
  Despite the difficulties associated with manning crews and 
maintaining the technical readiness of ships, the intensity and 
effectiveness of the combat service and alert duty performed by 
them has increased somewhat. Strategic missile submarines have 
patrolled in designated areas and have carried out alert duty at 
basing areas in readiness to accomplish assigned missions. 
General purpose forces have ensured their ability to resist the 
enemy and have monitored the reconnaissance activity of foreign 
naval forces. Pacific Fleet ships successfully accomplished 
assigned missions in coordination with the multinational forces 
in the Persian Gulf, demonstrating Russia's support of the UN 
sanctions with regard to Iraq and the Black Sea Fleet in part 
rendered assistance to Georgia in the stabilization of the 
situation at Poti. 
  Operational, mobilization and combat training measures were 
more intensively conducted last year. The practical skills of 
command authorities and staffs in the command and control of 
forces and techniques for the operational employment of forces 
in combined arms and strategic operations to repel an enemy 
aerospace attack were rehearsed in these measures. Command and 
staff map exercises, joint command and staff and staff training 
without the involvement of marking forces were the primary 
methods for conducting operational and mobilization training. 
This permitted us to maintain and improve the practical skills 
of operational echelon commanders and staffs in the command and 
control of forces but, at the same time, it resulted in a 
reduction of the number of times ships put to sea and the number 
of flights of aircraft which had a negative impact on the level 
of naval and air skills of some of the forces. 
  In 1993, combat training of Naval forces was conducted on 
the 
whole according to plan: intensively and rhythmically. The 
combined formations and formations commanded by Captains 1st 
Rank S. Simenenko, V. Shchegolev, V. Krikunov, N. Temerev and 
the submarines commanded by Captains 1st Rank V. Zakharov, A. 
Yefanov and Captain 2nd Rank V. Kvasov achieved the best results. 
  At the same time, we did not manage to attain an appreciable 
improvement in combat training. In individual formations and 
units, exercises and training classes were conducted at a low 
organizational-methodological level and did not completely 
ensure the qualitative rehearsal of specific functional duties 
for the maintenance of the high combat readiness of subordinate 
forces and for the effective accomplishment of combat training 
missions by them. Little attention was devoted to the search for 
and mastery of new technical techniques for the employment of 
forces. Passive forms of training, without the utilization of 
shore-based simulators and training classes, frequently 
predominated in training. Required measures were not undertaken 
to intensify combat training by improving the methodology for 
conducting exercises, drills and training classes. 
  Last year, the fleets were compelled to adjust combat 
training plans toward the reduction of the number of missions 
and combat drills due to the lack of an adequate quantity of 
fuel, lubricating oil, ship maintenance support, and also due to 
the failure to take into account the specific nature of combat 
training under conditions of a drastic reduction of financing, 
material and technical support, and undermanning of ship crews. 
  All of this required commanders of all levels to drastically 
increase the level of attention to base training, including the 
conduct of organizational and tactical assemblies, base, staff 
and command and staff map exercises, preparatory tactical 
exercises and other forms of training. However, established 
procedures for conducting formation base exercises were 
frequently violated, especially in the Pacific Ocean and 
Northern fleets which did not permit them to completely take 
advantage of existing capabilities to rehearse command and 
control organs and ship combat crews while accomplishing their 
assigned missions. 
  Under conditions of a severe shortage of fuel and the 
reduction of allotted overhaul periods, stricter requirements 
should have been made of planning for the accomplishment of 
missions by ships at sea. Each time ships put to sea should have 
been utilized with the maximum effectiveness, with mutual 
support by the various fleet component services of the rehearsal 
of their own missions and the comprehensive employment of 
weapons. But these requirements have not yet become a mandatory 
standard in all of the fleets. So, last year in the Pacific 
Fleet, ships put to sea to accomplish 1-2 drills -- without the 
utilization of the capabilities of supporting and coordinating 
forces. Comprehensive combat training was organized somewhat 
better in the Northern and Black Sea fleets. 
  In 1993, naval aviation successfully began to master the 
Su-27k ship-based fighter aircraft and accomplished combat 
service missions with high indicators. We can note a change for 
the better in Northern Fleet Air Force units where Colonels I. 
Bokhonko and N. Levchenko are the commanders. Pacific Fleet Air 
Force antisubmarine warfare personnel led by Colonels V. Uvarov 
and A. Akhmedyanov, and Baltic Fleet Air Force antisubmarine 
warfare personnel led by Colonel N. Somov achieved good results. 
  However, the low supply of new aircraft, spare parts for 
them, aviation fuel and other material technical resources to 
fleet air forces resulted in a reduction of crew flying hours, 
disruptions of combat training plans and, as a result -- to the 
reduction of the level of unit combat readiness and flight 
safety. The most serious situation developed in the Black Sea 
Fleet Air Force and, first and foremost, as a result of the 
unresolved issue on the status of this fleet. 
  The Naval coastal defense troops successfully mastered new 
techniques for conducting battle and prepared for operations as 
part of an airborne-maritime assault force echelon, for the 
defense of important fleet facilities and sections of the sea 
coast that are accessible for maritime assault landings in 
coordination with other naval forces and Ground Forces 
formations. 
  Despite the objective difficulties associated with the 
involvement of troops for the accomplishment of uncharacteristic 
missions and significant undermanning, combat training plans 
were largely accomplished in all formations and units. Combat 
training in the naval infantry formation which Colonel A. 
Smolyak commands was conducted in an intensive and qualitative 
manner. The artillerymen under the leadership of Colonel N. 
Kumshatskiy and the naval infantrymen where Major V. Novikov is 
the commander achieved good results. The missileers under the 
leadership of Colonels A. Zabavin and S. Kazachukhin 
successfully accomplished all combat drills. Combat training 
missions were not accomplished as well in the formation which 
Colonel Ye. Kocheshkov commands where omissions in the 
organizational work of officer personnel became the cause of 
inadequate preparation of command and control organs and the low 
firing proficiency of personnel. 
  On the whole, operational, mobilization and combat training 
missions were accomplished in a more qualitative manner in the 
Northern Fleet last year. 
  The unresolved issues of ship repair, maintenance of 
engineer 
networks, lines of communication and providing basing areas with 
technical resources, a portion of which has exhausted prescribed 
time periods and is physically and technically obsolete, had a 
negative impact on the course of fleet training. 
  The accident rate of combatants and ships in the fleets 
still 
remains high. But then again, equipment failures make up 
approximately 60% of that total number, the primary 
causes of 
which are: the low organization of service, weak special 
training of personnel and failure to accomplish the requirements 
of manuals and operating instructions. Quality remains low while 
conducting maintenance and preparing ships to put to sea, 
personnel violate explosive and fire safety requirements while 
conducting potentially dangerous work and the quality of work of 
permanent ship commissions at individual formations is poor 
while examining ships' hulls, equipment and systems. 
  In the fleets, the role of staff specialists has been 
reduced 
in the support and maintenance of the technical readiness of 
ships. They are permitting leniency in the accomplishment of 
maintenance inspections and they are not taking timely steps to 
eliminate malfunctions or to increase the level of personnel 
maintenance training. The internal resources of formations and 
ships are not being completely utilized to conduct qualitative 
scheduled-preventive maintenance and inspections. 
  The Pacific Fleet formation that Rear Admiral A. Klimenok 
commands had the most unsatisfactory accident rate last year. 
  The accident rate associated with ship command and control 
was not reduced. Half of the accidents of this type occurred in 
the Black Sea Fleet. 
  The moral-psychological state of Navy personnel is assessed 
as stable. The situation on ships and in units is controlled and 
manageable, although it remains complicated. Despite unfavorable 
trends, the majority of military collectives are distinguished 
by the appropriate observance of regulations, discipline, and 
the healthy cohesion of all categories of servicemen that 
permits on the whole the successful accomplishment of missions 
and maintenance of the combat capability of naval forces. This 
was largely promoted by the personal exemplariness of the 
absolute majority of commanders and superior officers in the 
execution of their service and military duties, by the 
certification of officer personnel that was conducted and by the 
transition to contract service that has been initiated. 
  Nonspecific work on the implementation of measures of 
socio-legal protection of servicemen, which has a negative 
impact on the moral-psychological state, the mood and conduct of 
officers, army and navy warrant officers, petty officers and 
sailors, is a serious shortcoming in the organizational and 
educational activity of commanders, staffs, and personnel 
organs. As a result, quite a bit of tension, contradictions, and 
negative trends, which undermine the foundation of military 
service --discipline, observance of regulations, and law and 
order -- are being maintained in military collectives and are 
having a pernicious influence on the overall level of military 
discipline. In 1993, they did not manage to resolve the problem 
of reducing the number of crimes. Incidents of deaths and trauma 
of servicemen as a result of the violation of safety measures 
and also suicide are not being reduced. Evasion of military 
service and failure to return from leave has become widespread. 
A vicious trend has developed toward the lessening of work with 
subordinates by certain ship, unit and subunit commanders who 
have begun to think that orders or articles of regulations can 
carry themselves out without the commanders' participation or 
monitoring. In today's situation, commanders are required to 
increase their organizing role in the mobilization of all 
personnel toward the exemplary accomplishment of their military 
duty and the successful accomplishment of assigned missions. 
  Last year, the Navy did not manage to create an integrated 
training and education system of subordinates with the active 
inclusion in it of all organs of military command and control 
and the educational structures. Ties are being slowly restored 
with the local authorities, veterans and youth organizations, 
creative unions and institutions of culture. Teaching the 
practice of educational work of commanders and superior officers 
of all levels, staff and service specialists is sporadic in 
nature and is inadequately targeted toward accomplishing 
specific combat training missions and strengthening military 
discipline. 
  We have noted the accomplishment of a series of priority 
measures to provide social protection of personnel in the Navy. 
So, with a total number of homeless of approximately 30,000 men, 
we planned to build 6,945 apartments and to obtain 344 rooms in 
dormitories, using resources allocated for capital construction. 
Furthermore, we proposed obtaining 1,254 apartments from the 
local authorities through shared participation and the purchase 
of 490 finished apartments. We also counted on introducing into 
operation a 534-seat school, two kindergartens for 1,300 people, 
four cafeterias with a 955-person capacity, seven boilers, three 
water treatment facilities, and a number of other facilities. 
However, inadequate and uneven financing permitted us to 
accomplish only 72% of our plans. Therefore, in 1994, the 
Navy 
has approved the task to obtain approximately 11,500 apartments 
through our own construction and shared participation. 
  Summing up the results of the last year, I must note that, 
despite the objective and subjective causes of an economic and 
socio-legal nature, the Navy on the whole successfully 
accomplished the primary mission --maintenance of the prescribed 
combat and military readiness. 
  The Russian Navy faces complex and responsible missions in 
the new year --1994. 
  In combat readiness. Primary efforts must be concentrated on 
the maintenance of the composition and state of naval strategic 
nuclear forces at a level that ensures the guaranteed 
accomplishment of the assigned missions under any conditions of 
the situation. General purpose forces are required to be 
maintained in a state that permits repelling aggression on a 
local or regional scale from the ocean and sea axes. 
  As before, combat service and alert duty for the timely 
detection of an armed attack that is being prepared or a 
threatening development of the situation and taking the steps 
required to increase the combat readiness of the fleets remain 
the primary methods for maintaining high force combat readiness. 
  Using all organizational and technical measures, we need to 
exclude a surprise attack, ensure the effective conduct of 
reconnaissance, the timely increase of force readiness and force 
deployment, and the capability to put a stop to aggression in 
the shortest period of time. 
  We must consider the comprehensive development of the 
organization of the transition of the fleets from a peacetime to 
a wartime footing while taking into account the various variants 
of the development of the situation to be the most important 
direction for the improvement of combat readiness. When this 
mission is being accomplished, we need to strive for the precise 
organization of work of the command and control organs and the 
coordinated accomplishment of planned measures to bring the 
forces up to the highest levels of combat readiness at all 
levels and to eliminate deficiencies revealed based upon 1993's 
results. Taking into account the intensive conduct of approved 
organizational measures and the reduction of the strength and 
composition of the fleets, we need to continuously take into 
account these changes and take the appropriate steps in a timely 
manner to support and maintain the prescribed level of combat 
readiness. 
  Senior commanders, commanders and staffs must continuously 
track and operationally react to changes of the 
military-political situation in the sea and ocean zones and seek 
rational ways to increase the effectiveness of the employment of 
forces in operations and combat operations when aggression is 
unleased. 
  In the context of implementing the Russian Federation Law 
"On 
the RF State Border", the Navy needs to carefully study the 
development of a system for the protection of the Russian state 
border in the underwater medium using Naval men and equipment to 
begin its practical inspection. 
  We need to accomplish a series of missions for the 
qualitative renewal of the ship complement, arms and military 
equipment, the reduction of the numbers of types, and the 
improvement of ship basing conditions and all types of support. 
Work will be continued on the infrastructure of the Baltic and 
Black Sea fleets and Caspian Flotilla forces at new basing 
locations on Russian Federation territory, and also for the 
withdrawal of weapons, ammunition, and materiel from Latvia, 
Estonia and Belorussia [Belarus]. 
  The rapid mastery of new ships, aircraft, helicopters, and 
modern types of arms and military equipment that are coming into 
the inventory is an important mission for the fleets. 
  During the accomplishment of operational training missions, 
the main efforts must be concentrated on the qualitative 
accomplishment of planned measures and support of the readiness 
of senior commanders, commanders and staffs for the command and 
control of forces while preparing and conducting operations and 
combat operations. We must devote special attention to the 
elaboration of the organization of coordination of naval forces 
with the formations and combined formations of the other 
services of the Armed Forces, the study and research of issues 
of the operational employment of naval forces in armed 
conflicts, local wars and emergency situations. 
  We must conduct the improvement of operational readiness 
methodology based upon the broad introduction and intensive 
utilization of computers and automated troop and weapon command 
and control systems and equipment. We need to step up the 
elaboration and introduction of computer games in the practice 
of command and control organ training, increase the quality of 
training and the conduct of exercises, training and classes, and 
strive toward a comprehensive approach to the conduct of all of 
its measures. Conduct operational-tactical and command and staff 
exercises simultaneously with several combined formations that 
are accomplishing joint missions in accordance with their 
operational designation and that are operating in one zone 
(area). In the process, when planning operational and combat 
training measures, take into account the economic and financial 
aspects of their conduct and, based upon the results of each of 
them, carry out an analysis and, when necessary, conduct 
adjustments of plans and their guiding documents in the 
prescribed manner. 
  When accomplishing combat training missions, we need to 
continue to improve the preparation of formations and units for 
combat operations as part of formations of varied forces, the 
search for and mastery of new effective tactical methods for 
their employment. Work out the formation and deployment of 
formations, the organization of support for their capability to 
resist the enemy, all types of defense, the tactics of 
conducting naval warfare with enemy ship formations with the 
support of the Air Force, fleet BRAV [Coastal Missile and 
Artillery Troops] and PVO [Air Defense] fighter aviation 
formations. 
  We must target the training of various component services' 
antisubmarine warfare forces on the improvement of the 
techniques for search, tracking, and destruction of submarines, 
comprehensive employment of all types of antisubmarine warfare 
weapons with the utilization of acoustic and non-acoustic search 
systems. 
  At tactical exercises, we need to continuously practice 
operations of ship and aircraft reconnaissance-strike groups to 
conduct reconnaissance, transmit target designation to strike 
forces, and also work out the comprehensive employment of EW 
[Electronic Warfare] systems, camouflage and other types of 
support. 
  Comprehensive training at sea, which must be anticipated by 
precisely developed, full-fledged and strictly monitored base 
training, must become the primary combat training method. We 
need to organize it in such a way that we ensure a full training 
load for shore-based simulators, ranges and training classes and 
utilize to the maximum extent possible the capabilities of 
command and control systems, weapons systems and technical 
systems of ships for the practical training of crews. We need to 
improve the organization of combined formation base exercises. 
  All of these measures must pursue one goal -- to prevent the 
reduction of naval combat training, ground forces field training 
and flying combat training for personnel. 
  Maintenance of ships, aircraft, weapons and technical 
systems 
at constant readiness and mobilization of all personnel to 
maintain their area of responsibility in a serviceable and 
combat ready state must become a constant concern of commanders 
and staffs during the course of combat training. 
  We must direct scientific research in the Navy toward the 
formation and conduct of a rational military-technical policy, 
the primary content of which, under conditions of the 
restriction of resources allocated for defense needs, is the 
conduct of measures directed at maintaining the combat potential 
of Russia's navy at a level that ensures the accomplishment of 
the assigned missions. 
  In the near future, our scientific institutions must 
concentrate their efforts on: 
  predicting the possible nature of armed combat at sea under 
new conditions, substantiation of strategic concepts, methods 
and techniques for the employment of fleet forces to defend the 
state from the sea and ocean axes; 
  developing techniques to prepare for and conduct operations 
and combat operations independently and in coordination with the 
other services of the Armed Forces, organizing command and 
control of forces and their comprehensive support; 
  substantiating the prospects for the structural development 
of the Navy, determining new ways for its development at the 
current stage, developing proposals for the reformation of 
structures, reducing the effective combat strength of the 
fleets, and improving combat and mobilization readiness under 
conditions of the reduction of the Armed Forces and their 
restricted economic capabilities; 
  researching the overall appearance of Naval weapons systems 
and the principles for its technical equipment that ensure the 
accomplishment of changed missions while taking into account the 
actual capabilities of industry; developing 
scientifically-substantiated operational-tactical requirements 
and military-economic substantiations of required changes of 
weapons systems and proposals for the adjustment of the primary 
directions of development and Naval weapons programs, draft 
NIOKR [scientific research and experimental design work] plans, 
basic and exploratory research; 
  substantiating the principles of the reduction of the VVT 
[weaponry and military hardware] list, time periods and 
expenditures for their development through standardization; 
determining priority NIOKR while taking into account the need 
for priority development of command and control, reconnaissance, 
and target designation systems; 
  developing modern mathematical model systems of operations 
and combat operations of naval forces and the introduction, on 
this basis, into practice of computer games methods for the 
operational and combat training of command and control organs 
and forces. 
  Training of scientific cadres requires special concern 
because they are the primary echelon in the new developments and 
the bearers of new ideas and knowledge. During this unstable 
period, it is important to not lose that scientific potential 
which exists in the Navy. 
  During the organization of socio-state training, primary 
efforts need to be concentrated on the formation and improvement 
of the professional knowledge of personnel, the 
moral-psychological qualities and readiness to defend the 
Fatherland, loyalty to the military oath, discipline, pride and 
responsibility for being a part of the Russian Navy that has a 
heroic 300-year history. 
  We must more completely utilize the classes in this type of 
training to teach psychological-pedagogical and legal knowledge 
and skills to military cadres. We must introduce the most active 
democratic, demonstration and emotional in impact types of 
teaching into the training process. 
  In the new training year, we must target educational work on 
ensuring moral-psychological stability and discipline of all 
categories of personnel, maintenance of the cohesiveness of 
military collectives, and strengthen servicemen's readiness to 
fight toward the accomplishment of tasked missions. In the 
process, we need to require from all cadres involved in the 
sphere of education maximum sensitivity and efficiency in 
reacting to fluctuations in the moods of servicemen, flexibility 
in the selection of methods and techniques to affect those 
moods, and to consider the specific nature of each category of 
personnel, each group and each individual. 
  The leading military collectives -- ship, company, battery 
-- 
must be the center of application of education efforts. 
  We must more boldly introduce into the educational process 
the ideological position, oriented first and foremost on 
patriotism and professionalism, loyalty to constitutional duty, 
responsibility for the entrusted task, and the dignity and honor 
of a soldier and citizen. 
  We need to use all forms of organizational and education 
work 
to strive to increase in every possible way the responsibility 
of each official for the state of military discipline and the 
state of affairs on ships, in military units and subunits, and 
the effectiveness of employed measures for the prevention of 
accidents, crimes and deaths of people. 
  We must consider the primary mission to be rooting out 
derision and harassment, crimes of insubordination, evasions of 
military service, outrages with regard to the local population, 
and thefts of state and military property, especially small 
arms; prevention of the death and traumatism of servicemen, 
accidents and catastrophes of military equipment and weapons. 
  Daily concern about material-everyday life support of 
personnel, medical service, and cultural relaxation of 
servicemen and their family members; the study of urgent 
problems, needs, and requests of subordinates and their timely 
resolution must be one of the main directions of activity of 
commanders of staffs, personnel organs, and of all officer 
cadres. 
  We must carry out the selection and assignment of officer 
cadres while considering the results achieved in the 
certification process. We must resolve personnel issues in a 
timely manner at all levels, while ensuring augmentation of 
leading cadres with trained and promising officers, admirals and 
generals, and the maintenance of continuity in leadership. 
Improve work with junior officers. Take steps to eliminate the 
reasons and conditions that cause junior officers to submit 
requests on their desire to be released from active military 
service. 
  In the sphere of military cooperation, we must consider the 
following to be priority directions: the development of 
cooperation with all CIS countries while proceeding from the 
need to strengthen collective security; the development of ties 
and the deepening of relations in the military sphere between 
states and their armed forces; development of a unified 
military-technical policy; and, coordination of coordination and 
cooperation in the defense industry sphere. 
  The most important results of work in 1993 and the missions 
for the new training year have been revealed in this short 
article. 
  I am confident that naval personnel will accomplish the 
assigned missions with dignity and honor. To do that, we need to 
work with a complete output of effort, to continuously learn, 
and to strive for high end results of work on the entrusted 
sector of service activity. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1994. 

