BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by A. Sarkisov, academician of the Russian Academy </F>
of Agricultural Sciences: "The Scientists Warn.... The Grain 
Beneath the Snow May Be Poisonous" -- first two paragraphs are 
editorial introduction] 
  [Excerpts] Two interdepartmental commissions of the 
Russian Security Council -- on protecting the population's 
health, and on ecological safety -- analyzed at a joint session 
on 9 March the alarming situation on the food market in the 
country, and drew the public's attention particularly to the 
danger which has arisen in many places of food products and feed 
grain being contaminated with mycotoxins, leading to the 
possibility of highly dangerous diseases in people and animals. 
  Professor A.Kh. Sarkisov, academician of the Russian Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences and founding father of mycotoxicology, 
tells us what mycotoxins are, how they can harm the health of 
people and animals, where and how they form, and how they could 
get into our food. 
  Sarkisov begins: Quite soon, the field work will 
begin throughout the country, and of course, the chief tasks are 
connected with the sowing. And here rural workers will come up 
against an unusual factor -- the need first to clear the fields 
of sowings of grain crops which should have been harvested last 
fall. As is well known, these crops were left on millions of 
hectares -- they disappeared under the snow. 
  Of course, this has happened before. In some years it cost 
the lives of many people and animals, before the causes of a new 
"unknown" disease were analyzed. 
  The land, especially its upper layer of cultivated soil, is 
a 
very complex living organism in which micro-organisms invisible 
to the naked eye -- and there can be as many as 100 billion of 
them in a single cubic centimeter of soil -- are actively 
participating in increasing its fertility. However, among them 
there are also microscopic fungi, most often types of fusarium, 
which have the capacity to infect grain which is left standing 
in the soil: They render it toxic to man and animals. [passage 
omitted] 
  The safe way to ensure protection against mycotoxicosis, as 
our past experience has shown, is to carry out the following 
obligatory measures. First, it is necessary in a short space of 
time to carry out, on the farm and for the rayon as a whole, a 
complete count of all areas with unharvested grain crops still 
on the root or in swathes, windrows, etc. Agricultural organs 
must be informed of the results of the count, and where 
infection of grain crops with toxic fusariums was noted earlier, 
the appropriate measures must be adopted. That means regions of 
the North Caucasus, the Volga (Tataria, Bashkiria 
[Bashkortostan], Mordovia, Udmurtia), Siberia, the Orenburg 
region, the Urals, and Altay and Krasnoyarsk Krays, as well as 
certain regions of Kazakhstan. The latest research has shown 
that 60 percent or more of wheat samples, even in Krasnodar 
Kray, contained mycotoxins. This was due to last year's weather 
conditions and the frequent precipitation. [passage omitted] 

