Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] A programme to immunise children against measles is 
now underway in both Matabeleland North and South following an 
outbreak of the disease in several districts, health officials 
reported yesterday. 
  Officials at the provincial medical directorate in Bulawayo 
said three children had died as a result of the disease since 
the first cases of measles were recorded in July. Of the three, 
two were from Tshelanyemba area in Matobo and the other was from 
Matabeleland North. 
  "We are now carrying out mass immunisation of children at 
risk of catching the disease especially in the most affected 
areas of Filabusi, Gwanda, Kezi and Matobo. In Matabeleland 
North, the programme centres on such areas as Nkayi, Lupane and 
Tsholotsho," they said. 
  However, the officials said the number of measles cases 
recorded over the past two months indicated that there was a 
slight decrease. The peak months were September and August. The 
officials said this was normal at the time of the year but they 
did not know the reasons for this. 
  According to officers, while all children were vaccinated 
against measles at an early stage, the protection against the 
disease tended to be limited as they grew older. As a result, 
the most affected were those above the age of five, they said. 
  In Bulawayo more than 1,000 cases of the disease were 
recorded but officials said the epidemic was under control. No 
figures of deaths were given. 

  -  A total of 22 cases of measles were recorded in Gweru last 
month. According to the city health department's monthly 
reports, cases of measles have been increasing steadily since 
July, when the first case was diagnosed. 
  The city health department had since July recorded 50 cases 
of the disease and some of the cases were from outside Gweru. 
The report said most of the cases recorded were mild and 
therefore did not require hospitalisation. The city health 
department in the report urged residents to ensure that their 
children were immunised against the disease. It said although 
the vaccination was not able to completely eradicate measles, it 
reduced the mortality and severity of the disease. 


