Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Dr. Andreas Trepte of the General Administration </F>
of the Max Planck Society: "On the Road Toward a Single 
Research Scene"; first paragraph is MPG SPIEGEL introduction] 
  [Text] Three years after German unification, the Max 
Planck Society feels that the time has come to review its 
achievements in the new federal laender and, where necessary, to 
adjust its funding policy for the accession area to take account 
of developments to date. This funding policy is based on a 
program drawn up by the society's governing bodies in the late 
fall of 1990 and comprising (as summarized below) two components 
or -- to put it simply -- a priority program devised to 
implement fast-acting measures and a long-term program 
envisaging the founding of Max Planck institutes. 
  The strategy underlying the funding policy that the 
Max-Planck Society adopted for the new federal laender in 1990 
may be summarized as follows: 
  1. Priority program designed to enhance university research, 
comprising: 
  -- funding of joint research undertaken with scientists from 
the new federal laender (1990-1992), and 
  -- establishment of: 
  a) teams; 
  b) local branches of institutes; and 
  c) centers for the humanities (1991-1997). 
  2. Long-term program envisaging the founding of Max Planck 
institutes in the new federal laender. 
<H5>  Enhancing University Research </H5>
  From 1990 to 1992, the priority program was mainly used to 
help establish contacts and initial joint research projects 
between scientists from the new federal laender and scientists 
at the Max Planck institutes. In parallel with these 
initiatives, a total of 28 temporary teams were set up at seven 
universities in the course of 1992 as a means of helping enhance 
basic research there. The building modernizations needed by 
these teams are being completed in 1993, so all the teams will 
now be able to make full use of their newly refurbished premises 
and accommodation. The host universities have meanwhile 
appointed 20 team leaders, while the appointment procedure for 
six more leading scientists is at an advanced stage and is 
expected to be completed before the end of 1993. There have 
been delays with two teams, one due to the introduction of 
integrity review [Integritaetspruefung] procedures at east 
German universities and the other to the prospective leader's 
appointment to another university. The people concerned at the 
universities and ministries, the Max Planck Society, and the Max 
Planck institutes sponsoring the two teams in question are 
working on solutions to the problems that these delays are 
creating and hope to come up with alternatives by the end of the 
current year. 
<H5>  Preservation of Existing Research Capabilities </H5>
  The Science Council's recommendations that two local 
branches 
of existing Max Planck institutes be set up and seven centers 
for the humanities be established and sponsored over a limited 
period as a contribution to the reorganization of research in 
the former GDR gave an additional boost to the Max Planck 
Society's priority program in 1991. 
  The local branches of the Max Planck institutes of Plasma 
Physics and Extraterrestrial Physics began work on 1 January 
1992. 
  In 1992, the Max Planck Society, via its "New Scientific 
Project Funding Corporation Limited," which it founded in 1991, 
began establishing seven research centers for the humanities, 
recruiting the requisite staff, and arranging accommodation and 
providing administrative facilities for them, pursuant to the 
Science Council's recommendation. This work was successfully 
completed by spring 1993. The drafting of recommendations as to 
the conceptional configuration and institutional organization of 
these centers has also been completed by a committee appointed 
by the chairman of the Max Planck Society. After the Max Planck 
Society's senate had noted these recommendations in June 1993, 
they were passed on to the Science Council so that it could 
express a final opinion on them sufficiently in advance of the 
beginning of the Max Planck Society subsidiary's trusteeship of 
the centers. It is now a pressing concern to all involved that 
a decision be made as early as possible as regards the future 
development prospects of the centers and that measures be taken 
accordingly. 
  The Max Planck Society's long-term program was also enlarged 
as a result of Science Council recommendations that two Max 
Planck institutes be set up in the light of its assessment of 
non-university research in the former GDR: the Max Planck 
institutes of Microstructure Physics and Colloid and Interface 
Research. As with the recommendations regarding the priority 
program, two major concerns in this case as well have been to 
prevent the disintegration of viable research capabilities, 
though without perpetuating the old structures, and to dismantle 
excess capacities which cannot be funded albeit without 
destroying longstanding working relationships. It was therefore 
necessary not only to formulate new scientific strategies, but 
to restructure the research work itself and to draft in 
scientists from other organizations. Seven scientists from 
Germany and abroad have been appointed as directors for the top 
positions at the two Max Planck institutes. 
<H5>  Aspirations and Obstacles </H5>
  Since the start of German unification, it has been the Max 
Planck Society's desire that its specific facilities should 
contribute to the creation of a single research scene in the 
united Germany. Under its long-term program, it therefore began, 
even before the end of 1990, to discuss, select, and plan 
projects for founding institutes to cover topics that would 
effectively enhance the research scene in the new laender and at 
the same time boost the research capability of the united 
Germany as a whole. The individual elements and the 
implementation schedule up to the summer of 1993 are set out 
below. 
<H3>  Implementation of the Max Planck Society's Program to Set Up 
Research Facilities in the New Federal Laender (1991-1993) </H3>
  1. Priority Program 
  1991: Founding of 28 teams, two local branches of 
institutes, and seven humanities centers; 
  1992: Creating working facilities required for 28 teams, 
two local branches of institutes, and seven humanities centers. 
  2. Long-Term Program 
  1991: Decisions to found two MPI's* 
  -- Microstructure Physics; and 
  -- Colloid and Interface Research. 
  1992: Implementation of the 1991 decisions; 
  Decisions to found four MPI's: 
  -- Biology of Infection; 
  -- Plant Physiology; 
  -- Economic Systems; and 
  -- Physics of Complex Systems. 
  Discussion of further projects to found institutes. 
  1993: Decision to found one MPI: 
  -- History of Science. 
  Implementation of the 1992/1993 decisions. 
  Discussion of further projects to found institutes: 
  -- Neuropsychology; 
  -- Theoretical Biology; 
  -- Peptide Binding; 
  -- Physics of Gravitation; and 
  -- Research on the Enlightenment 
[Aufklaerungsforschung]** * [Max Planck institutes] ** The Max 
Planck Society committee concerned currently sees no possibility 
of implementing this project as a Max Planck institute. 
  The long-term program is based on an awareness that research 
priorities in the new federal laender cannot merely be deduced 
from the existing capabilities there but also require strategies 
that take account of the recent and latest developments in 
science and research at the international level. 
  To this end, the scientific members of the Max Planck 
Society 
submitted a total of 25 proposals for projects in 1990, 11 of 
which were finally selected according to science policy criteria 
and thoroughly discussed and assessed. The scientific 
discussions on five projects reached a positive conclusion in 
spring 1993 -- with the Max Planck Society's senate deciding to 
found an institute in each case. 
  However, for a considerable time it could not be predicted 
whether the federal and land governments would be prepared to 
finance further Max Planck Society institutes in the new laender 
to the level envisaged in the society's plans. Indeed, in 1992 
all the signs pointed to the Society having to make do with only 
a very tight financial framework far below its budget 
requirements. 
  The senate of the Max Planck Society thus found itself 
forced, in June 1992, to make the implementation of its 
decisions to found further Max Planck institutes in the new 
laender subject to a special financing reservation. The Max 
Planck Society had originally intended to begin setting up the 
majority of its newly founded institutes at the end of 1992, and 
to decide on their locations accordingly. However, the funds 
available under the society's budget for 1993 and the Federal 
Government's middle-term budget appropriations for the Max 
Planck Society in the accession area did not provide an adequate 
basis on which to proceed. 
  Then, in August 1992 -- when consideration of the 1994 
budget 
was imminent -- the Max Planck Society formerly asked the 
Federal Government and the heads of government of the original 
and new federal laender to create the conditions required to 
implement its program. This request aimed to obtain a consensus 
among the funding authorities both as to the timeframe within 
which the goal of as even as possible a distribution of Max 
Planck institutes in the united Germany could be achieved and as 
to the increase in funding that this would require over the 
following five years. 
  Being unable to wait for a reply from the federal and land 
governments, the Max Planck Society decided immediately, in 
November 1992, to proceed with the implementation of at least 
some of the decisions to found institutes, thus running a 
considerable risk. In November 1992, the senate accordingly 
decided to go ahead and set up a Max Planck Institute of the 
Biology of Infection and a Max Planck Institute of Research into 
Economic Systems and to enter into negotiations with the two 
host laender concerned. 
  Over the following months it became increasingly clear, 
particularly in the chairman's talks with the 
minister-presidents of the new laender and the Federal Minister 
of Research and Technology, that the governments of the new 
laender were in agreement with the Max Planck Society's program 
for setting up research facilities in the accession area and 
were prepared to give active support to its plans. For its 
part, the BMFT [Federal Ministry of Research and Technology] 
announced an appreciable rise in its budget appropriations for 
the Max Planck Society's work in the new federal laender 
commencing 1994. 
<H5>  Further Institutes Founded and Initial Recruitment Talks Held </H5>
  It was these two parallel developments, the positive 
reaction 
of the heads of government of the new laender and the Federal 
Government's revised plans, that made it possible, in March 
1993, for the Max Planck Society's senate to present the plans 
to date for the locations of the institutes on which decisions 
had already been made and the options available for the 
locations of those still under discussion. Following this 
senate meeting, a start was made on implementing the decisions 
to found institutes that had been set aside until then, i.e.: 
  -- the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology in 
the Potsdam area; 
  -- the Max Planck Institute of the Physics of Complex 
Systems 
in Dresden, and 
  -- the Max Planck Institute of the History of Science in 
Berlin. 
  This cleared the way for recruitment talks with all the 
directors-designate and targeted negotiations with the 
prospective host laender so that matters such as premises for 
the institutes and each institute's integration into the local 
scientific scene could be settled rapidly and by common accord. 
  Provided the negotiations with the future host laender can 
be 
brought to a positive conclusion in good time and the directors- 
designate accept the appointments offered to them, these five 
institutes will be able to begin work before the end of the 
current year, or at the latest in the first half of next year. 
Together with its two existing institutes, the Max Planck 
Society will then have seven institutes in the new federal 
laender and the eastern part of Berlin. 
<H5>  Plans for Five More Research Facilities </H5>
  Five more research institutes are already in an extremely 
advanced stage of scientific planning and, subject to the 
outcome of scientific discussions at the end of 1994, a start 
could be made with setting them up in the course of 1995 at the 
latest. These institute foundation projects cover: 
  -- the physics of gravitation; 
  -- theoretical biology; 
  -- neuropsychology research; 
  -- enzymology of peptide binding (Footnote 1), and 
  -- research on the European Enlightenment (Footnote 2). 
  A clear picture already exists as to the location of most of 
these facilities from the point of view of local scientific 
scene and appropriate regional distribution: The European 
Enlightenment and enzymology of peptide binding projects would 
probably be located in Halle and a Max Planck Institute of the 
Physics of Gravitation in Potsdam. Locational conditions 
appropriate for the planned Max Planck Institute of 
Neuropsychology Research have been identified in both Leipzig 
and Magdeburg, and the two cities are currently being considered 
by the committee concerned. The committee in charge of the 
projected Max Planck Institute of Theoretical Biology will 
consider two alternative host cities: Rostock and Jena. 
<H5>  Regional Distribution in the New Federal Laender </H5>
  The following regional distribution options are currently 
being considered for the two existing, five developing, and five 
planned Max Planck Society projects: Berlin 
  -- Biology of Infection and 
  -- History of Science. Brandenburg 
  -- Colloid and Interface Research; 
  -- Molecular Plant Physiology, and 
  -- Physics of Gravitation, 
  all in the Potsdam area. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania 
  -- Theoretical Biology 
  in Rostock (alternative to Jena/Thuringia). Saxony 
  -- Physics of Complex Systems 
  in Dresden, and 
  -- Neuropsychology 
  in Leipzig (alternative to Magdeburg/Saxony-Anhalt). 
Saxony-Anhalt 
  -- Microstructure Physics 
  in Halle; 
  -- Enzymology of Peptide Binding 
  in Halle, and 
  -- Neuropsychology 
  in Magdeburg (alternative to Leipzig/Saxony). Thuringia 
  -- Research into Economic Systems 
  in Jena and 
  -- Theoretical Biology 
  in Jena (alternative to Rostock/Mecklenburg) 
  According to current plans, the Max Planck Society will be 
represented in the new federal laender and the eastern part of 
Berlin from 1995 onwards with a maximum of 12 and a minimum of 
10 institutes. 
  Footnotes 1. Solutions other than the founding of an 
institute are also being discussed for this facility. 2. The 
Max Planck Society committee concerned currently sees no 
possibility of implementing this project in the form of a Max 
Planck institute. However, the final decision will be made by 
the section concerned or, if appropriate, by the senate of the 
Max Planck Society at its October and November meetings this 
year. 
<H5>  1993 Interim Report </H5>
  The stage reached by September 1993 in discussing, founding, 
and setting up Max Planck Society [MPG] research institutes in 
the new funding area is summarized below. 
<H5>  Max Planck Society's Work in the New Federal Laender and </H5>

Berlin, Status: September 1993 
  I. Facilities Founded Further to Max Planck Society 
Planning: 
  Teams at Universities: 
  A. Humboldt University, Berlin: 
  -- Structural Grammar; 
  -- Algebraic Geometry, Number Theory; 
  -- X Ray Diffraction on Coating Systems; 
  -- Nonconventional Radiation; 
  -- Quantum Chemistry; 
  -- Cell Division Regulation and Gene Substitution; 
  -- Transformation Processes in the New Laender; 
  -- Theory of Low-Dimension Semiconductors. 
  B. University of Potsdam: 
  -- Error Tolerant Computing; 
  -- Nonlinear Dynamics in Astrophysics; 
  -- Estate Ownership East of River Elbe; 
  -- Partial Differential Equations and Complex Analysis. 
  C. University of Rostock: 
  -- Theoretical Multiparticle Systems; 
  -- Complex Catalysis; 
  -- Asymmetrical Catalysis. 
  D. Technical University of Dresden: 
  -- Theory of Complex Electron Systems; 
  -- Mechanics of Heterogeneous Solid Bodies. 
  E. University of Leipzig: 
  -- Time Resolution Spectroscopy. 
  F. University of Halle-Wittenberg: 
  -- Enzymology of Peptide Binding; 
  -- Environment Law; 
  -- Liquid-Crystal Systems. 
  G. University of Jena: 
  -- CO2 Chemistry; 
  -- X Ray Optics; 
  -- Dust in Star Formation Areas; 
  -- Theory of Gravitation; 
  -- Molecular and Cellular Physiology; 
  -- Pharmacological Hemostaseology; 
  -- Signal Transmission by Growth Factors. 
  II. Facilities Founded Further to Science Council 
Recommendations: 
  A. Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics. 
  B. Max Planck Institute of Colloid and Interface Research. 
  C. Berlin Branch of Max Planck Institute of Plasma Physics. 
  D. Berlin Branch of Max Planck Institute of Extraterrestrial 
Physics. 
  E. Centers for Humanities Research (sponsored by the New 
Scientific Project Funding Corporation Limited): 
  -- Historical Studies; 
  -- History and Theory of Science; 
  -- Research into the European Enlightenment; 
  -- Modern Middle Eastern Research; 
  -- General Linguistics, Speech Typology, and Linguistic 
Universals Research; 
  -- Literary Research; 
  -- History and Culture of Central, Eastern Europe. 
  III. Further Projects under Scientific Discussion: 
  -- Physics of Gravitation; 
  -- Theoretical Biology; 
  -- Neuropsychology Research; 
  -- Enzymology of Peptide Binding; 
  -- European Enlightenment. 
  IV. Senate Decisions to Found Following Projects Taken: 
  -- Max Planck Institute of the Biology of Infection; 
  -- Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology; 
  -- Max Planck Institute of Research into Economic Systems; 
  -- Max Planck Institute of the Physics of Complex Systems; 
  -- Max Planck Institute of the History of Science. 
  However, the locations established to date and those still 
under consideration for the institutes envisaged so far are not 
yet sufficient to achieve the Max Planck Society's goal of 
proportionate regional presence in the accession area. One of 
the main reasons behind this initial lack of balance is that the 
local scientific scenes, which are essential for productive Max 
Planck institutes [MPIs], differ widely in the individual 
laender. The Max Planck Society is nevertheless confident that 
its current plans to found further institutes in the new federal 
laender will bring it sufficiently close to achieving the 
desired balance in the distribution of its research facilities 
to keep the gap between the relative advantages and drawbacks of 
the individual laender, which is also seen in the original 
federal laender, within limits in the end result. 
  The Max Planck Society's future planning for the new federal 
laender is based on the long-term program that it drew up in 
1990 alongside its priority program. In it, the Max Planck 
Society identified its long-term goal as focusing on funding 
basic research in institutes of its own in the new laender as 
well. It was and remains the Max Planck Society's concern to 
contribute to the creation of a single research scene in the 
united Germany by gradually founding a relatively large number 
of institutes in the new laender. In concrete terms, for the 
Max Planck Society a single research scene means, firstly, being 
represented on the same scale, proportionally speaking, in the 
new and original federal laender and, secondly, countering the 
danger of a transfer of finance away from the new and toward the 
original laender, as threatened from 1995, when research will be 
funded on an overall basis. If it is to achieve both these 
goals, the society will need to have 15 to 20 institutes in the 
new laender by the turn of the century. 
<H5>  Planning Principles and Special Features </H5>
  To enable it to meet these targets, the Max Planck Society 
has set in motion a complex, ongoing procedure for discussing, 
founding, and building up new institutes. This procedure is 
based on the special role performed by the Max Planck Society 
within Germany's widely differentiated system of 
institutionalized research and comprises the following 
principles: 
  -- The Max Planck Society's domain is that of basic 
research, 
where it complements university research. It consequently 
relies on the existence of productive, broadly diversified 
university research (principle of subsidiarity); 
  -- The Max Planck Society supports basic research in areas 
holding out particular promise for the future but which the 
universities have not yet (adequately) taken up or which they 
cannot (adequately) cover (principle of emerging fields); 
  -- In order to fulfill its purpose, the Max Planck Society 
needs top scientists with a particular aptitude for leading its 
institutes (Harnack principle). 
  The Max Planck Society's procedure for discussing, founding, 
and setting up new research facilities, which involves a large 
number of outside experts, begins with the examination of 
proposals to found institutes and the selection of the most 
suitable topics according to a number of overriding criteria. 
This is followed by a survey of the stage reached in 
international research in the discipline concerned. The next 
steps in the procedure are to draw up and discuss the research 
strategy, to seek suitable candidates, and so on down to 
identifying the best location and acquiring equipment and 
premises for the future institute. 
  The founding of a Max Planck institute [MPI] has enormous 
consequences in institutional and staffing terms. It is not 
merely a matter of dignifying this or that research topic but of 
tying up financial resources and staff over an indefinite 
period. Last but not least, the working lives of top 
researchers are diverted to the facility. The preparatory 
procedure involved in founding an institute thus takes time, as 
it has to be extremely thorough in view of: 
  -- The financial implications inherent in the establishment 
of permanent institutes; 
  -- The time that it takes to set up the institute; and 
  -- The conditions necessary for the successful appointment 
of 
scientists at the forefront of the international field in their 
subjects. 
  The very principles on which this procedure is based tend to 
place limits on its success from within owing to: 
  -- The particular nature of the research topics, which means 
that, out of the whole range of supraregional nonuniversity 
research funding available, they require the specific facilities 
provided only by the Max Planck Society; and 
  -- The limited availability of top scientists suited to 
leading a Max Planck institute. 
  External constraints to which the procedure is subject 
depend 
firstly on the readiness of the federal and land governments to 
put up the funds needed to implement the institute projects 
given a positive assessment in this process. Other limits 
depend on the finite nature of the logistic capabilities that 
the Max Planck Society has at its disposal for setting up and 
administering new research facilities. 
<H5>  Continuous Implementation of Institute Founding Projects </H5>
  The Max Planck Society set its process for discussing the 
founding of institutes in the new federal laender in motion back 
in 1990, and it has produced the following results to date: 
  -- In 1991, the Max Planck institutes of Microstructure 
Physics (1) and Colloid and Interface Research (2) were founded 
following discussion of the Science Council's recommendations to 
this effect; 
  -- In 1992, the MPG decided to found four more Max Planck 
institutes of, respectively, the Biology of Infection (3), 
Molecular Plant Physiology (4), Research into Economic Systems 
(5), and the Physics of Complex Systems (6); 
  -- In 1993, it was decided to found the Max Planck Institute 
of the History of Science (7); and 
  -- Decisions to found five more institutes are expected in 
fall 1993 or the first half of 1994. 
  It was not until spring 1993, however, that the federal and 
land governments found themselves in a position to bring their 
budget priorities more closely into line with the Max Planck 
Society's institute founding work and to let the society know 
that it could now count on full support for the implementation 
of its long-term program in the new federal laender. Since June 
1993, the Max Planck Society has received enough hints to assume 
that the federal and land governments will provide the funds 
needed to achieve its overall goal, which is for its coverage of 
the new laender to be similar to its presence in the original 
federal area. Since February 1993, the Max Planck Society's 
committees have been continuing the selection and discussion 
process with a view to founding further institutes in the new 
laender, in the expectation that it will be possible to 
implement their decisions. 
  In order to be represented in the new laender by 15 to 20 
institutes by the turn of the century, the Max Planck Society 
hopes to found up to eight more institutes in the new federal 
area over the next few years in addition to those already 
existing and those now being set up or about to emerge from the 
discussion procedure. The Max Planck Society is relying on the 
federal and land governments' promise to provide the requisite 
funds for these plans, which will now assume concrete form, as 
well. 
  In order to meet the target of eight more institutes, the 
scientific members of the society have been asked to submit 
additional proposals for them, if possible by the end of 
November 1993. Spring 1994 will then see the beginning of 
specific discussions on the individual projects in the three 
sections of the Max Planck Society. As set out in box 3, the 
society plans to set up two institutes a year if possible 
between 1995 and 1999 in a continuous succession of planning and 
founding. 
<H3>  Implementation of the Max Planck Society's Program to Set Up 
Research Facilities in the New Federal Laender (1994-200) </H3>
  1. Priority Program 
  1994-1997: funding of teams and local institute 
branches, preparations for institutionalization of 
humanities centers; 
  1998-2000: integration of teams into host universities. 
  2. Long-Term Program 
  1994-2000: implementation of 1992/1993 decisions to 
found institutes, decisions to found projects 
discussed in 1993 and their implementation; discussion, 
founding, and setting up of further MPI's 
<H5>  Difficulties Encountered When Founding Institutes </H5>
  The Max Planck Society has always encountered specific 
difficulties when founding new institutes. Even the planning 
process itself runs a constant risk of foundering on account of 
the particular commitments that have to be entered into on such 
occasions. Moreover, it is the society's political counterparts 
who, by allocating funds or by deciding in favor of other 
priorities, create the conditions in which a project can be 
implemented or otherwise. In addition, our experience over the 
last two years has shown how much more difficult it is to set up 
institutes in the new laender, both because of the many matters 
of science policy and infrastructure planning that remain to be 
settled there, from the structure of higher education down to 
the problems caused by the building land and housing market, and 
because of the specific -- objective and subjective --difficulty 
that leading scientists may encounter in deciding to settle 
permanently with their families in the new federal laender. 
These various factors mean that the possibility of individual 
projects foundering in the new laender can never be ruled out, 
and the number of Max Planck Society commissions appointed to 
examine and draw up proposals for new institutes in 1994 will 
therefore be rather higher than the eight new institutes 
actually contemplated. 
  The committees' work will be arranged in such a way as to 
consider the issue of the choice of location for the projected 
institute as early as possible. The Science Council's 
recommendations as to the development of relevant research areas 
and programs at east German universities will be taken into 
account, as will any of the laender's and universities' plans 
that have now taken a more concrete form; systematic contacts 
with research and structural advisory bodies at the land 
ministries and talks with university colleagues from the 
disciplines concerned will gradually make it clear where 
appropriate conditions for the research work to be performed at 
the planned institute are to be found or may be expected within 
the foreseeable future, and where the institute can make a 
particular contribution to university research. The intention 
is that this procedure will bring the principle of subsidiarity 
to university research to bear in a manner appropriate to the 
specific situation of research in the new laender -- as is 
already the case with the Max Planck Society teams established 
at universities. 
<H5>  Dialogue With the Federal and Land Governments </H5>
  The Max Planck Society is already reporting regularly to the 
Federal-Land Commission on its progress in meeting its planning 
target of up to 20 institutes in the new laender and its 
middle-term financial planning at the annual round of budget 
negotiations. In the summer of 1993, the chairman of the Max 
Planck Society and the Federal Minister of Research and 
Technology also discussed plans for the Max Planck Society and 
the federal and land governments to confer regularly on the 
status reached in the planning of further Max Planck institutes 
and the financial requirements that they entail. An ongoing 
dialogue of this type would also enable the federal and land 
governments to adopt the financial measures required to 
implement the stage reached in the society's planning process at 
an early date. 
  As mentioned above, the Max Planck Society's target is not 
merely to achieve an adequate presence throughout the Federal 
Republic but to distribute the society's research capability 
fairly among the new federal laender. However, this goal of a 
single, coherent research scene cannot be achieved until the 
whole establishment process has been accomplished. On the 
contrary, the individual steps in this process will constantly 
create fresh imbalances, although they will only be temporary, 
and for this reason the Max Planck Society hopes to establish an 
intensive dialogue concerning close, trusting collaboration with 
the new laender themselves so that the intermediate steps can be 
accepted in their inevitable imbalance as a means to the end of 
a generally balanced, albeit not mathematically equal, 
distribution of the Max Planck institutes throughout the new 
federal laender. 

