Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Proposal by Coordinating Committee of the Sandinist </F>
Democratic Left (Pikin Guerrero); first paragraph is committee's 
introduction] 
  [Text] This month, as we commemorate the 60th anniversary 
of the assassination of Augusto Cesar Sandino and anticipate the 
Special Congress of the Sandinist National Liberation Front 
(FSLN), in keeping with the mandate of the Sandinist Assembly 
and the membership's desire to reflect on and debate more 
thoroughly the nature of our party and the future of the nation, 
we are making our contribution to the program specifications and 
helping to enrich the discussion at all levels and in all 
sectors of Sandinism. 
<H5>  Rule of Law, Social Justice, and Humanist Socialism </H5>
  The FSLN [Sandinist National Liberation Front] considers 
itself a revolutionary party whose fundamental objective is to 
struggle and work, in the short and medium term, for the 
establishment of the Rule of Law, Social Justice, and a Humanist 
and Democratic Socialism that will place the individual, the 
family, and the community at the center of its concerns. In this 
regard, the FSLN rejects the principles and measures of 
liberalism and neoliberalism as a solution to the political, 
social, and economic problems of Nicaraguan society. 
  The FSLN's aspiration and proposal for all of Nicaraguan 
society is to move gradually and progressively toward a humanist 
socialism in which the rule of law would combine with social 
justice and political and economic democracy, and popular 
organizations and sectors could achieve real participation in 
the political and economic power of the Nicaraguan nation. To 
achieve these objectives, the FSLN must ally itself with all 
those who are interested in eliminating the dictatorial and 
caudillist tendencies in politics and the concentrating and 
exclusive tendencies in the economy, which still prevail in 
Nicaraguan capitalist society. 
  The FSLN promotes relationships of respect and mutual 
benefit, as well as peaceful coexistence with the neighboring 
governments and peoples of Central America and the Caribbean, 
and particularly with the United States. 
  The FSLN makes common cause with the peoples of Latin 
America 
and the Caribbean in the defense of self-determination and 
national sovereignty. 
<H5>  Political Power </H5>
  The nation's sovereignty resides in the Nicaraguan people. 
  The people are the source of political power, and this power 
is expressed not only in the state apparatus and government 
institutions, but also in the institutions and organizations of 
civil society: trade associations; labor unions; churches; 
municipalities; associations of students, women, professionals 
and artists, and ethnic groups; cultural, agroecological, 
sports, and youth organizations; and nongovernment agencies in 
general. 
  The FSLN must stimulate the creation and democratic 
development of local, municipal, territorial, and associative 
power, without any sort of exclusion. 
  The FSLN considers the officers, petty officers, and 
enlisted 
men of the Army and the police to be the fruit of the RPS 
[expansion not given], and it encourages the subordination of 
their institutions to respect for human rights, the 
Constitution, and the laws of the Republic. 
<H5>  Political Democracy </H5>
  The legitimacy of political power lies in the general 
representation of the citizenry and the participation of all 
existing organizations in civil society. 
  The FSLN respects and democratically strengthens the 
institutions and political values that are most representative 
of national culture: administrative honesty, universal suffrage, 
the separation of powers, and national sovereignty and 
independence. It discourages, questions, and opposes any 
exclusive political culture. 
  As a democratic party, the FSLN represents all sectors of 
the 
Nicaraguan nation, without regard for race, religion, class, 
sex, ethnic group, or political position, who are struggling for 
peace, stability, security, and the political rights of all 
Nicaraguans. As a revolutionary party, the FSLN is striving to 
achieve real social participation in the realms and institutions 
of civil society and the national government, especially on the 
part of labor and popular sectors in general, and the rest of 
the dispossessed sectors of Nicaragua. 
  The FSLN respects, promotes, and develops civic methods for 
enriching the participation of the citizenry and of popular 
organizations in demanding respect for their political, social, 
economic, and cultural rights. 
  The FSLN defends the individual security and liberty of all 
Nicaraguans against the abuses of the government or any other 
national or international body. 
  The FSLN promotes full autonomy for the ethnic peoples and 
communities of the Atlantic coast. 
  The FSLN acknowledges the gender demands that the Nicaraguan 
feminist movement has been putting forth, and it struggles for 
the complete elimination of the discrimination that women 
suffer, and for their participation at all levels of national 
and party activity. 
<H5>  Economic, Social, and Cultural Democracy </H5>
  As a democratic party, the FSLN represents all sectors who 
are seeking national economic development and social justice. As 
a revolutionary party, it particularly represents the popular 
forces, midlevel sectors, professionals, intellectuals, and 
artists who want their fair share in the distribution of 
national wealth. 
  The FSLN rejects any position that promotes the restoration 
of the oligarchic regime, such as the exclusive and neoliberal 
policies that lead to social contradictions, conflicts, and 
instability. 
  The FSLN respects public and private property, as well as 
any 
other form of property; it struggles for the democratization of 
property ownership, and promotes and encourages all forms of 
associative property ownership: communal, cooperative, Workers' 
Property Area (APT), associative enterprises, municipal, 
autonomous and labor union, federative, and mixed. 
  The FSLN struggles to democratize the economy, striving to 
ensure that it will respond to the majorities, not the 
minorities, that its competitiveness is not oligopolistic, that 
it is based on ethical and popular criteria rather than 
demagogic moralities, that it is monitored by society and the 
state without distorting its role in the effective and 
productive allocation of resources, and that it is an economy 
that favors human resources rather than capital. 
  The FSLN promotes those economic policies that are aimed at 
productive growth, that involve distribution according to the 
work and productivity of each person, within the areas to which 
society and individual initiative consign them, and that give 
priority to providing employment, health, education, and housing. 
  The FSLN develops all possible initiatives and measures to 
reduce the poverty and unemployment that plague the majority of 
Nicaraguan people. 
  The FSLN struggles to gain access to the minimum conditions 
for a decent life for all individuals who, for reasons of age, 
sex, or physical disability cannot enjoy the general amenities 
of society. 
  The FSLN draws fundamental inspiration from the historical 
and cultural roots of the Nicaraguan people in its search for 
the economic model that is most beneficial to the nation as a 
whole, and to the impoverished majority in particular. 
  The FSLN struggles to preserve the national ecosystem, 
promoting all technical and cultural practices that strengthen 
the conservation, improvement, and maintenance of our resources. 
  The FSLN encourages economic policies that favor all social 
sectors, particularly rural and urban producers: democratization 
of credit, investment opportunities, and trade and financial 
information, for producers, workers, and consumers. It also 
promotes policies that deter capital flight and asset stripping. 
  The FSLN uses all possible influences, both nationally and 
internationally, to make sure that the state oversees national 
economic development and regulates the social distribution of 
wealth. 
<H5>  Party Organization </H5>
  The FSLN is a party that is open to all sectors of 
Nicaraguan 
society, and it aspires to represent, from the opposition or in 
the government, society as a whole, in the search for democracy, 
economic development, and social justice. It places the poor and 
the unemployed, who are the majority of Nicaraguans, at the 
center of its concerns. 
  The FSLN is a revolutionary, democratic, and participative 
party that struggles to reconcile individual initiative and 
freedom with the interests of the organization and the 
philosophical principles that guide it. 
  The FSLN is a party that promotes national and international 
political alliances with other parties with a view to achieving 
the objectives of the social and economic well-being of society 
as a whole, and the popular sectors in particular. 
  The FSLN is a party that respects the autonomy and interests 
of social and popular organizations, backs their demands and 
their struggles, and tries to attract them to its philosophy. 
  The FSLN is a broad and democratic party where there is room 
for all citizens who accept its philosophical principles, 
respect for Sandinist unity, and majority decisions. 
  The FSLN is a party that promotes consensus among its 
members, using discussion and dialogue as a means of resolving 
internal conflicts. 
  The FSLN favors renewal, modernization, change, and internal 
democracy as ways of strengthening Sandinism from the left. 
<H5>  Methods of Struggle </H5>
  The FSLN considers the methods of parliamentary and legal 
struggle, popular mobilization, and public debate to be a 
legitimate combination. 
  The FSLN considers that the struggles of any popular 
organization should be based on the broadest consensus of the 
rank and file as well as the support, coordination, and 
solidarity of related organizations, and should include among 
their objectives and procedures the persuasion of the populace 
in order to incorporate it into their demands. 
  The FSLN considers information, education, and humanist 
instruction to be the fundamental instrument for nourishing the 
political, social, and economic ethics of Sandinists and of 
Nicaraguans in general. 
  The FSLN considers direct, secret, and universal suffrage to 
be a legitimate method of struggle in campaigns for municipal 
and parliamentary office and for the presidency, as well as any 
other national or party office. 
  By the Discussion Forum of the Sandinist Democratic Left 
Coordinating Committee (Pikin Guerrero) 

