Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Legislative and Parliamentary Affairs 
Division. The Majles held sessions yesterday and last night 
and began its examination in the first round of discussions of 
the general points of the budget, during which time supporters 
and opponents of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget 
made speeches. We call to your attention the details of the 
discussions. 
<H5>  'Ali Zadsar, Supporter </H5>
  A major part of the statements of Mr. Zadsar were published 
in yesterday's issue of the newspaper. Here, the parts of his 
speech concerning waste, which were mentioned as examples will 
be noted: The officials of Kerman Province, in particular the 
governor-general, should be kind enough to enlighten us as to 
whether or not the Mola al-Movahedin Institute and its numerous 
affiliated companies has been formed and is thriving, with all 
the political, economic, and cultural resources of the sacred 
Islamic regime, and whether or not the income taxes have been 
deposited in the Treasury. 
  He continued: Has the Mahan Company, which competed with the 
national airlines, been established with the support of the 
government and the office of the governor-general of Kerman and 
the money and power of the country or not? Is the tax on the 
profit gained from every round-trip ticket, which is sold at 
60,000 rials[R] deposited in the Treasury or in the account of 
the members of the board of directors? Many such questions are 
being asked throughout the country and in Greater Tehran, all of 
which cannot be mentioned in this brief speech. 
<H5>  'Abdollah Nowruzi, Opponent </H5>
  Mr. 'Abdollah Nowruzi, the deputy of the people of Malayer, 
spoke as an opponent of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
budget and said: Our process of writing the budget is routine; 
our budget writers do not evaluate the budget of the previous 
years; and the revenues in the budget are not written in 
rationally. 
  He said: Everyone knows that the decrease in the price of 
oil 
is in effect to impose pressure on the Islamic Republic of Iran. 
Now, what practical and reasonable methods have our planners 
devised to reduce dependence on oil, move towards nonoil 
exports, increase tax revenues, and decrease the expenditures of 
the government organizations? He added: Companies evade the 
payment of taxes and even fabricate numbers in order not to pay 
taxes, while a part of the revenues of these companies is placed 
at the disposal of real or legal persons or spent on luxuries. 
He added: Such companies are included in the main factors in 
inflation growth in the society. 
  Emphasizing that revenues from increased government services 
be spent on fundamental affairs, he asked for the control of 
prices. 
<H5>  Mohammad Reza Khabbaz, Supporting </H5>
  Khabbaz was the next supporter. He said: The revolving funds 
last year were R2,500 billion, which the committee reduced to 
R1,000 billion. Yet, this increase in cash flow is not without 
effects. Another point that the Joint Committee included in this 
bill is the examination of government companies, banks, and 
government-affiliated for-profit establishments that are 
required to have their annual figures and budgets ratified by 
the Majles. 
  Referring to the capping of the ceiling of government funds 
set at R7,000 billion, he added: If this ceiling is not capped, 
you know that injecting money into the society will mean 
increasing the cash flow, and increasing the cash flow means the 
creation of inflation. Since we are moving towards 
privatization, our slogans and actions must be the same. Hence, 
the majority of these funds, about 55 percent, are allocated to 
the private sector for privatization. 
  He mentioned the elimination of tax exemptions as another 
characteristic of this report and pointed out: In a correct 
economy, tax exemption is meaningless. Of course, there are some 
companies and charitable organizations, which the government 
must take under its wing, and the Majles certainly does not 
oppose this. He added: Another characteristic of the report is 
that the Consumer and Producer Protection Organization has been 
given the responsibility of granting subsidies for essential 
goods. However, my support should not suggest overall agreement; 
there are problems in this report concerning that the Majles 
will use its authority at the proper time. Note 27 is another 
feature, according to which, fortunately, a good fund of more 
than R300 billion has been allocated to the Office of the 
Affairs of Deprived Regions. This is a very constructive action. 
In regards to Note 25, offered by the government, we believe 
that this note is in keeping with the Second [Five-Year 
Development] Plan. In other words, the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995] budget is not the place for it to be examined. 
  In continuing his speech, Khabbaz pointed out: Another 
reason 
for my support for the proposal of the Joint Committee is that, 
fortunately, attention is paid to the details of many of the 
issues, and the government is given the responsibility of taking 
into consideration the inflation index in coordinating the 
appropriate profit margin for economic activities in the 
industries and trade sectors with regard to 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] pricing of guaranteed agricultural and 
animal husbandry products. 
<H5>  Mohsen Yahyavi, Opponent </H5>
  Yahyavi, the deputy of Tehran, as an opponent of the 1373 
[21 
March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, thanked the brothers in the 
Joint Committee for their hard work and said: Decreasing 
inflationary pressures by emphasizing the control of the volume 
of cash flow and increasing subsidies on essential goods, such 
as the increase in the government's ceiling from $300 million to 
$800 million, the increase in the government's ceiling from $300 
million to $400 million for the import of raw materials, and the 
allocation of $80 million in foreign currency for students, 
which reduced the pressures on their families and for which the 
government had not included anything, are something but, in my 
opinion, not enough. 
  Referring to Note 25, he said: In Note 25, by increasing 
prices, the Joint Committee claims that 5,000 tomans will be the 
individual per capita share. In reality, it will be several 
times this amount. 
  In hiring a taxi, fuel must not be more than 20 percent of 
the effective factor, because attrition and spare parts are at 
issue. [sentence as published] But, as soon as we increase the 
price 1.5 times, even if the taxi driver does not double his 
fare, he will increase it by no less than 1.5 times. Based on 
greed, they impose pressure on our people several fold. What 
percentage of the people of our country have we exempted from 
taxes because they have a monthly income of 15,000 tomans or 
less? And then we impose other taxes on them. Of course, we know 
that these prices are not realistic prices and the subsidy that 
we pay for our services is the most unjust distribution of the 
Treasury among the people. Why? Because more of this subsidy 
goes to affluent families, who make more use of these services. 
He stated that the elimination of this injustice will take time. 
  In another part of his speech, Mr. Yahyavi said: 
  I remember that my brother, Mr. Dari, spoke prior to the 
open 
session on certain issues that occurred in the presence of the 
grand leader. When I said to him what I have said here, perhaps 
a little more, concerning Note 25, corroborating my statements, 
he mentioned the problems of certain individuals who have 
complained to him. For example, a person whom he trusts to be 
truthful had said to him that he has not been able to buy meat 
at 500 tomans [per kg] for six months. Then, someone added that 
some people may take advantage of what he says and, resorting to 
Note 25, oppose it. He said, If so, they will have done a good 
thing. 
  This shows that the leader is very well aware of the 
pressures imposed on the people. He then added that some things 
seem logical, but the time for them is not right yet. For 
example, I believe that we must produce as little oil as 
possible. But when the minister of petroleum speaks to me, 
stating that we have produced more oil, I admire it, because 
today we require that more oil be produced. As a result, the 
interpretations of this note might be on the side of social 
justice, but on the basis of this statement, now is not the 
right time for this social justice. Of course, this last brief 
statement is my own conclusion. 
  He said: The Joint Committee has increased the subsidy on 
essential goods by $200 million. But we know that this subsidy, 
with the population increase that we have, is still about 300 
percent less than that of last year. We have decreased the 
foreign currency allocated to essential goods compared to last 
year, and by increasing prices we impose another problem on the 
people. Of course, there may be some exceptions to these price 
increases, such as for electricity, which can be calculated on 
the basis of increasing consumption. But I believe this note 
must be omitted. 
  Yahyavi added: Part "B" of Paragraph "D," regarding document 
credit opened prior to 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994], 
states that it should be close to the floating foreign currency 
rate. This is very dangerous. You see, if the Ministry of 
Petroleum, which has ordered a great deal of material, waits to 
import [those materials] tomorrow, it will have to contribute 
all you have allocated to it to make the payment. 
  Referring to the effects of Note 2 on the increase in the 
price of general needs and increasing inflation, he said: If a 
proper mechanism is not devised, the increase in the price of 
energy will have ill effects on the deprived classes. 
  He regarded the national tax system as insufficient to 
achieve the projected goals in this bill and added: Considering 
that there is more emphasis on taxes than oil revenues, this 
system must be reformed. 
<H5>  'Abbasi'ali Zali, Supporter </H5>
  The next supporter of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
national budget bill was Dr. Zali, the deputy from Karaj, who 
said in defense of the budget bill: Those who spoke as opponents 
stated the opinion of each and every member of the Joint 
Planning and Budget and Economic Affairs and Finance Committee 
and other experts. 
  The reason for my support for this bill is simple. The 
honorable deputies must, on the one hand, take into 
consideration the problems that were at issue and, on the other 
hand, accept that in the 47 meetings held to examine the issues, 
in the presence of a large number of responsible and expert 
individuals and deputies, ultimately, this outcome may have been 
the best ratification possible. 
  Concerning the decrease in expenditures and preventing 
waste, 
Dr. Zali said: The Joint Committee took these problems into 
consideration. Decreasing dependence on oil and decreasing 
foreign obligations were very important principles to which 
attention was paid throughout. Finally, by implementing revenue 
policies, we tried to take into consideration issues concerning 
the deprived regions and low-income strata as well as the 
agricultural sector, to which special attention must be paid in 
the Second Plan. 
  He also added: The fact that our revenues must conform to 
the 
expenditures is absolutely true. We projected the foreign 
currency revenues of the country at about $1.9 billion less than 
that of the government bill. We feel that if we take into 
consideration the realities, it will be in the best interest of 
the country. 
  In connection with the increase in taxes in 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995], he said: We increased the tax revenues from 
19.1 percent to 26.1 percent. In other words, we made the 
revenues rely on 7 percent more taxes than what the government 
had proposed. As to what mechanism exists to collect the taxes, 
that is an issue that must be looked into in regard to 
implementation. God willing, the tax pressure will be on the 
shoulders of those who should pay them. 
  The member of the Planning and Budget Committee stated: 
Taking into consideration that imports must be prevented, 
through import tariffs we were able to increase government 
revenues from R1,540 billion to R2,520 billion. In regards to 
the increase in prices in Note 25, he said: These decisions are 
not without reason. At the present, we have projects in the 
country that must be implemented, and their implementation is 
dependent on this note. If the deputies are prepared to stop the 
implementation of these projects and abandon them, eliminating 
the increase in prices would be logical. But if they are not 
content with this idea, another approach is to increase 
borrowing as before, and we have witnessed the inherent results 
and problems. Hence, if we have to make gasoline R80 as opposed 
to 12 tomans, as was suggested by the government, the decision 
was based on these facts. In order to avoid putting pressure on 
the low-income strata, we implemented these issues. Pressure 
must be on the shoulders of those who make the most use of the 
national resources. If we give subsidies to energy, fuel, and 
other things, who is making use of these subsidies? We say that 
policies should be implemented so as to avoid harming the 
low-income classes. Every day, 300 million liters of gasoline 
are used in the country. If you calculate it, it comes to 700 
million tomans. Why should all the strata pay this subsidy? 
  Concerning waste and its prevention in government 
organizations, Dr. Zali said: Most of the waste is in the 
government companies. We insist that the government gradually 
transfer these companies, so that they will become profitable 
and pay their taxes. We must accept that the decisions that have 
been made are absolutely in the interest of the country. Just 
imagine, 15 government companies, which were supposed to pay 
taxes have refused to do so and have paid less, and 25 companies 
paid no taxes. Concerning the first case, the Joint Committee 
included R28 billion for them. In the second case, the 
difference was R504 billion. On the whole, we made the policy 
for the companies such that they are not allowed to save more 
than 30 percent of the difference between their gross profit and 
their expenditures. Rather, they should be taxed. The 
implementation of this policy will prevent waste. 
<H5>  [Box, p 5] </H5>
<H3>  The Most Important Statements of the Supporters and 
Opponents of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] Budget Bill </H3>
<H5>  Supporters </H5>
  1) In some cases, the allocated subsidies are 
anti-inflationary. 
  2) Customs tariffs have increased to protect domestic 
industries against luxury goods. 
  3) Attention is paid to the low-income strata. 
  4) The revenues of the country in this bill are realistic. 
  5) The rate of growth of cash flow has been controlled and 
banking funds limited. 
  6) Note 25 will result in an increase in investment in oil 
and energy. 
  7) The Joint Committee modifications in Note 25 are 
anti-inflationary. 
  8) Tax revenues have increased in the bill. 
  9) The ratification of Note 25 will prevent smuggling and 
waste of fuel. 
  10) The payment of more subsidies to the agricultural sector 
has been projected. 
<H5>  Opponents </H5>
  1) Dependence of the budget on oil has increased. 
  2) The government debt to the banking system will increase. 
  3) The 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget has not 
been 
written with a view to the culture. 
  4) The most important problem of this bill is the budget's 
reliance on the sale of oil. 
  5) There are weaknesses in writing the schedule and budget. 
  6) There is no requirement that the revenue projections in 
the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget be realistic. 
  7) Agriculture is not central in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995] budget. 
  8) The ceiling of the present budget is quite inflationary 
and unrealistic. 
  9) Despite the due date of some of the foreign currency 
obligations, the government has included $4.5 billion. 
  10) With the 30-percent increase in the cash flow in the 
budget, inflation will be 30 percent. [end box] 
<H5>  Zare'i-Qanavati, Opponent </H5>
  Zare'i-Qanavati, the deputy of the people of Behbahan, was 
the next opponent of the budget bill. He explained the reason 
for his opposition in his speech and said: I consider the 
changes in the budget bill by the Joint Committee a useful step, 
but the general direction of the budget can be improved. What I 
oppose is failure to achieve social justice, which is an 
essential principle of the Islamic government that is emphasized 
by the grand leader. 
  He then said: What the society expects of the Majles and 
what 
is emphasized by the grand leader is that price increases be 
prevented. This is also what the Majles wishes, but it is not 
seen in the budget bill. Although the Joint Committee has tried 
to control the price increases to some extent, the emphasis of 
the grand leader on conservation should be evident in the annual 
budget. The experience of previous years has shown that 
conservation is not achieved through advice and instructions, 
and the annual budget and the Five-Year Plan do not indicate it 
in the form of a policy. 
  In continuation, he pointed out: Under the present 
conditions, the strata with fixed incomes have a hard life. The 
deputies these days are aware of the anxiety of this 
hard-working strata as a result of the increases for next year 
in terms of such items as oil, water, electricity, and 
telephone. The cost of food, clothing, housing rent, 
transportation fares, and services in 1372 [21 March 1993-20 
March 1994] have increased by more than 50 percent, while the 
income of families has remained the same. As a result, their 
purchasing power has decreased. In the formulas of the 
organizations and the budget for contractors, inflation is 
calculated quarterly and modifications are made, and no one 
questions why this modification is implemented in regards to the 
workers of those workshops. 
  Praising the hard work of the committee in amending the 
bill, 
Zare'i-Qanavati said: Do not be satisfied with these reforms. No 
matter how much you raise taxes, since you do not have a system 
of controls, all these are paid by the low-income strata. 
  The figures in the budget show that dependence on oil has 
increased. In 1371 [21 March 1992-20 Mar 1993], this dependence 
was about 42 percent; in 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994], 
about 61 percent; and in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995]; 
about 62 percent. On the other hand, reliance on tax revenues 
has decreased. 
  In opposing the budget bill, the deputy from Behbahan also 
projected that in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] the value 
of the rial vis-a-vis the dollar will decrease. 
  In conclusion, he added: Efforts to free the country from 
reliance on oil and the dollar have had no favorable results. 
Also, an examination of the figures in the budget show that the 
debt of the government to the banking system will increase, and 
this increase is about R4,365 billion. 
  They say there is nothing to worry about in regards to the 
late debt payments. But we should worry, because, considering 
the uncertain future of the oil and the decreased 
foreign-currency income, repayment of part of the debt will 
cause problems, and failure to pay will also result in the 
postponement of many of the economic projects. 
<H5>  Seyyed Hoseyn Sharifi, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent was Sharifi, who in expressing his 
opposition mentioned the first problem as reliance on the 
traditional method of budget writing and said: For example, in 
the current sector, the increase of a percentage point over the 
budgets of previous years is made without an examination of the 
prices and the actual needs of every province. In this 
connection, there must be a basic revision. 
  He added: Despite the fact that large amounts have been 
invested in government companies, the profit resulting from them 
should overshadow other government revenues. But, unfortunately, 
in Paragraph "B" of Note 2 there is still talk of payments to 
assist the government companies because of the losses from the 
general funds. On the other hand, every year a major part of the 
banking funds is taken by these companies, which prevents the 
banks from giving loans to the private sector and other classes. 
  He continued: I ask the government representative to firstly 
explain about the curve showing increases and decreases in the 
debts of companies to the banking system and their present 
amount of debt and also discuss the companies in the country, 
which show profits and those that generate losses. In order to 
deal more realistically with an examination of the budget bill, 
the government representative must present a brief report on the 
collection of general revenues in the nine months of this year 
in proportion to the projected figures of the Majles. This can 
be one of the effective bases on which to make decisions 
concerning the present bill. 
  Stating that the cash flow increase this year and offering a 
correct analysis of the level of increase and lack of growth for 
next year, in considering the proposed budget, will make 
decision making easier for the Majles, he said: When there is 
talk of the vulnerable strata, we are talking about people who 
are covered by the Imam's Emergency Committee, whereas there are 
many salary earners, retired persons, villagers, and small 
businessmen on fixed incomes, and they must be taken into 
consideration in any discussion on the modification of prices. 
The speaker continued: It would be good if in the government 
bill special restrictions were placed on organizations in terms 
of foreign purchases and if attention were paid to industries 
and support for domestic products. If the Majles were absolutely 
certain that the revenues from Note 25 would all be spent on 
creating domestic jobs and on support for domestic products, 
certainly it would react to it differently. But such is not the 
existing trend of use of the domestic products in Note 25 by 
officials. For example, in Arak there are parent and heavy 
industries that are capable of producing more than the needs of 
the country, yet we see, in regards to oil and electricity, that 
the foreign manufacturers still thrive in the economic arena of 
the country, while, on the other hand, factories cry out in 
complaint. 
  Sharifi also pointed out: While it is true that there are 
telephone [services], decreased costs, and shortened time 
regarding commercial and residential buildings, they create 
expenditures for families and create income for the merchants. 
[sentence as published] 
  If Note 25 is accepted by the Majles, it can be modified in 
its place and its imposition in the accounting system of 
telephone bills is not a difficult task. 
<H5>  Mohammad Reza Bahonar, Supporter </H5>
  The next supporter was Bahonar, the deputy from Tehran, who 
said: The most essential cause of inflation is increased cash 
flow. In next year's budget, we ratified R7,000 billion as the 
ceiling on the growth of cash flow. Considering the cash flow 
that we anticipate having by the end of 1372 [20 March 1994], 
God willing, next year, while there will be some thriving of the 
national economy, the increase in cash flow will not exceed 15 
percent. Of course, in the government program proposed to the 
Majles, that is, the Second Developmental Plan, the average 
growth was [projected at] 12.5 percent, but, for various 
reasons, the bill presented to the Majles projected more than 
the amount I have stated. We hope that through controls and by 
better allocating banking funds and being somewhat conservative 
in granting loans to the large government and public companies, 
next year we can have a reasonable and tolerable cash flow for 
the oppressed strata of the society. 
  In continuation, in connection with Note 29 he said: The 
Joint Committee has omitted one or two main paragraphs of the 
above-mentioned note, because the economic capability of our 
country in connection with foreign obligations is much greater 
than what exists now. If we were viewed as are other countries 
in the world, even if we were to have more foreign debt than we 
have, this would not be detrimental. 
  Bahonar continued: Considering this principle, we must study 
our foreign obligations carefully and realize that our foreign 
obligations are below what is normal for other countries in the 
world. 
  In connection with observing the inevitable principle of 
dignity, wisdom, and expediency in foreign policy, the deputy 
from Tehran then said: These policies have been announced by the 
grand leader, and in economic issues we must keep in mind the 
three points of the dignity, wisdom, and expediency of the 
Islamic Republic. This year, compared to 1367 [21 March 1988-20 
March 1989], we have produced perhaps more than $6 billion in 
new products. In 1367 [21 March 1988-20 March 1989], we were 
obliged to import these same products from other countries. 
  Continuing, he said: If these paragraphs have been omitted 
from Note 29, it does not mean that the projects are shut down. 
It means that these projects can work within our acceptable 
ceiling of funds next year. But if they are about to go above 
that ceiling, we suggest that they be carefully examined 
expertly in the Second Plan. 
  In connection with Note 25, Engineer Bahonar said: In 
connection with the increase in the price of fuel, the Joint 
Committee agreed to R80 for gasoline, which is a 60-percent 
increase. However, the government had proposed R120. The 
committee agreed to R20 for kerosene, which is a 40-percent 
increase, whereas the government had proposed a 100-percent 
increase. We ratified the same figures as the government for 
natural gas, that is, at a 126-percent increase, and heating oil 
at a 25-percent price increase, the same as the government. 
  Then, in connection with the issue of customs tariffs, he 
said: We projected a mild increase in these tariffs for next 
year to support domestic products somewhat. We have been able to 
write the committee report so as to compel government companies 
to pay the taxes they are supposed to pay to the Treasury. 
<H5>  Yunos Mohammadi, Opponent </H5>
  Yunos Mohammadi, the deputy from Khorramshahr, was another 
opponent of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] national 
budget bill. He referred to Note 25 of this bill and said: The 
projected increase in the rate of fuel in this note will reduce 
the purchasing power of the people and weaken the national 
currency. 
  He also asked for the support of the low-income strata with 
regard to economic modifications and increased prices. 
  In order to reduce unnecessary revenues and create a balance 
between revenues and expenditures, the deputy of the people of 
Khorramshahr emphasized the elimination of luxury and waste, 
control of the smuggling of fuel, and prevention of the 
ratification of new developmental projects. [sentence as 
published] 
<H5>  'Ali Movahhedi-Savoji, Supporting </H5>
  'Ali Movahhedi-Savoji the deputy from Tehran was the next 
supporter of the budget bill. He said: No one in the Majles 
opposes the general points of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995] budget. But the disagreements concern the details and 
paragraphs of the bill. All the honorable opponents consider the 
direction of the Joint Planning and Budget and Economic Affairs 
and Finance Committee desirable, and it has gone in the 
direction that they wanted. They should look at the revenues 
realistically as far as possible and ratify them. In connection 
with reducing the government expenditures, as far as they could, 
they reduced them. The decrease of R2,000 billion from the 
general budget is in this direction. Also, in regards to 
revolving funds in the Treasury, which are cited in Note 1, we 
can see that the committee has reduced the government proposed 
revolving fund. In my opinion, this was the right thing to do, 
because this revolving fund at the beginning of the year is in 
effect borrowing, which of course must be repaid by the end of 
the year. In the past, the method was that they took this 
revolving fund and later did not return it to the Treasury. The 
important point is that the Majles and the Planning and Budget 
Committee must supervise and control this revolving fund. 
  In regards to Note 25, Movahhedi-Savoji said: The Joint 
Committee has tried to reduce the price increases. I do not 
agree with the government proposed increase in the price of 
electricity, water, telephones, and post, because in the past 
few years the government and related organizations have 
increased the price of telephones, water, electricity, and post. 
At present, people are protesting, worrying, and complaining 
about the increase in these prices, and to increase them again 
would not seem right. But, in connection with petroleum products 
that increase, I must say that the consumption of fuel in our 
country is higher than that of all other countries, and 
according to available reports, Iran uses enough fuel for 1.2 
billion people. It would appear that this action is the result 
of the fact that the government brings an excessive amount of 
gasoline and other products into the market. Of this 60 million 
population, how many make use of cars? Why is it necessary for 
gasoline that costs 30 tomans to be given to them for 5 tomans? 
One of the harmful effects of artificially low prices is that a 
great deal of fuel in our country is smuggled to other 
countries. Hence, the increase in the price of gasoline by the 
Joint Committee will have no inflationary effects. 
  Concerning the completion of incomplete projects in the 
country, he said: We believe new developmental plans and 
projects should not be started while we have important 
incomplete projects in the country. We must first complete those 
with this tight budget and the problems that we have and then 
start new projects. 
<H5>  Beytollah Ja'fari, Opponent </H5>
  He said: Note 25, in the form ratified in the Joint 
Committee, is still too inflationary and if ratified will result 
in increased prices in the country and confront the hard-working 
strata, who are the main soldiers of the revolution and Islam 
with difficulty. If the price of gasoline increases by 50 
percent, will the income of the people also increase by the same 
amount? They might say that subsidies are mostly used by the 
wealthy. The answer is clear. If the tax system is correctly 
amended and implemented, this problem will be resolved. If the 
government and the Plan and Budget Organization are looking for 
revenues, why do they use this lever in regards to the 
low-income class that makes up the majority? 
  Why does the government not make the government companies 
active? Of 1,200 government companies that, based on Note 2 of 
the 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994] budget law, must include 
their budgets in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, 
only 460 companies have included their budgets in the bill. The 
use of the budget by government companies is subject to bylaws 
that are usually ratified by the general assemblies. This will 
enable them not to observe the policies made by the Majles. In 
order not to adhere to these regulations devised by their 
general assemblies, government companies have created secondary 
companies. Even the ministries and government establishments 
have established and invested in other companies that appear on 
the surface not to be governmental. For instance, the Iran Steel 
Company has such companies as the Iranian National Steel 
Services Company and Retirement Fund at its side. At a time when 
the entry of cars by government organizations was prohibited, 
the Iranian National Steel Services Company, which appears not 
to be government-related, using the discount on commercial 
taxes, engaged in importing 200 cars to be used in mining 
projects, but in practice a number of them were sold to the 
Social Security Organization. These actions thwart the policies 
set by the Majles. The deputy from Urmia continued: My 
understanding of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget 
is that we have not made agriculture a central issue as we 
should have. As long as agriculture fails to be a central issue 
and investments in the county are not allocated to this sector, 
we will be obliged to import wheat, rice, meat, and other 
foodstuff from other countries, and subsequently the symptom of 
the migration from villages to cities will continue. 
  Ja'fari added: I agree with bringing the ceiling of the 
budget to the level of 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994], as 
proposed by the Industries and Mines Committee, because the 
ceiling of the present budget is quite inflationary and, more 
than the previous year, will result in price increases. 
<H5>  Hasan Aminlu, Supporter </H5>
  Another supporter of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
budget bill was Aminlu, who said: The budget that has been 
ratified this year is not an ideal budget. From our perspective, 
an ideal budget is a budget in which expenditures and revenues 
of the government are gained through taxes and added values and 
the per capita income of the people goes up. [sentence as 
published] We, too, have some criticism about the companies and 
the waste in them. 
  He added: It is necessary to mention that of the 8,000 
billion general government budget, 5,000 billion is in the 
budgets of the companies. We also believe that the supervisory 
dimension has been weak. We also have something to say in 
regards to surface revenues that are created. But this does not 
mean that we do not defend the positive points that exist in 
this year's budget. In the general picture of the budget this 
year and the changes that were made in the Joint Committee, out 
of the R3,600 billion general government budget, about R400 
billion have been deducted from the oil revenues; about R100 
billion have been deducted from the budget of Note 25; and about 
R50 billion of the expenditures sections have been transferred 
to the companies. 
  Of the total 500 billion toman reduction which has resulted 
in the revenues, about 100 billion concerned [Note] 25, and 200 
billion were the result of taxes and other revenues, which is a 
strength for the committee. Another 200 billion tomans has been 
reduced in the ceiling of revenues and general government 
expenditures. 
  He termed the decreased dependency of the budget on oil 
another point of strength for this bill and said: If we continue 
this trend gradually and in future years, the view is that every 
year a percentage of the budget revenues will be detached from 
oil and moved towards other revenues, which will certainly be in 
the interest of budget writing in the country. When our Majles 
dictates to the government that it reduce about 10 percent of 
the ceiling of its exports, it is good in international terms 
that Iran is even satisfied with the ceiling set by OPEC. Also, 
the price per barrel of oil is set lower this year. In Paragraph 
"C," it has been suggested that if oil revenues exceed the 
established ceiling and the value of oil goes up, about $1.3 
billion of the obligations that are set at $1.6 billion in Note 
29, $1.3 billion will be repaid through this same paragraph. 
[sentence as published] Aminlu then pointed out: With the 
changes that have been made in Note 25, first the ceiling that 
was projected was covered; also, it has devised a good policy in 
the electricity section to lessen the pressure on the vulnerable 
and low-income strata. 
  In regards to Note 29, too, good changes have been made. The 
issue of medicine today is one of the problems of the country. 
The Joint Committee in its wisdom has increased foreign currency 
for medicines and allocated $400 million to procure needed 
drugs. Even though this figure still does not meet all the 
pharmaceutical needs for the country, given the existing 
resources of the budget, this ratio for drugs is acceptable. The 
share of essential goods in Note 29 has increased. For students, 
the foreign currency that was not included in the government 
bill has been increased. 
  Referring to the increase in the payment of government 
obligations in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, 
concerning support for the vulnerable strata, he said: In some 
cases, there is support in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995] budget for the vulnerable strata, including payment of 
agricultural subsidies, keeping the price of electricity fixed 
for those with lower consumption, and the creation of a new line 
for the social security of villagers. 
  For the treatment of the vulnerable strata, the amount of 4 
billion tomans has been projected as a new line this year. This 
can be a start for general health insurance, which is on our 
future agenda. Subsidies for essential goods can be effective in 
solving many of the problems of many of the vulnerable strata. 
<H5>  'Abdolrahim Nurbakhsh, Opponent </H5>
  'Abdolrahim Nurbakhsh spoke in opposition to the budget bill 
and said: A comparison of the funds allocated to organizations 
since 1368 [21 March 1989-20 March 1990] shows that funds have 
increased in quantity, but in practice some of the 
organizations, such as education, labor, cooperatives, and 
higher education, have been declining in the 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] budget. I believe that the 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] budget has not been written from a cultural 
perspective, even though our revolution is essentially a 
cultural and ideological revolution. The direction of our budget 
must be towards the expansion of centers of higher education and 
their revitalization. 
  In continuing his speech, emphasizing the expansion of the 
Payam-e Nur University in the deprived areas, he asked that this 
university be strengthened and its present trend prevented. 
  Nurbakhsh also criticized lack of attention to cooperatives 
in the budget bill and said: Today, if we want to have a 
response to the unemployed youth, the only solution is the 
cooperative sector. Unfortunately, the dear ones and the experts 
of the Plan and Budget Organization have paid less attention to 
this issue. If there are unemployed and confused youth in the 
country and we are unable to attract them, what have we 
accomplished for them in connection with the cultural revolution 
in this bill? 
  Then, given the price increases that have been stated in 
Note 
25 along with the tariffs discussed there, in 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] we shall see symptoms resulting from these 
increases, and the heavy burden will be on the shoulders of the 
deprived strata in the society and the unemployed youth who have 
moved towards false jobs. 
<H5>  'Ali Mobini-Dehkordi, Supporting </H5>
  Referring to the policies governing the method of examining 
the revenues, he said: In the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
budget a new policy was devised to force the banking system to 
specify the ceiling of its funds for government and 
nongovernment sectors. Ultimately the change in the net debt of 
government companies and the private sector at the end of 1373 
[20 March 1995] does not exceed 7,000 billion, with the share of 
45 percent and 65 percent allocated to the government sector and 
the private sector, respectively. The funds from the notes in 
the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget amounted to R2,201 
billion. In comparison with the funds in 1372 [21 March 1993-20 
March 1994], which amounted to R1,782 billion, it has an 
appropriate growth, along with proper policies, growth of 
production, creation of jobs, providing of agricultural 
utilities, providing of the necessary material for carpet 
weaving workshops, and payment of loans to owners of 
residential, commercial, and production units damaged as a 
result of unexpected events. 
  Concerning the revolving funds, he said: The decrease in the 
ceiling of the revolving funds from R2,500 billion to R2,000 
billion and controlling the ceiling of banking funds can harness 
inflation through reducing the volume of cash flow. 
  He also added: Making the revenues realistic; creating 
variety in the revenue resources of the country; creating 
balance; collecting taxes for fundamental services proposed by 
the government; increasing the share of taxes in the total 
budget revenues; supporting domestic products with increased 
tariff percentages; paying attention to the low-income strata of 
the society in devising policies concerning the collection of 
taxes on electricity, natural gas, and kerosene; reducing the 
oil revenues; and reducing the cash flow volume as much as 
possible were among the other intended policies. 
  In continuation, he added: The share of tax revenues in the 
government proposed bill for 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
was about 19 percent, which the committee increased to 26 
percent. He added: The total revenues in the government proposed 
budget bill reached R33,593 billion, which the Joint Committee, 
carefully by examining the operation of revenue resources, 
brought to R30,220.8 billion, a decrease of R3,372.2 billion. 
This change was the result of reducing the projected tax 
collection of the government and Note 25 by R414 billion and 
reducing the oil revenues by R4,444 billion. If the share of 
taxes increased by R1,485.9 billion is deducted from it, it will 
reach R2,958 billion. 
  In conclusion, he said: In order to strengthen the financial 
and revenue discipline of the country and direct the government 
companies in such a way that the revenue-generating activities 
of government companies and executive organizations are 
appropriately devised and coherent with the general revenues and 
the general Treasury so as not to cause a decrease in taxes and 
the profit of government shares, the government must be obliged, 
on the basis of imports in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995], 
to set the commercial taxes on imported goods at a level that 
will at least retain the projected revenues. 
<H5>  'Abbas Sheybani, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent of the Planning and Budget Committee 
report 
said in a speech: Note 25 has no other use but to put pressure 
on poor people. Set aside every project that is involved. 
Suppose all of our oil wells were hit. In fact, go after an 
economy without oil. Why are you so dependent on oil, which we 
should be selling at $50 and they buy for $10? My suggestion is 
that the Majles vote to reduce it by 500,000 barrels per day 
[bpd], which will certainly drive the price up. 
  He continued: [As a member of] a Majles in which more than 
135 members have signed not to have high prices, Mr. President, 
as long as the shadow of the leader is over our head, I promise 
the vulnerable strata that we will not ratify any high prices. 
Our duty is to live with the resources that we have. We should 
wait for two years and not accept any new projects. 
  Dr. Sheybani also added: The Majles will by no means condone 
high prices. Let the government go and correct the situation. 
Let it get rid of those companies that operate at a loss. You 
cannot fix management by raising prices. 
  He continued: We wanted to raise the price of bread somewhat 
early in the revolution. In the middle of the night, the Imam 
sent a message, "You do not have the right to raise the prices. 
And from now on, if you want to raise the price of anything, it 
must be with my own permission." 
  In the way that we follow the Imam, we follow that leader. 
The leader himself said in his directives, Do not do anything 
that would harm the vulnerable strata. 
  He said: I suggest that we reduce [oil production] by 
500,000 
bpd and reduce current expenditures by 20 percent. 
<H5>  Asadollah Razavi, Supporter </H5>
  The next supporter was the deputy from Kerman, who said: In 
the budget presented by the government, the general revenue and 
other sources of funds amount to R33,767 billion, which shows an 
increase of about 43 percent compared to last year. The Joint 
Committee has reduced this amount by R2,143 billion, which is 
still a growth of 34 percent. This decrease is mainly due to the 
sale of oil, as about 2 million has been reduced from the oil 
exports and one dollar less is calculated in its price. 
  He continued: This year, considering the total oil 
production 
in the world and the likelihood of the entry of Iraq into the 
oil market as well as the level of production of non-OPEC 
countries next year increasing or decreasing and what conclusion 
the OPEC countries will reach in regards to the decrease in oil 
exports, there are various probabilities. The average price of 
Iranian oil for export is projected at $9-17 per barrel. Given 
all this, the price per barrel and the number ratified by the 
committee seem reasonable. In connection with factors that have 
been effective in reducing this figure, Razavi said: In 
Paragraph 1 of Note 22, the total commercial and foreign 
currency policies of the country in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995] must be such that the total of foreign currency 
obligations of the country from all sources by the end of 1373 
[20 March 1995] will be $1.6 billion less than at the beginning 
of 1373 [21 March 1994]. 
  In connection with the increase in the price of gasoline in 
Note 25, he said: The increase in the price of gasoline, 
considering the projected inflation, must reach a minimum, and 
this minimum has been set at R30 in the committee. 
<H5>  Seyyed Ahmad Rasulinezhad, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent was Rasulinezhad the deputy of Damavand 
and 
Firuzkuh, who spoke in regards to the elimination of subsidies 
and increase in prices and said: You think that the increase in 
the price of fuel will not bring more pressure on the weak 
strata. On the average, the increase in the price of gasoline 
will certainly result in the increase in the price of 
transportation and goods that reach the consumers, and other 
instances of this kind. 
  He emphasized: It should be examined to see what amount of 
money these companies have received this year from the people 
and the Treasury and how they have operated. An insignificant 
amount may be added to the salaries of employees, women, and 
salary earners from the increase in prices, but the prices go up 
tremendously, by several times. 
  Rasulinezhad mentioned the unjust distribution of the budget 
and said: Some of the views have caused a number of regions and 
provincial cities to be deprived of the attention of the 
government in the proposed bill. For example, the cities of the 
province of Tehran, which tolerate a significant part of the 
pressures and burden of Greater Tehran, and due to being located 
next to the capital of the country, we must witness the 
elimination of developmental projects despite the vital role of 
some of them. I say to the planners and the Plan and Budget 
Organization that pressure on the cities around Tehran and the 
severance of government services and developmental projects 
cause more pressure on the city of Tehran and increase problems. 
  He then said: The efforts of the Joint Committee to reduce 
foreign obligations are not sufficient. It has been said 
frequently that all the existing problems and shortages cannot 
be rectified in a short period of two to three years. We require 
more basic, precise planning and longer calculate time to be 
able to overcome the problems. The government must have more 
control and supervision over the market and prices in order to 
reduce the existing pressure on the deprived and the oppressed. 
<H5>  Karim Zare'i, Supporting </H5>
  The next supporter was Dr. Zare'i, who said: The most 
important strong points of the Joint Committee report consist of 
the use of the directives of the grand leader in drawing the 
main lines of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, 
attention to the wishes of deputies in the pre-agenda speeches, 
the use of views and attention to the opinion of the honorable 
president in the Friday sermons. 
  Then, in connection with agricultural development and 
attention to the export of its products, he said: The only 
sector that has exceeded its obligations in the Five-Year Plan 
has been the agricultural sector, which has seen a significant 
growth. 
  Then, describing the important points of the budget this 
year, he said: In order to harness inflation, in some instances 
necessary subsidies have been allocated to prevent inflation and 
increase prices. Revenues have been realistically noted, and 
customs taxes have increased to support domestic industries 
vis-a-vis luxury goods, prevent the budget from becoming 
inflationary, and pay attention to the poor and low-income 
strata. In Note 3, support for cooperatives continues. Attention 
has been paid to the deprived regions. In Paragraph D of Note 7, 
the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs has been granted 
permission. [sentence as published] 
  Then he mentioned Note 25 and said: In this note, one of the 
appropriate steps is preventing the increase in the price of 
electricity for agriculture. 
<H5>  Mohammad Naser Tavassolizadeh, Supporter </H5>
  The next supporter was Tavassolizadeh, deputy from Torbat 
Heydariyyeh, who spoke in support of the bill and said: One of 
the characteristics of this bill is that it has significantly 
distanced itself from oil. Previously, the main feature was the 
sale of oil, but now the direction provides hope for the future 
years. 
  In continuation, he said: The consumption of oil in our 
country is three times that of Turkey, six times that of 
Pakistan, and 1.2 times that of China, despite the fact that 
China has a population 20 times that of ours. Hence, we must be 
realistic in our direction and be able to guarantee the future 
of our country. 
  Also considering support for domestic industry among the 
positive points of this plan he added: When we watch the customs 
and close the borders, these are the preparations for 
guaranteeing the independence of our country. 
  Tavassolizadeh said: Unfortunately, less attention has been 
paid in the ratification of the Joint Committee to support for 
medicines for livestock as well as fertilizers and pesticides, 
and the amount is not acceptable. We have seen such policies and 
the harm they have caused our agriculture in the past. 
<H5>  'Ali Mir Karami, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent was Karami, the deputy from Qasr-e Shirin, 
who said in opposing the bill: Unfortunately, the single product 
policy of the country has caused the enemy to have access to our 
weakness and inflict severe blows on the body of this 
revolution, every year the sign of which is the crisis of the 
decrease in the price of oil. 
  He said: the existing cash flow in the hands of some 
individuals in the society in addition to escalating inflation 
will result in economic ailments. The growth of cash must be 
checked with specific leverages, and by devising special taxes 
on revenues and their property, that which must be collected 
legally for the government general revenues as taxes must be 
collected and the way blocked to evade it in any possible manner. 
  In continuation, he said: As the ratification of Note 25 is 
inevitable, first, ways to protect the deprived classes must be 
taken into consideration, and then the increase in prices must 
be taken into consideration. 
<H5>  Ahmad Nikfar, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent was Nikfar the deputy from the city of 
Eqlid. Also, in a speech in connection with writing the budget 
and stating that budget writing must be regional, he said: 
Relations have taken the place of regulations, and considering 
that we were trying to advance the procedure of the distribution 
of the budget at least from now on in a most proper form, we did 
not take any step in this regard. 
  The deputy from Eqlid said: The Majles and deputies in their 
suggestions hoped that the results of that plan would increase 
the authority of the specialized committees in the procedure to 
ratify the budget. What has resulted, unfortunately, was not so. 
It even increased the time that the Majles should spent on the 
budget by several times. 
  Then, in connection with the proposed bill of the 
government, 
he said: (In this bill), ignoring and no attention to the 
deprived regions can be seen. In two notes of the budget of this 
year, on the whole, about 50 billion tomans were given to 
deprived regions which now, in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995] budget, this amount has been reduced to 15 billion tomans. 
<H5>  Mohammad Baqer Tavakkoli, Supporter </H5>
  The next supporter was the deputy of Khomeyn, who spoke in 
connection with the budget bill regarding the decrease in the 
level of incomes, the increase in the percentage of taxes, and 
the increase in commercial tariffs, and said: One of the most 
effective issues in inflation is banking funds, which are given 
by banks to government establishments and the private sector. In 
the government bill, about R7,598 billion, at a ratio of 80 
percent for the government sector and 20 percent for the private 
sector, have been set, which has been reduced in the 
examinations of the Joint Committees to R7,000 billion, at a 
ratio of 55 percent for the private sector and 45 percent for 
the government sector, which will help the country thrive. 
  Then, in connection with the increase in subsidies for 
essential goods and medicines, he said: The committee increased 
the amount of foreign currency for medicines from $303 million 
to $400 million. Also, it increased the basic goods from $695 
million to $800 million. 
<H5>  'Ali Naqi Khamushi, Opponent </H5>
  The next opponent was Khamushi, the deputy of Tehran, who 
referred to the foreign currency rate and said: Having received 
the proposed 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget, we 
practically see that the price of foreign currency was increased 
by 20 percent from 145 tomans, and you and I want to approve it. 
Do we know that raising the price of foreign currency equals 
increasing all the prices by 20 percent? 
  He then continued: In current expenditures alone, we have 
50.9-percent growth, which is a shocking figure. It will be to 
no avail to inject rials as the rate of the floating dollar goes 
up, which will result in higher prices of services. 
  The deputy of Tehran continued: Unfortunately, this budget 
includes about 50-60 percent inflation. 
  Khamushi then, in connection with the decrease in the price 
of oil, requested the ceiling of the budget to be reduced to the 
ceiling of the 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994] budget. 
  In continuation, he said: If we are able to separate about 
50 
percent from the oil revenues, it can be a first step on the 
path of actual economic independence. 
  The deputy from Tehran referred to the increase in tax 
revenues in the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget bill. 
  In continuation, Khamushi mentioned several statistical 
figures in connection with the percentage of funds in the 1372 
[21 March 1993-20 March 1994] budget with regard to 1373 [21 
March 1994-20 March 1995] and added: I ask all the deputies to 
take a bold step toward reaching a healthy economy and 
independence from oil through the budget. 
<H5>  Fatemeh Homeyun-Moqaddam (Supporter) </H5>
  Ms. Fatemeh Homeyun-Moqaddam, the deputy from Tabriz, was 
the 
last supporter of the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] budget 
bill. She said: Today (yesterday), we heard that the board of 
directors of the Majles had a meeting with the honorable grand 
leader in connection with the budget, and he offered the 
necessary directive, to which, God willing, attention will soon 
be paid. I speak in support of the budget, but not that the 
budget has no imperfections. Certainly, what is right with the 
budget will outweigh than its imperfections. In the previous 
years, the budget bill was not viewed realistically, but this 
year it is close. Not that it has become realistic. For example, 
1) relative support for domestic products by increasing the 
customs fees and taxes are among the good aspects of the budget; 
2) support for the oppressed and vulnerable strata by providing 
foreign currency for medicines, foreign currency for essential 
goods, foreign currency for students and the Red Crescent, and 
keeping their prices stable, especially the heartfelt 
contentment of the leader, are among the good aspects of the 
budget; 3) emphasis on the cost of kerosene, electricity, 
telephone, etc.; 4) emphasis on proper and sound tax revenues 
and their change in the government bill by 261 percent is a good 
change; 5) repayment of national obligations is given priority; 
6) in regards to oil and natural gas taxes, there has been a 
logical reaction; 7) severance of dependence on oil; 8) if we 
see the budget independent of oil, we will have taken positive 
steps in the independence of the oil rial. 
<H5>  Mohsen Kuhkan (Opponent) </H5>
  Mohsen Kuhkan the deputy from Lenjan was the last opponent 
to 
the 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] national budget bill. In 
justifying his opposition, he asked the experts of the Planning 
and Budget and the Joint Committees to respond to these 
questions. 
  In explaining these reasons, he said: I have always 
questioned why we calculate the percentage of the oil in the 
national budget with regard to the whole budget and say that 
this year we have a percentage of decrease in the use of oil in 
the general budget. [sentence as published] If all at once the 
budget reaches a point that we are able to sell all the oil and 
turn the dollars in for rials and use them in the budget and the 
profit margin is small, could we still say that our dependence 
on oil has decreased? 
  In 1371 [21 March 1992-20 March 1993], about 58 percent of 
the budget was spent in connection with social issues, including 
higher education, health, and treatment. But in 1372 [21 March 
1993-20 March 1994], it was decreased to 41 percent. This level 
in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] in the proposed budget was 
reduced to 36 percent. In other words, regarding social affairs, 
that part that concerns funds connected with the cultural 
invasion must be seen here as decreasing every year. This is one 
problem in the budget bill. On the other hand, there is an 
increase in miscellaneous expenditures. In 1371 [21 March 
1992-20 March 1993], about 6 percent; in 1372 [21 March 1993-20 
March 1994], 11 percent; and in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 
1995], 12 percent are miscellaneous expenditures. 
  Concerning some of the revenues being unrealistic, Kuhkan 
said: The Joint Committee worked very hard. They reduced the 
dependence of the budget on rials due to the sale of foreign 
currency and lowered it to a level above the ceiling of the 
budget. But, on the other hand, in taxes and some other revenues 
they made increases. 
  Concerning the repayment of the loans of the for-profit 
development projects in 1371 [21 March 1992-20 March 1993], from 
R31 billion about R8.6 billion materialized, and in the six 
months of 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994], 26 billion. If in 
the six months of 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994] it had 
materialized in accordance with the ratification, it should have 
been R26 billion, whereas R3.1 billion materialized. It is 
interesting to know that in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995] 
it increased to R42.6 billion. The sale of barracks in 1371 [21 
March 1992-20 March 1993] was projected at about R45 billion, 
but nothing materialized. The honorable government has not 
stated this in the bill, but the honorable committee has 
specified numbers and figures for this in 1373 [21 March 1994-20 
March 1995]. Also, with the recession that exists in the baying 
and selling of property and land, you see whether the figures 
you projected in the annual taxes on property are correct or 
not. In 1371 [21 March 1992-20 March 1993], the projection was 
about R22 billion, of which R7.1 billion materialized. In the 
second six months of 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994], about 8 
billion was projected, of which 3.1 billion materialized. In 
1373 [21 March 1994-20 March 1995], the estimates are the same 
as in 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 1994]. Given these problems, 
we do not think that these revenues will materialize. 
<H5>  Statements of the Government Representative </H5>
  Rowghani-Zanjani, the director of planning and budget, in 
defending the budget bill said: If a decision is made in 
connection with the economic policies concerning the change and 
modification of prices and in is dealt with in connection with 
the contractual policies in the budget, it is because of the 
points to which the honorable deputies or I or some of the 
honorable ministers have referred. It is for these reasons that 
this decision has been made. Because we are at a point that 
requires that important and vital decisions be made in order for 
us to pass this period of transition and reach a potential, 
dynamic, acceptable, and ideal economy of the regime of the 
Islamic Republic. 
  He then said: There are two very important notes in the 
bill. 
One is Note 25 and the other Note 29, which are really 
determining and have economic effects in the Second Plan and the 
budget. 
  If there is a quote in connection with Note 25 concerning 
the 
grand leader apparently having certain views and if his opinions 
are final, they must certainly be followed. Likewise, if there 
are other points, this issue is important for us to consider in 
the discussion of the budget, to be aware of this issue and be 
able to open up Note 25 further. 
  The director of the Plan and Budget Organization then, 
pointing out that the share of the oil revenues has not 
increased compared to 1371 [21 March 1992-20 March 1993], said: 
We determined the share of oil revenues in the 1373 [21 March 
1994-20 March 1995] budget law. 
  If the brothers analyze the 1372 [21 March 1993-20 March 
1994] budget, they will see that we considered nearly $17 
billion for foreign currency and rural revenues. The budget bill 
that has been written and presented by the government for 1373 
[21 March 1994-20 March 1995] is about $12.5 billion. In other 
words, we have written $4 billion less than last year. As to why 
the share of oil revenues has gone up, I must say that it has 
not. The budget has become more transparent. 
  Also, in connection with taxes, he said: We think we collect 
high taxes. In fact, now with the oil revenues becoming 
transparent, everyone realizes how our budget relies on oil 
revenues and how it can affect it. You realize that we hardly 
collect any taxes at all. 
  He also said: As to why revenues have increased, it is due 
to 
Note 25, which accounts for nearly R3,000 billion. Also, the 
taxes that the brothers ratified. Part of the implementation of 
the national projects depends on this note, and if this note is 
not implemented, the projects will stop and will even have 
economic effects. 
  In regards to increasing the payment of obligations, 
Rowghani-Zanjani said: We considered $1 billion. But the Joint 
Committee made it $1.6 billion. The increase in this payment 
will have an effect on our economy. It will effect jobs, 
production, imports, exports, investments, cash flow, and 
prices. It is not true that we stand in an ideal position and 
make policies without having any effect. 
  Also, concerning projections of the price of oil, he said: 
It 
is true that we cannot project the price of oil, considering the 
world market. The government has projected $14 per barrel, but 
the brothers in the committee project $13. At the present time, 
with the severe cold in the west and the United States, the 
price of oil has increased. Hence, we think the government's 
projection is more correct. Let us make it $14, and if it does 
not materialize, we can control it in the government. 
  Rowghani-Zanjani added: If the revenues do not materialize, 
we shall not create new obligations, and we will not start the 
projects that are to start. The deputy brothers come to us 
asking why we do not put such-and-such a project up for bidding, 
etc. The reason is that we have no money. 
  He also added: The brothers say high prices and inflation 
must be eliminated, but in items that concern commercial taxes, 
you changed the 8 percent to 18 percent. Certainly, it will be a 
high price for the consumer. We do not oppose supporting 
domestic products, but we must also see the other side of the 
issue. 

