BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Excerpt] Belgium has been the major single donor to 
Rwanda, granting Rwanda about 5 billion Rwandese francs 
annually. Despite all this, the Kigali dictatorship, made up of 
MRND [Republican National Movement for Democracy and 
Development], members of the current so-called government, left 
no stone unturned in portraying Belgium an enemy of Rwanda. 
This was done deliberately and thoroughly through the MRND-CDR 
[Coalition for the Defense of the Republic] radio, RTLM [Radio 
Television Libre des Milles Collines], through MRND-CDR 
newspapers, through MRND-CDR public rallies and conferences. 
The Belgians were labelled pro-RPF even before their troops 
stepped into the capital, Kigali. The MRND-CDR had labelled the 
Neutral Military Observer Group [NMOG] commanded by Tanzanian 
General Hashim Mbita as pro-RPF. The MRND- CDR has labelled 
NMOG II, commanded by Nigerian General Opaleye, as pro-RPF too. 
It therefore came as no surprise when MRND-CDR labeled UNAMIR 
[UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda], commanded by Canadian General 
Romeo Dallaire, as pro-RPF, and more specifically the Belgian 
contingent in the UNAMIR. 
  The MRND-CDR radio embarked on a deliberate campaign to 
tarnish the Belgian troops, preparing the Rwandese people for 
what the Presidential Guards and elements of the government army 
had all along been planning to do, that is, to scare away the UN 
troops and derail the peace process completely. Notwithstanding 
the campaign by RTLM and the MRND-CDR leaders, the Belgian 
troops in Rwanda performed their duties even-handedly. This did 
not please the MRND-CDR, who, as a final blow, unleashed the 
notorious Presidential Guards to cold-bloodedly kill 10 Belgian 
Blue Berets, together with the late Rwandese Prime Minister Mrs. 
Agathe Uwilingiyimana and her family. Even after these 
murderous acts were committed, Radio RTLM continues to fan 
disaffection on the Belgian troops and the Presidential Guards 
continue their attacks on Belgian troops in Rwanda. 
  Though the Belgians are leaving, there are questions that 
arise: 1) Should MRND-CDR, the Presidential Guard and the RTLM 
go unpunished for their murderous crimes against the Rwandese 
people, the UN and Belgium? 2) Should the Bangladesh, the 
Ghanaians, the rest of the current Blue Berets and any other 
international effort suffer the same fate as the Belgians did at 
the hands of MRND-CDR, Presidential Guards and the RTLM ? 3) How 
many UN resolutions ought to be made so that this clique is 
routed completely? 
  For the Rwandese Patriotic Front [RPF] the answers to all 
these questions are no. The RPF has decided to completely rout 
this murderous clique and to silence voices such as the RTLM for 
ever. The RPF together with the majority of the Rwandese people 
invites the UN, the Belgians and the international community to 
make a final resolution on Rwanda, which is to rid the Rwandese 
people of this evil clique. We join the Belgian people and the 
families of the Belgian troops who died defending peace in 
Rwanda in their mourning today. 

