Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] In anticipation of future energy shortages the 
``Lunar Energy Station Initiative'' calls for construction of an 
energy station on the moon that will supply energy steadily to 
earth, has moved toward the stage of actual development. Now 
that the lunar energy station study group of the Foundation for 
Promotion of Material Science and Technology of Japan (MST) has 
completed its report based on a year-long investigation 
conducted by specialists from industry, government, and academic 
circles, the first meeting will be held on the 21st at Kogakuin 
University's Shinjuku campus in Tokyo. 
  The plan for the new nuclear power plant, which is the 
central theme of this energy development initiative for infinite 
space, will likely draw much attention. The new power plant is 
supposed to be able to convert electric energy directly from the 
thermal energy emitted from its reactor, using a functionally 
gradient material (FGM) ultra high efficiency energy conversion 
system for the reactor core structure. 
  The lunar energy station development initiative was based by 
several assumptions, including the inevitability of an energy 
crisis in the future, the need to promote the safety of ground 
nuclear power generation, the importance of an economical source 
of power for space development, and progress on development of 
FGM that can be used as a high efficiency thermoelectric 
conversion material. 
  The solar energy plant employs a new nuclear reactor concept 
that converts energy directly into electricity without using 
turbines and water like current nuclear power plants do. This is 
where FGM plays its role. 
  According to the plan, the electric energy thus produced 
will 
be transmitted to an energy relay station which travels in earth 
orbit in the form of a high transmission efficieny waveband 
laser beam. Then its wave length will be changed to a high 
atmospheric transmission efficiency waveband laser and sent to 
an energy receiver on the ground. From here, the electricity 
will be distributed to various places through a ground 
transmission system. 
  At the meeting, papers will be given by specialists who took 
part in the study. They will include the ``Energy and LEP (Lunar 
Energy Park) Initiative in the 21st century'' (by Masayuki Niino 
of the National Aerospace Laboratory) and subjects such as 
transportation systems to the moon, the lunar energy station, 
energy transmission to the earth, and ground receiving system. 
  FGM is a next generation new material with highly 
sophisticated functions. The idea originated in Japan. 
Production of FGM calls for a gradual change in the composition 
of the material from one side to the other. As a result, the 
properties on either side of the material are completely 
different. It is drawing much attention as a material useful for 
heat resistant structural materials for space as well as for the 
development of high efficiency and high power output energy 
conversion systems. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-011L-19A>           Graphic </FIG>



  Although the idea is still in the formative stage, giant 
projects such as this in space development require nationwide 
discussion and formation of a consensus, as well as a system of 
international cooperation. The lunar energy station study group 
hopes that communication on this subject will continue after 
this conference. 

