Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] On Monday the deputy minister of commerce said: The 
value of our nation's official and unofficial exports last year 
was about $6 billion, of which only $4 billion was registered 
with customs. 
  Dr. Hoseyn Noqrehkar-Shirazi, who was speaking at the 
opening 
ceremonies for the Razdar Dried Fruit Packaging Industries 
Factory, added: Our unofficial exporting was done by people 
living near the borders, itinerant peddlers and travelers. 
  He noted that in the export of goods one must not look at 
markets as one-time consumption markets. He said: We now have a 
400-million-person regional market, and in this regard we must 
fulfill our own mission. 
  Noqrehkar-Shirazi added: The Ministry of Commerce has given 
special attention to the task of educating exporters, in order 
to facilitate the work of foreign trade. 
  He said: Another of this ministry's responsibilities is 
giving the work of the people to the people themselves, and in 
this regard the Ministry of Commerce does not consider itself to 
be acting on behalf of the people, and at the same time we are 
determined to solve the problems of production. 
  The deputy minister of commerce explained: With the measures 
that have been taken, after 30 years the laws of commerce have 
been changed to benefit foreign trade, and in this regard we 
have no choice but to tie the fate of imports to that of exports. 
  He added: Our slogan is imports against exports, and this 
means increasing production, employment, per-capita income and 
exports. 
  According to Noqrehkar-Shirazi, to increase nonoil exports, 
Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping will give a special discount 
for export goods so our goods will be able to compete with goods 
from other countries. On the other hand, emphasis is given to 
reforming laws and regulations and also to forming chambers of 
commerce. 
  Concerning Iran's membership in GATT, he said: Iran is now 
an 
observer in GATT. Under current conditions GATT membership is 
not in Iran's interest. 
  This official explained: To make a complete and 
comprehensive 
study of GATT membership for Iran with consideration for all the 
areas, the Ministry of Commerce has formed a committee composed 
of several ministries. 
  At this meeting, 'Ali Reza Khatib, executive director of the 
Bank of Commerce, also gave a speech. He said: This bank is 
equipping itself to deal with problems and expedite the affairs 
of exporters. 
  He also said: As of next year, if the banking system agrees, 
the allocation of credits for exports will increase from 6 
percent to 10 percent. 
  On the other hand, a plan is being studied on the basis of 
which the banking facilities rate for exporters will be reduced. 
  Dr. Kakavand, executive director of the Export Development 
Bank, also said: This bank was established in the year 1371 [21 
March 1992-20 March 1993] to facilitate and guarantee exports. 
  He added: Another of the Export Development Bank's 
responsibilities is to provide export credits to exporters and 
buyers of Iranian goods. 
  'Alavi, deputy director of the Export Bank, said: With the 
approval of the Money and Credit Council, this bank paid the 
entire six percent of its export credits this year to applicants. 
  He explained: The problem of some industrial owners has 
nothing to do with the banking system, and the problem will be 
solved with the formation of an Export Fund. 

