Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by James Landale and Philip Webster: "Tories </F>
Divided on Plan To Cede More Power to Brussels"] 
  [Text] John Major faced a new Conservative split on Europe 
last night as Douglas Hurd fought to prevent a weakening of 
Britain's voting strength in the European Union. 
  The Foreign Secretary was under attack from all sides in 
Brussels as EU [European Union] ministers argued over how voting 
arrangements should be adjusted when four new countries join the 
union. Only Spain lined up with Britain in opposing the changes 
and the talks broke up last night without agreement; they will 
resume next Tuesday [22 March]. 
  Denmark had warned Mr Hurd that he could be triggering a 
serious political crisis, since failure to settle the issue 
could put the enlargement of the community at risk. Niels 
Helveg Petersen, the Danish Foreign Minister, said the British 
position was untenable: "They cannot say throughout their 
presidency that they are in favour of enlargement and then come 
here and try to block it." 
  Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor, put more pressure on 
Britain with a telephone call to the Prime Minister expressing 
concern about the danger of the enlargement talks breaking down. 
  But the Foreign Office said last night that nothing had been 
put forward that met Britain's basic requirements. Mr Hurd 
would return home this morning for talks with Mr Major, and 
officials hoped that he would bring with him "something that 
moves in the right direction." British officials said that some 
progress had been made, but the French European Affairs Minister 
Alain Lamassoure said positions had hardened rather than moved 
closer together and some diplomats thought an emergency summit 
might be needed to decide the issue. 
  At the heart of the dispute is a proposal to raise from 23 
votes to 27 the so-called blocking minority that can veto some 
community legislation. Britain, which has ten votes wants to 
keep the figure at 23. Spain is also against the change, but 
has put forward a compromise combining the two positions. 
  Mr Hurd had been warned before leaving for Brussels that 
Conservative MPs would not accept a climbdown, yet 
Euro-enthusiasts insisted that he must not jeopardise the 
expansion of the community that he and Mr Major advocate. Mr 
Major told the Commons yesterday that he was "very much in 
favour" of enlargement, but Britain wanted to ensure "democratic 
legitimacy" and the rights of minorities in the EU. 
  Sweden, Finland and Austria have all agreed the terms under 
which they will join and ministers were last night close to a 
final agreement with Norway. But a failure to settle the voting 
dispute would put their accession in doubt because the European 
Parliament might not have time to ratify the relevant treaty 
before the June elections. Referendums planned for the autumn 
might also have to be delayed, making it more difficult for the 
four countries' governments to maintain the momentum of popular 
support for EU membership. 
  Acutely aware of the dangers, Hans van den Broek, the EU 
foreign affairs commissioner, appealed to Mr Major to put the 
community's interests ahead of his own domestic troubles, while 
the German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel met Mr Hurd twice 
yesterday to try to find a way through the impasse. 
  Tory divisions over the "blocking minority" are less 
clearcut 
than during the Maastricht saga, because at least some 
Euro-enthusiasts are dubious about the voting proposals. John 
Townend chairman of the party's backbench finance committee, 
said opposition was spread right across the party. "This is a 
case of blackmail. The commission is proposing watering down 
voting rights to have enlargement of the community." The 
community had a vested interest in enlargement because the 
incoming countries were rich. 
  Iain Duncan-Smith, Tory MP for Chingford, said: "There is no 
need to move on this. There is no real threat. We should just 
call their bluff and stand firm." Lord Parkinson agreed. He 
said Mr Hurd should stand firm, "not out of bloody-mindedness, 
but because what we have demonstrated since the Maastricht vote 
is that Britain has been right in resisting the move to a single 
currency and an evertighter ERM." 
  But Hugh Dykes, chairman of the European Movement, denounced 
his Euro-sceptic colleagues as "neurotic TV chat-show ogres," 
and Ray Whitney, MP for Wycombe, said: "We should not lose 
sight -- and we should not allow those opposed to Britains 
membership of Europe to allow us to lose sight -- of the real 
objective of getting enlargement in the national interest." 

