Language: <F P=105>English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Darshan Singh, president, Small Newspapers </F>
Editors Guild] 
  [Text] Foreign mercenaries have added a new menacing twist 
to the situation in the Kashmir Valley by infiltrating in large 
numbers with modern weaponry. Security Forces Director General 
Mr. D.K. Arya, in a recent interview to a Bombay newspaper, said 
there are at least 3,000 foreign mercenaries active in Kashmir 
Valley. These mercenaries are mostly Afghans, Lebanese, 
Sudanese, and Egyptians. They have been showing an increasing 
presence in the valley and beyond in Doda and Kishtwar and most 
of the areas westward. In a recent meeting, the Indian 
ambassador to the United States, Mr. S.S. Ray, told the under 
secretary of state, Mr. Peter Tarnoff that foreign mercenaries 
promoted by external forces are deeply involved in Kashmir 
crisis which is one of the important causes for persistence of 
terrorist violence there. These terrorists are well entrenched 
and possess the most modern system of fire arms, ammunition, and 
wireless sets. They have equipment like the ones available with 
the organized defense forces only. The number of Halogen [as 
heard] 60-mm mortars, rocket launchers, rifles, grenades, sniper 
rifles, AK-47 rifles, and ammunition have been siezed from them 
in a series of raids conducted by the security forces in the 
past few months. 
  The infiltration of mercenaries began about a year ago 
mostly 
through Pak-occupied Kashmir. Pakistani soldiers provided them 
with cover under a heavy barrage of firing on the Line of 
Control as they sneaked into the Indian territory in small 
numbers. These mercenaries have excellent training as most of 
them fought against Russians and then against Hekmatyar in 
Afghanistan. When Afghan war against former Soviet Union ended, 
these Islamic militants simply moved to another front, that is, 
Kashmir. That is why they are very different from the earlier 
Kashmiri militants, who usually adopted hit-and-run tactics. 
  These mercenaries are being looked after by the 
Inter-Services Intelligence [ISI] of Pakistan financially and 
also with constant supply of sophisticated weapons and gadgets. 
They are basically fugitives in their own country, persona non 
grata, and would therefore be tried or shot. Their only 
motivation for involvement in terrorist activities in Kashmir 
comes from an icono of religion [as heard] suggesting suitable 
brainwashing by ISI which gives them an added zeal. These 
mercenaries are virtually leading the terrorist movement in the 
valley at present. The seeds of terrorism originating in Afghan 
conflict seems to have boiled over to this part of the world. 
Recent media coverages televised in USA and Canada offer 
compelling evidence in support of India's mounting concern over 
the spread of terrorist violence in South Asia, particularly in 
Kashmir valley. Activities of these trained terrorist hordes 
have also resulted in such tragic incidents as the bombing of an 
Air India airliner over the Atlantic ocean in 1985 and the 
attack of the World Trade Center in New York City last year. 
  Despite the continuing involvement of foreign mercenaries 
and 
persisting terrorist violence promoted by alien forces, India 
has not diluted its commitment to the restoration of the 
political process in Jammu and Kashmir. With this aim in view, 
the government is at present engaged in the onerous [as heard] 
task of bringing peace and normality in the valley. Attempts of 
militants to step up violence in the valley and cause 
large-scale law and order problem through destruction of Muslim 
shrines, including Hazratbal, have been frustrated in the recent 
past. 
  Besides infiltration of foreign mercenaries, narco-smuggling 
is also playing a damaging role in Kashmir. Pakistan's drug 
barons are engaged directly and indirectly in providing 
financial and other support to militants who utilize this money 
for procuring modern weaponry with a view to creating law and 
order problem in Jammu and Kashmir. Is this the drug and arms 
peddling nation that waxes eloquent on human rights at Geneva? 
[sentence as heard]. 
* 

