Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Michael Bond report: "Europe Alert Over Threat of Nuclear </F>
Terrorism"] 
  [Text] London -- Security forces in both western and 
eastern Europe are combining their efforts to tackle the growing 
menace of nuclear smuggling from countries of the former Soviet 
Union -- described by Nato as one of the greatest threats to 
international security since the end of the Cold War. 
  Interpol, the international police agency, has now set up a 
specialised group, involving police forces in 24 European 
nations, THE EUROPEAN has learnt. Border guards and Customs 
officers in Poland, the Czech Republic, Ukraine and Sweden have 
been equipped with radiation detectors and are being taught how 
to handle radioactive substances. 
  A senior Interpol officer, Hiroaki Takizawa, based at Lyon, 
said: "There is growing concern in European countries about 
nuclear smuggling. Our main problem is the lack of information. 
This is a new sort of crime -- we do not yet know who is 
smuggling the material, who is buying it, and why." 
  Nuclear smuggling has become an increasingly lucrative 
business for professional dealers, but for the couriers and 
those who steal the material it is a dangerous -- even lethal -- 
game. Several have been caught carrying highly radioactive 
metals in their shirt pockets or strapped to their bodies. A 
Polish man died after carrying plutonium powder to Germany in 
his navel. "Most of the thieves are cowboys," said one 
investigator working in Moscow. "They have no idea they are 
dealing with highly dangerous substances." 
  Police in Germany, the country most commonly used to smuggle 
the material into the West, have registered nearly 350 cases of 
the illegal export of plutonium and other radioactive substances 
from the former Soviet Union in the past two years. They blame 
the burgeoning trade on falling security standards at former 
Soviet nuclear installations. 
  Interpol says radioactive material has been stolen from a 
vast range of sources. Russian authorities themselves have 
reported that during 1993 there were 900 attempts to gain 
illegal entry to nuclear installations, and a further 700 cases 
of workers trying to smuggle out materials. An investigator 
based in Moscow said: "There are wild rumours in Russia that it 
is possible to make money out of anything if it is radioactive. 
People are stealing from everywhere from waste dumps to medical 
laboratories." 
  Though there is no evidence that any nuclear substances have 
fallen into the hands of terrorists, and much of the stolen 
material would be useless for making weapons, a leaked report 
completed earlier this year by the German secret service 
identified potential customers. These included "two extremist 
Islamic fundamentalist groups". 
  It said there were "credible intelligence indications that 
high- ranking persons in ministries, embassies, industrial firms 
and research facilities" in eastern Europe were involved in 
nuclear smuggling. 
  The dismantling of nuclear arms in Russia and Ukraine over 
the next decade will produce a surplus of about 50 tonnes of 
virtually pure weapons-grade plutonium. Security officials fear 
some of this will fall into the hands of a rogue government or 
terrorist group, but they also point out that many other types 
of nuclear material can be lethal in the wrong hands. 
  Interpol is treating 30 nuclear smuggling cases as extremely 
serious but this could be just "the tip of the iceberg". Among 
cases being investigated are: 
  1. 250kg of uranium taken from a plant at Glazov. 
  2. 123 grammes of uranium stolen from Chernobyl nuclear 
power plant by an employee last October. 
  3. 260 lead boxes containing several hundred grammes of 
uranium from Kazakhstan. Six Ukrainians were arrested with them 
on the Moldovan border in December. In the capital of Moldova a 
lawyer was awaiting the delivery, for which he was due to pay 
$1.2 million. This uranium was 80 per cent enriched -- virtually 
weapons-grade. It takes just 7kg of weapons-grade material to 
make a nuclear bomb. 

