Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Chancellor Helmut Kohl by Heinz Klaus </F>
Mertes, Helmut Markwort, and Claus Larass in Bonn; date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Mertes] Another 250 days to go before the 
Bundestag elections, which will be held on 16 October. They 
will be the political highlight of super election year 1994. 
Then we will know whether Helmut Kohl's chancellorship will end 
after 12 years, or whether he will continue to lead German 
politics at home and abroad. Or will a decision be made 
earlier? Chancellor Kohl, how sure are you that you will not 
lose power before election day? 
  [Kohl] I must say that I do not understand your question. 
Parliamentary elections will take place on the day mentioned by 
you. Do you expect a revolution or what? 
  [Mertes] Elections will take place in Lower Saxony on 13 
March, for example. If this should turn out to be a defeat for 
the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union [CDU/CSU], 
this means that men like Biedenkopf will raise their voices 
throughout the country the following Monday, 14 March, asking 
whether it is still possible to win the Bundestag elections with 
the chancellor. 
  [Kohl] Well, you know, I have been in office for such a long 
time, and I have won so many elections. I also lost elections. 
The procedure is always the same. If election results are 
positive, we are all responsible. Yet this does not only apply 
to the CDU/CSU, but to all parties. If election results are 
bad, only a few are responsible. One must get used to that. I 
am still in office, and I intend to wage an intensive and very 
dedicated election campaign. I also intend to win the elections 
with the help of numerous good friends and with the support of 
the citizens. 
  [Markwort] Yet polls have never been so poor for the CDU/CSU 
and you prior to elections. You are facing two major tasks, and 
I would like to know how you want to tackle them. First, you 
have to overcome despondency in the CDU/CSU. There are many who 
say that we have nearly lost the elections. Second, you must 
bring about a change in public opinion. Do you have a special 
message, a special thesis, or a decision? 
  [Kohl] First of all, I would like to tell you that I am not 
particularly impressed by opinion polls. 
  [Markwort] Yet the public is impressed. 
  [Kohl] This is another matter. Let me first answer the 
first part of your question. If you remember the polls before 
the first free elections in the GDR, which took place barely 
four years ago, if you remember what was said and written in 
January and February four years ago -- the CDU and I were not 
given the slightest chance. Still, we scored a remarkable 
victory. 
  [Mertes] Well, there will not be another German unification. 
  [Kohl] I am not speaking about German unification. I am 
talking about the first free elections to the People's Chamber. 
In elections in Lower Saxony, which took place a little later, 
we did not achieve good results either. One should not forget 
that. We will know the results on election day. Until then, we 
must fight for every vote. It is stupid to speculate about 
coalitions -- about a possible grand coalition -- for example. 
This is not my style. I want to continue the work with the 
coalition consisting of the CDU/CSU and Free Democratic Party of 
Germany [FDP]. I see good opportunities for that, and I will 
advocate this idea and fight for it. We have accomplished a 
great deal of good work in the past few months. Step by step, 
we have taken more positive decisions for the future than any 
other German government within such a short period. We must now 
make this clear to the public. We will receive a positive 
response. As far as despondency in the CDU/CSU is concerned, 
you will have to live with that. We are a German party, and the 
German parties are all characterized by enormous changes of 
mood. If everything goes well, they are up, and if things do 
not work out so well, they are down. We have enough supporters. 
There are always a few who assume controversial positions, but 
that is not so important during an election year. Those who are 
not loyal to the party must know that they will later have to 
face the consequences within the party. Thus, I am quite calm 
in view of possible developments in the coming months. 
  [Mertes] Is this a threat? 
  [Kohl] This is not a threat but a statement. 
  [Mertes] Are you not afraid of a domino effect, that is that 
election results in Lower Saxony might influence the general 
mood if the CDU/CSU does not achieve good results? 
  [Kohl] How can you know the results at this point? The 
election campaign has not even started. It will be opened in 
the next few days. Let us first wait and see how the voters 
will decide and not talk about results that do not even exist. 
I refuse to do so. 
  [Larass] Still, I would like to discuss this issue. 
According to scenarios that are being drawn, the results for the 
CDU/CSU will certainly not be overwhelming in Lower Saxony, as 
far as one can see at this point. For the following European 
elections, preconditions for the CDU/CSU are not optimum either. 
You might be held responsible for that. 
  [Kohl] I want to stress that you are talking about 
forecasts. Your forecast for the European elections reminds me 
of the last European elections. Polls predicted miserable 
results for us, but we still emerged as the strongest party. We 
achieved a much better result -- which is difficult because of 
the low voter turnout -- than many assumed. Talking about these 
things -- during the previous European elections, there were 
also voices among the public and the party leadership who 
claimed that something would have to happen after the elections. 
I opened the session at the time and asked who had something to 
say. Nobody replied. 
  [Larass] Let us leave forecasts aside. Token strikes are 
currently taking place in Germany -- 100,000 or 200,000 are 
taking to the streets every day in a sensitive economic 
situation. What can you tell these people, without interfering 
in the wage negotiations? 
  [Kohl] What I can and want to tell them is that this is not 
really the right time to trigger large-scale disputes. All 
those concerned -- employers and employees -- should get 
together and find sensible solutions, which is possible. The 
other large trade union -- the trade union of chemical workers 
--has just shown that by adopting very sensible wage 
settlements. I am not only referring to the extent of the wage 
increases but also to the numerous details that allow more 
flexibility. If one discusses wages today, one must know that 
priority is to be given to safeguarding jobs and creating new 
ones. Then we can talk about the extent of increases. What I 
can say is that we are jointly launching an initiative designed 
to create jobs. Efforts are required in the sphere of politics 
and of the economy. Comparing the situation with other 
countries, I would like to tell you the following: We have just 
amended the job promotion law to create more part-time jobs. 
This measure will quickly lead to new developments. If we 
compare our situation with that of other countries, we see that 
every third employee works part-time in the Netherlands, every 
fourth in Sweden and Great Britain, and every fifth in Japan, 
but only every seventh in Germany. In the old laender, 2 
million full-time employees would prefer to work part-time. In 
the new laender, their number is 500,000. If we had the same 
number of part-time jobs as in our neighboring country, the 
Netherlands, we could offer jobs to another 2 million. This is 
a sensible instrument to improve the situation quickly and in a 
sensible way. 
  [Markwort] Is there still too much bureaucracy? 
  [Kohl] No, not at all. The law is absolutely okay. It 
grants additional social security to those who look for 
part-time jobs. Action is now required. 
  [Markwort] People would like to work part-time in all 
spheres, including the public sector. Do you believe that 
changes are possible there? 
  [Kohl] Your question is absolutely justified. At this 
week's second cabinet meeting, I initiated a number of measures 
in this respect. We want to achieve a breakthrough in the 
public sector -- at least at the federal level -- as soon as 
possible. The same applies to the laender and communes. We 
might set a clear sign in 1994. The government will do 
everything it can. 
  [Mertes] The wage dispute in the metalworking industry has 
been triggered by the following question: Is a reduction of 
real and nominal incomes and of social benefits possible and 
reasonable? 
  [Kohl] Why reasonable? We must view the situation in our 
country realistically, and at the state level, we must act in 
the same way as in our private lives. If you are facing the 
situation in your private life that you do not have a higher 
income, you must try to make ends meet. The state must behave 
in the same way. We must and want to help our compatriots in 
the new laender. This will cost the taxpayers between 140 and 
150 billion German marks [DM]. This capital will be raised in 
the west through taxes and revenue and transferred to the new 
laender. Thus, developments will be made possible there from 
which we all benefit. This can already be felt at this point. 
We can spend this sum only once. As far as new indebtedness is 
concerned, we have reached the limit. We are not only concerned 
about debts, but the stability of the mark is also at stake. 
This is the most important thing. If we want to keep the mark 
stable, we must keep the budget in order. Thus, we cannot spend 
more, but we have to save an additional DM26 billion in 1994. A 
number of expenditures that we would like to carry out must be 
postponed in all spheres. Every individual must do what the 
state is doing, particularly since the general income situation 
in Germany -- though poverty exists in some places in Germany -- 
makes that possible. I plead in a very realistic manner for a 
tight budget policy on the part of the state and general 
solidarity with a view to the new laender. 
  [Larass] The people would possibly like to participate 
and, even though not gladly, they would participate in certain 
savings. This is all right. But one sometimes has the 
impression that politicians also take a delight in negative 
figures. That is to say, as soon as an austerity round is 
announced and pushed through, there is the next one, the next 
paper is presented and increases are made here and there. Can 
this not be concentrated? I think that it is simply becoming 
too much for the people. 
  [Kohl] You are quite right. But it is strange if we 
mutually put the blame on each other. Not only the politicians 
have to answer for the fact that reports and considerations that 
have not yet been made are, of course, published. However, I do 
not want mutual scolding here because in principle you are 
right, but, simply speaking, the course of things cannot be 
concentrated. 
  My philosophy is rather simple. I am saying that the citizen 
has a wallet, out of which he has to pay everything: municipal 
taxes, whether the garbage collection, the sewage bill, the road 
tolls, or something else. He has to pay this or that in the 
land and he also has to pay federal taxes. 
  [Larass] There are many families who are saying: We cannot 
pay any longer. It need not be the majority. But if one talks 
to the people, a large part of them says: We simply cannot do 
it any longer. The husband works, the wife works, they have two 
children and they say: It is no longer possible. 
  [Kohl] This certainly happens. But we have to have a look 
at the specific case, the income situation, social welfare, and 
all that belongs to it. I do not accept a generalized answer. 
  [Larass] At least, the fears are very great. One has the 
feeling... 
  [Kohl] This is something completely different. 
  [Larass] ...that the people also get little support from 
politicians. 
  [Kohl] Well, I have to tell you that politics is not there 
for everything. If there are fears, there are many reasons for 
them, in the fewest cases these are really political reasons. 
It has meanwhile become a practice in our country that someone 
takes credit for every problem that has been positively settled 
and politics is blamed for every problem that is currently not 
solved or can perhaps not yet be solved. 
  [Larass] Let us take a positive sign. BMW is buying the 
Rover works in England. Is this already a sign of a slow 
improvement, that the situation of the German economy is better 
than it is sometimes said? Is this actually a sign of hope or 
is it...? 
  [Kohl] First of all, this is very good because I think that 
it is very good that in the European Union [EU], in the economic 
development -- I explicitly include the United States -- we also 
make investments on this side and on the other side and that we 
closely cooperate economically, if possible. But it is out of 
the question, this can be perceived by everyone -- without being 
a prophet, we are -- though slowly -- on the point of getting 
out of the economic low. The problem is again that we will get 
out of the economic low more quickly than we will be able to 
reduce unemployment because, according to all experiences, this 
is a process. There is no doubt that 1994 will be a better year 
from the economic point of view. You only have to listen to the 
stock exchange gurus and to have a look at what is going on 
there. There is no doubt about that. We have a stable 
currency. We have an enormous success that is left unmentioned 
almost everywhere. The fact that we are further reducing the 
inflation rate, that this year not four but three will be before 
the decimal is the best social policy that exists because high 
inflation rates burden the small incomes, including and above 
all the retirees. I think that this is one of the great 
achievements because in 1990, in the economic and monetary union 
with the former GDR, an enormous inflation wave was 
internationally predicted for Germany. It did not come. Four 
was too much and now we are reaching a reasonable ratio. 
  [Markwort] As far as the topic of negative headlines is 
concerned, I also do not want to blame anybody. But I think 
that, for example, the parties themselves were responsible for 
all the to-and-fro regarding the nursing-care insurance. Almost 
every holiday has already been under discussion. Is that not a 
matter where the chancellor -- let us get down to business, Mr. 
Chancellor -- convenes a meeting? Do the people not expect him 
to put his foot down? 
  [Kohl] But all that has been done. It is not a question of 
putting one's foot down. 
  [Markwort] But without any result. 
  [Kohl] Excuse me, this is a question of majorities. If the 
CDU/CSU had the majority in the Bundestag, the law would have 
been adopted long ago. But the voters decided on the majorities 
in the Bundestag and the Bundesrat. Thus, one cannot say that 
it depends on the chancellor. Regarding this matter, I am the 
one who can understand it least. I think that it is completely 
absurd that, considering the Germans' dimension of leisure, we 
have to quarrel over two days. What is the problem? The 
problem is that the number of older people is dramatically 
increasing. It is very gratifying that the people are 
healthier, also in their old age. However, if I know that in 
our time, in these years, we have 3 million citizens who are 
older than 80 years and that for 30 years we have been among the 
two or three countries with the lowest birthrates, that in many 
big German cities more than 50 percent of the owners of 
apartments are single and this behavior will not change in this 
respect, the conclusion is that we have to do more for nursing 
care, by the way, not only for the people who are now 80 years 
old, but the relevant development will continue. 
  By the way, the idea of the nursing-care insurance is also 
overdue. It has been under discussion for two decades. It has 
also been neglected. This belongs to what I said before. What 
a strange quarrel we are now having! On an average, we have 30 
days of annual leave. Then we have 10 to 13 holidays. If this 
is taken together, we have more holidays than in any other 
country in Europe. So we can really discuss the provision of 
two days for the securing of old age. 
  [Markwort] This has been discussed for ages. I think that, 
on the whole, it contributes to the weariness concerning 
politics and that journalists are relatively innocent in this 
respect. 
  [Kohl] I am not in favor of abusing journalists. First of 
all, this would be wrong because it is a sweeping judgment. 
There are neither stereotyped politicians nor stereotyped 
journalists. I am of your opinion. But if you provide me with 
the majority in the Bundesrat, the business will be over today 
at noon. I think that this quarrel on the back of the older 
people who are currently the generation of the people to be 
nursed -- by the way, this may be on our backs tomorrow -- is 
absolutely unacceptable. I also do not understand it. By the 
way, the majority of the population does not understand it 
either because I am sure that we would have a clear majority for 
it if a referendum were held on it. In view of 30 days of leave 
and 10 or 12 holidays, this can be settled. At the moment, 
however, the matter is stalemated by completely nonsensical and 
innumerable protective positions. 
  [Mertes] I think that, with Minister Ortleb's resignation, 
the 10th minister has left your cabinet since 1990. Will there 
soon be an 11th, that is, Minister Bluem, who has connected his 
political fate with the nursing-care insurance? 
  [Kohl] Not at all. But I really ask you not to compare 
colleague Ortleb, who is ill, suffered from this disease, 
recovered again, and made great efforts, and, by the way, is a 
really great man, with political events. What has to be said in 
connection with colleague Ortleb is something completely 
different. This depresses me. It is not connected with 
ministers. You can also observe it with my colleagues in the 
Bundestag, that is, that everything is unbelievably more 
difficult here for the men and women who come from the new 
laender, who had a completely different life, and who suddenly 
assumed political offices and responsibility after 1990 because 
they do not have any antecedents and experiences and have great 
difficulties in the merciless everyday political life, which 
cannot always be understood by outsiders, and they often cannot 
carry the burden. This is a very dismaying experience for me. 
  However, as far as the resignation of a large number of 
ministers is concerned, this is definitely no different from 
anywhere else in the world or in former governments, considering 
Helmut Kohl's 12 years as chancellor -- it will be 12 years in 
the autumn. When you talk about the number, you have to say how 
many governments have been elected and newly constituted in the 
meantime. 
  [Mertes] Let us once again come back to the nursing-care 
insurance. Do you proceed on the assumption that it will still 
be adopted now? In other words, if if is not achieved in this 
legislative period, what social policy projects of the past four 
years where progress has been made in the welfare state can you 
present to the voters? 
  [Kohl] Well, first of all, I want to say once again that, as 
far as this special question, which is very important to me 
personally in view of the older generation is concerned, I will 
try to do what is humanly possibly to achieve it. I cannot 
predict anything now in this respect. 
  Having a look at the past four years, I first of all have to 
say that these are the four years of German unity. Of course, 
the focus of social policies has been in the new laender in 
these four years. This is only right because we have always said 
that they are our brothers and sisters. And now we are asked 
whether this is true. Here I give one example for all: In early 
1990 a retiree in the new laender, which were still called the 
GDR at that time, had a monthly pension of 450 to 500 East 
German marks after 40 years of work. The same retiree with 40 
years of work now gets DM1,250 this month, in January 1994. You 
can see from this difference that there have been fundamental 
changes in the field of social policy. 
  [Mertes] It is the same everywhere, Mr. Kohl. What you 
say is plausible and one can check this calculation. 
Nevertheless, approval of your government is declining strongly 
in particular in eastern Germany. 
  [Kohl] We would like to wait for the elections to see about 
that. 
  [Mertes] How do the people react when you go to the east? 
  [Kohl] Excellently. I have to distinguish where I am -- 
whether I am going there, whether I have been announced 
properly, whether the appropriate extras have been deployed, and 
whether the television cameras have put the demonstrators in 
their places in time. 
  [Mertes] Who do you think is deploying these extras? 
  [Kohl] Well, that is quite easy; there are no problems. You 
will find the very old structures that are active there. Then 
there are mobile demonstration groups, which are sent out from 
certain places. There are a lot from the west. Quite often I 
meet the same people again and again. And certainly there are 
also people who are spontaneously outraged. However, if the 
four of us sitting here got into a helicopter now, went to any 
place, which you yourself specify from the air, where people are 
walking in the streets, for example, in the weekly market, and 
we walked among the people -- I experienced this just last week 
again in a town....[sentence as heard] 
  [Markwort] Nevertheless, the polls -- I have to get back to 
that -- which are done scientifically, are believed by 
everybody, and also influence the mood, are bad for you, in 
particular in the new laender. Is this not tragic, that the 
chancellor of unification, who essentially contributed to 
freeing the people, suddenly has a bad reputation among those 
whom he freed? 
  [Kohl] First of all, I do not like these terms at all. 
  [Markwort] Well, it is a little exaggerated. 
  [Kohl] I do not like it at all. I really look forward to 
the elections in the new laender on 16 October with great calm. 
I have said that I will stand in all the places where I stood 
in 1990 and I will hold rallies everywhere. And then we will 
see what the people really say. For instance, how do you know 
who the pensioners will vote for, whom we just discussed and who 
know from very personal experience what their lives were like 
and what they are like now? How do you know -- and this is 
something that is no longer included in the discussion at all -- 
in what way the people have not forgotten the most important 
thing, namely that they are genuinely free citizens in a free 
country? 
  [Markwort] Of course, I do not know and I cannot ask 
everyone. 
  [Kohl] That would be good. 
  [Markwort] But I do rely on the premise that prominent 
opinion research institutes, which talk to 2,000 
representatively chosen people, correctly present the prevailing 
mood. Of course, one can turn the mood around. After all, an 
election campaigner must be able to do that. However, I do rely 
on them to tell me what the mood in the country is like. And 
these are floating voters, who do not have any firm ties with 
the Social Democratic Party of Germany [SPD] or the CDU; they do 
not yet have any experience with voting. 
  [Kohl] I agree, and therefore, because things are as you 
correctly describe them, I suggest that you wait calmly, just as 
I am. 
  [Larass] What do the people tell you when you meet them in 
the market place? What do you hear from them? 
  [Kohl] I hear the following: First of all, a very high 
percentage -- both young and old people -- are grateful for 
German unification. This gratitude has not declined at all. 
This is a very important basic feeling. They say: We thank 
you that unification has come. 
  At the moment this is even increasing, because the insight 
that things might get worse again in Moscow is intensifying the 
fears that we discussed earlier. These fears are now also 
giving rise to the insight that there were, perhaps, only a few 
months during which the door was open and this guy -- myself -- 
made the best possible use of them. 
  Second, there is another thing: People are now suddenly 
discovering that many people lied, also in Germany, people who 
did not want unification at all. It is now increasingly being 
discovered who, in reality, had actually defected to Honecker, 
either directly or indirectly. The people also know that I did 
not defect. Some considered me to be an idiot, because I 
advocated the old-fashioned ideas of freedom and unification. 
  Third -- I have just had a discussion in the street -- the 
people naturally see that there will be flourishing landscapes, 
that the basic idea is not wrong at all, but that there will 
only be a difference of a few years. And then I explain to 
people where I made a mistake, namely that in 1990 I naturally 
assumed -- just as anybody in the world; I do not know anybody 
who thought differently -- that the Soviet Union would remain in 
existence and not collapse overnight, as it did a year later, 
that is, that the economic relations between the then-GDR, the 
new laender, with the Soviet Union would remain as they were, 
that we did not have to replace the old structures overnight, 
that we could catch up slowly on the world market with other 
products of the companies of the then GDR, the subsequent new 
laender, without this dramatic reduction of jobs. This was my 
mistake. I admit this. 
  In summer 1991 I was still negotiating with Mikhail 
Gorbachev 
about the delivery of goods worth between DM30 and DM40 billion, 
and now we have DM4 billion this year. And when I say this, I 
get very much understanding for it. 
  [Markwort] We are talking business here with the 
chancellor, but I would like to ask the historian Helmut Kohl a 
question for once. How do you assess the new insights from the 
1970s, the coming to terms with the past of the crumbling Brandt 
government, and the influence that the Socialist Unity Party of 
Germany [SED] had on the SPD? 
  [Kohl] Well, I think that what is emerging now is extremely 
shameful, and I would like to make it quite clear that I do not 
feel any joy at all about it. I think it is shameful, also 
regarding our relationship with our foreign partners and 
friends, that it is now becoming clear how many people here in 
the west had defected intellectually, how many people had long 
given up on the unification of the nation and had betrayed the 
wonderful idea of a unified fatherland just because of 
advantages gained in everyday politics. I find that very bad. 
  I predict that this feeling will greatly intensify among 
many 
people, the feeling that in a stormy period of German history 
many -- perhaps not all, I do not even know whether there would 
be a majority, as public opinion research does not help me in 
this -- had long given everything up. I am not happy about 
that. By the way, this will find its way more and more into the 
minds of the people in the new laender. I can see this from the 
letters that I get every day. 
  In my toast during Honecker's visit I said nothing that was 
different from what I had always said. I never held 
negotiations or talks or ordered talks to be held by others with 
the goal of making concessions. 
  There were two questions that were of existential importance 
for me out of my understanding of human rights as a German. 
First, the demand Honecker always made right at the beginning, 
namely that the small documentation center -- it really was not 
large -- in Salzgitter be abolished, which recorded human rights 
violations in the prisons of the then GDR as far as they became 
known. He always wanted to get rid of Salzgitter. I always 
felt that it was a scandal that the SPD-ruled laender stopped 
financing Salzgitter -- it was only a few marks -- to do 
Honecker a favor. The office was then maintained by the other 
laender. 
  Second, and this is the central issue, that Honecker's other 
demand, namely that we should accept two citizenships, was taken 
into consideration to such an extent. This is something quite 
different from a juridical procedure, nor is it the same as 
holding official talks. This meant depriving 17 million Germans 
of their original citizenship. 
  And those who do not want to understand at all what this 
meant must know that it was decisive also for the collapse of 
the GDR regime that in summer 1989 the Hungarian Government, the 
communist Hungarian Government, which did not want to continue 
such a Stalinist policy in Honecker's style, said that there is 
one German citizenship and, therefore, we will let the Germans 
go, regardless of where they come from. And this was the 
beginning of the end. In Prague and in Hungary the Germans 
could not have crossed the borders if they had had GDR 
citizenship. The matter would also have been different in this 
respect. 
  Therefore, it is a shame and a scandal that it was possible 
that people held negotiations on this matter. 
  [Mertes] How would you explain the fact that the 
reassessment of the past -- of the most recent past -- is 
assuming so much significance again? Has this something to do 
with election year? 
  [Kohl] No. 
  [Mertes] Do you see a risk that mud slinging might be 
triggered by old files? 
  [Kohl] There is no such risk. I believe it would be stupid 
to wage an election campaign characterized by mud slinging. 
Somebody who runs for the president's office and whose party 
has massively participated... 
  [Mertes] You are referring to Johannes Rau. 
  [Kohl] Yes. He himself was not so much involved, but he 
watched his party attacking a candidate from another party, the 
CDU/CSU, a candidate from the new laender, from Dresden, with 
the most disparaging and, in my view, unacceptable remarks and 
statements. If somebody presents himself as the candidate of 
German unity and as the candidate of the people in the new 
laender, too, while pointing out that we do not need a candidate 
from the new laender because he will safeguard their interests, 
he must face the question, not about a sin committed as an 
adolescent, but about what happened in the past 10 years. The 
candidate made no positive contribution in his land at the 
office for the registration of GDR crimes, for example. After 
all, he was and still is minister-president. As a social 
democrat, his supreme goal should be to fight for humanity, for 
justice, and for the poor. Second, I have not heard any 
statement from him massively rejecting different citizenships. 
He did not do so in his capacity as candidate for chancellor, 
either. As far as the files are concerned, I did not look for 
them, but they simply exist, and he will have to deal with them. 
  If I remember what questions I have had to face constantly 
during my political career since I became party chairman -- 
during the past 21 years -- I do not know why others simply 
ignore the facts. 
  [Mertes] Have we seen the campaigner Kohl, who wants to be 
tough, in the past three minutes? What will be your personal 
style during the election campaign? 
  [Kohl] I will not change my style during the election 
campaign. I will not be a different person then. I will talk 
to the people as I always do. I will advocate and explain my 
policy. I will not run around with a sledge-hammer all the time 
and bang it on people's heads. I will not put up with offense, 
and I will certainly not offer my left cheek if somebody hits me 
on the right one. I would like to stress this here as chairman 
of the CDU. [unintelligible interjection] This need not be a 
duel. You know, this has something to do with the fashionable 
word feelings. I do not like this word at all. It sounds 
terrible and does not mean very much. Yet if we are talking 
about my feelings, I think it is very good for my health if I do 
not swallow everything. 
  [Markwort] There are other issues, apart from the election 
campaign. You have visited the United States, and you 
frequently talk on the telephone with Yeltsin. How come you 
have always had a good relationship with Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and 
the U.S. Presidents Reagan, Bush, and now Clinton? Your 
relationship with Clinton seems to be excellent. 
  [Kohl] It is difficult for me to answer this question. You 
should ask those affected. You know, I have always tried to 
apply the principles of private life to political life, too. I 
have never advocated separate political morals. Experience has 
taught me several things. I adopted two very important 
sentences from my mother. She used to tell us children: In 
life, you must always be aware that one meets people at least 
twice. Thus, during the first meeting, you must behave in a way 
that you can still look them straight in the eye the second 
time. The other sentence is: Visit people when they are not 
doing so well. If they are doing fine, they have lots of 
friends. You can see that very well in politics -- on elections 
days, after election defeats. Many people act in accordance 
with this principle. 
  Let us take the example of Boris Yeltsin. Boris Yeltsin 
knows that Mikhail Gorbachev is my friend. Yeltsin is also my 
friend. I have never tried to hide this fact. He knows very 
well that George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev did more than 
anybody else to bring about German unity. It would not have 
been possible without the two. I believe that a man must be 
able to tolerate somebody else's friendship with those who are 
no longer in power. 
  I can give you another fantastic example of fairness that I 
experienced on Monday morning this week [31 January]. When I 
arrived at Bill Clinton's office, and after he had welcomed me, 
the first thing that he said was: I think it was great of you 
to arrange this ceremony for George Bush, his predecessor and 
competitor during the election campaign, yesterday evening. It 
is true that no other American did more for German unity and the 
Germans than George Bush. During the ceremony, George Bush was 
presented with the Great Distinguished Service Cross of the FRG, 
awarded by the federal president. During his term of office, 
Bush did not accept any decorations. Thus, I organized a small 
ceremony for him and the secretary of state and conveyed thanks 
in a speech. This did not have a negative impact on my 
relationship with Bill Clinton. Quite the contrary, as you can 
see. He is quite a normal man with human feelings for 
togetherness. 
  [Markwort] Apart from your friendship with Clinton, U.S. 
politicians have leveled massive allegations that the Europeans, 
including the Germans, are not doing enough to stop human rights 
violations at their front door -- in the former Yugoslavia. 
What is your opinion? 
  [Kohl] First of all, it was not difficult for me to explain 
why we are not intervening with German soldiers in the former 
Yugoslavia. It is not possible for us because we have not yet 
amended our constitution, which is urgently needed. One cannot 
be a member of the club of the United Nations and enjoy the 
rights but reject the obligations. Yet even once the 
constitution is amended, we are not the right partners because 
of our historical experiences during the 1940s in the war in 
Yugoslavia. We cannot send soldiers there, not even for 
humanitarian missions. I have always rejected that. By the 
way, I have not met anybody in the United States who does not 
understand these two arguments. 
  [Markwort] The chancellor of the largest -- and most 
important -- European nation has now stated that Europe is not 
doing enough for the protection of human rights. Who should do 
something? The smaller states? Who makes a decision in Europe? 
Every country is probably waiting for another. 
  [Kohl] To be honest, there is no simple solution to the 
problem that we are facing. Those who advocate the dispatch of 
soldiers -- I am addressing the German public here -- must be 
aware that someone has to issue the order. My Spanish 
counterpart and friend Felipe Gonzales had to mourn 27 deaths in 
a humanitarian mission. Thus, if a young Spanish soldier from 
Bilbao, for example, is shot dead, Felipe Gonzales must tell his 
mother, his father, his bride, or his wife why he sent the 
soldier there. Those who advocate military measures must be 
aware that several hundred thousand soldiers would be needed. I 
do not know anybody who would issue such an order. I would not 
recommend it to any of my counterparts or expect him to do so. 
This is the truth. What we have to try once more is to use the 
authority of the leaders and of the large countries to arrive at 
an acceptable compromise. We have achieved some progress 
concerning a new order. We have entered the final phase. We 
also discussed this in Washington. Yet I cannot offer a 
panacea. All who claim that we should drop bombs should not 
forget the pictures of civilian casualties with which we will be 
confronted afterward. We are facing an unholy alliance of the 
worst factors here. 
  [Mertes] You say unholy alliance. Of course, this is a 
conflict that goes on and on. Can it be that the economic 
problems that oppress us suddenly look very small in view of the 
foreign policy dangers that are emerging? 
  [Kohl] Yes. This is a development that has been under way 
for a long time and that has a lot to do with public opinion and 
changes in public opinion. Bismarck's sentence that foreign and 
security policy -- and nothing else -- decide the fate of a 
nation is a sentence that has been ridiculed by many in this 
country over the past years. We knew everything better, so to 
speak. Now we have again got into the thunderstorms of history. 
  However, compared with 1914, we have a completely different 
situation. Today there is an international community, today 
there is the community in Europe, which is even more important 
in this case, if you take, for instance, the Charter of the 
Council of Europe, which clearly condemns everybody who changes 
borders by force. If we had had that set down in international 
law in 1914, the world would have taken a different course. 
  [Mertes] Even then no one was fond of war. 
  [Kohl] Yes, but the forms were completely different at that 
time. This is what is happening in Yugoslavia just now and that 
is why I am categorically in favor of making it known to those 
who change borders by force there that, as soon as the civil war 
is over and borders changed by force remain in effect, this FRG 
-- at least with Chancellor Kohl -- will not pay a single mark 
for reconstruction. I think that we should have used this 
threat, if you like, much more in Europe. I have always said 
that. 
  Because there are many people in this region -- not only 
from 
one group, which one must say for the sake of fairness -- who 
think: Now we are doing this, we are shifting borders, we are 
terrorizing the people, we are carrying out ethnic cleansing, 
and then, in the end, they will give in for the sake of peace, 
and then everything will have been destroyed and gigantic 
billion sums --six-digit billion sums -- will be required. And 
then they will have to help us. 
  We do not have to do anything. I favor making it clear that 
those who work with the methods of international political 
gangsterism -- what we experienced during the first half of the 
century in the German name and to the detriment of the Germans 
-- cannot be subsidized and supported by us any more. 
  As regards Russia, we have to support the reform forces and 
make sure that those who see the dangers and know that their 
future is impossible without foreign aid and that foreign aid 
and also German aid depends on sticking to the principles that I 
have just mentioned, that reforms are slowly advanced, no matter 
how difficult they are.... [sentence as heard]. 
  [Mertes] You continue to believe in Yeltsin? 
  [Kohl] I am firmly confirmed that Boris Yeltsin first wants 
reforms -- not as some Harvard professor draws up in a model but 
under the current conditions in Russia. This will work far more 
slowly. 
  After all, how else should it work after 80 years of 
communism? You know, when I talk to Boris Yeltsin I feel in him 
and in many others that they are proud people, a proud nation, a 
proud country, with a great history and tradition, and they all 
see in the pictures how five, six, or seven years ago half the 
world made a pilgrimage there, some of them on their knees. I 
still remember the undignified pictures, for instance at 
Andropov's funeral. And now the same people who came crawling 
on their knees at that time to pay homage are now talking 
arrogantly. 
  I think it was one of Bill Clinton's best deeds of the past 
few weeks that, when he visited Moscow, he honored the Russians 
by making it clear: You are the other great country, nobody 
wants to patronize you, we want to help you, but it must be help 
for self-help. 
  [Mertes] In conclusion, let us come back again to domestic 
policy, to the gray domestic policy. 
  [Kohl] It is not gray at all. 
  [Mertes] Okay. But I do not know whether you want to deny 
that the cohesion of the CDU, your party, leaves a lot to be 
desired at the beginning of the election year. What do you want 
to do at the party congress in Hamburg at the end of February in 
order to improve cohesion? What will you call for? Will you 
also call for the chancellor's election campaign? What will be 
the issues? 
  [Kohl] The party must know that we can win the elections 
only if we are cohesive, and the party certainly knows that. 
Already the formulation is incorrect. It is not true that the 
party does not want to struggle, nor that the party is torn by 
strife. There are relatively few who do that. 
  [Mertes] Do you want to stop those at the party congress in 
Hamburg? 
  [Kohl] You ask what I am going to tell the people in 
Hamburg. I will say: People, this is the direction in which we 
are moving, and I support it. Whoever wants something else is 
welcome to get up on the rostrum here and say so. This is the 
hour of truth. 
  And I can predict what will happen then, but I am not going 
to tell you now. We will talk about that after the party 
congress. 
  [Markwort] Mertes mentioned the chancellor's election 
campaign. Do we have to assume that only Helmut Kohl will be 
seen on the billboards? Which of the CDU politicians would you 
like to present in addition? 
  [Kohl] No, not at all. We have never done that, with the 
exception of the 1990 elections, which were the elections of 
German unification, because we had the same posters and in 
Rostock it was rather clear who would be stressed. In all the 
election campaigns -- after all this is not the first election 
in which we are running -- we have always stressed the top man. 
  [Markwort] Who would you like to see on the posters apart 
from yourself? 
  [Kohl] The candidate is well known. We will certainly not 
stress an enormous number of people. However, we will stress 
some and they must be men and women and this must be discussed 
in the party bodies, because if I say it here, you will have a 
wonderful journalistic message, but the party will say: He has 
not asked us at all. 
  [Mertes] But actually these people should be known. 
  [Kohl] They are known indeed. I may assure you that they 
have already been sired, they have already been born, and they 
are already of age. 
  [Mertes] You have not only been born, but you will be 64 
this election year. This is a good age, but, of course, this 
will also be a year that enormously drains one's strength. Do 
you feel physically fit and healthy enough to go through this 
election campaign? 
  [Kohl] In everyday life I get the impression that a number 
of younger people moan at my physical fitness. This is not my 
achievement. I can only think God every day that this is the 
case. This year I really want to know it, and this year I really 
want to struggle for every single vote -- in the streets, in the 
squares, at many opportunities. And, above all, I want to 
struggle for a political conviction, for a direction of German 
politics, in which we understand history, act on the basis of 
history, but orient ourselves toward the future by not sticking 
to the status quo in all matters and say: This was so in the 
past and it must remain so, but in which we carefully examine 
what is solid -- and these things must remain. But a lot of 
things must change. 
  By the way, the elections will be won by those who believe 
that we have a realistic reason for optimism. 
  [Mertes] Thank you very much, Mr. Chancellor. 

