BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Lin Jenkins and Bill Frost: "Hospital Get </F>
Warning on Killer Bug"] 
  [Excerpts] The deadly bacteria that destroy tissue and 
muscle were believed to have claimed a sixth victim yesterday as 
the Department of Health circulated hospitals and health 
laboratories with details of the infection. 
  An investigation was under way last night into the death of 
a 
woman who had been thought to be cured of the streptococcal 
infection which she contracted after giving birth by Caesarean 
section. 
  The woman, in her early twenties, gave birth to a girl on 
May 
3 and spent more than a week in intensive care fighting a 
bacterial infection. 
  Doctors at St Peter's Hospital, Chertsey, Surrey, believed 
that she had recovered and on May 12 transferred her to Queen 
Marys hospital, Roehampton, to have plastic surgery and skin 
grafts to repair the damage caused by the infection, which eats 
away at tissue and muscle. 
  The woman's gynaecologist at the Surrey hospital had become 
worried when she began displaying septicaemia symptoms after the 
birth. A microbiology specialist diagnosed the onset of the 
tissue- destroying disease. 
  Hopes had been high that she would respond to treatment, but 
yesterday afternoon St Peters said she had died after being 
transferred. 
  A spokesman said: "Our consultant biologist sees maybe one 
or 
two cases a year. It is a fairly common bacteria, but it very 
rarely produces these symptoms. No further details were being 
released at the request of her family, and the case has been 
referred to the Battersea coroner. 
  John Adler, director of operation services at St Peters, 
refused to speculate on the cause of death: "We have no idea 
whether it was connected with the bacteria or not. There are 
other possible causes, and we will not know for certain until a 
post-mortem examination has been carried out." 
  All the cases have been apparently caused by strains of 
streptococcus, a bacterium usually linked to throat infections. 
Victims suffer a condition called necrotising fasciitis, in 
which the bacterium gets under the skin, causing a gangrene-like 
infection. 
  In an attempt to calm public fears about the bacterium, the 
director of the Public Health Laboratory Service communicable 
disease surveillance centre, Dr Christopher Bartlett, said 
yesterday the number of cases was within expected annual figures. 
  He added: Public anxiety should be allayed by the fact that 
we have examined all indicators of streptococcal infection in 
the country, and these are demonstrating no change in either 
numbers or patterns of infection. 
  In Parliament, Tom Sackville, junior health minister, 
rejected calls by MPs to make the condition a notifiable one, 
whereby all GPs and hospitals must report it. 
  The bacterium has claimed lives throughout the South of 
England. [passage omitted] 
  Dr Robin Stott, medical director of Lewisham Hospital NHS 
[National Health Service] Trust, said: "We are trying to put 
this in perspective and not cause more alarm. The bacteria is 
relatively trivial and responds to penicillin. 
  "Forty years ago it used to give rise to conditions which 
are 
more serious than they are today, such as kidney disease and 
rheumatic fever. The reasons for a change in potency of these 
bacteria are obscure. Occasionally and rarely this bacteria 
does cause significant life-threatening diseases which we are 
seeing now again for reasons we don't know," he said. 
  Dr Gopal Rao, consultant microbiologist at the hospital, 
said 
people displaying certain symptoms should see their doctor, and 
that GPs in the area and casualty departments were being alerted. 
  "This is a rare infection, but if someone is concerned, the 
following symptoms might be helpful: pain and tenderness in the 
limbs, accompanied by a fever in a well individual, should 
prompt the person to go to their GP," he said. 

