Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Andreas Gerlach] </F>
  [Text] Sensors: Sense and Comprehension 
<H3>  Intelligent Systems Revolutionize Automotive, Environmental, 
and Medical Engineering </H3>
  Hans-Hermann Braess has a bold vision. The research director 
at the BMW (Bayerische Motoren Werke) hopes "to duplicate man's 
unbelievable sensory abilities with technical sensors." 
  The further notion that components needed for such sensors 
"should not cost more than a few marks," seems to make him 
definitely a dreamer. Yet his vision is already close to 
becoming a reality. 
  With the aid of microelectronics, sensor technology has been 
thrust into an entirely new dimension. Today tiny sensors can 
already touch, taste, see, and hear. They measure position, 
pressure, angular speed, and humidity, or aid in analysis of 
chemical concentrations. These midgets are, moreover, much 
cheaper than conventional measuring sensors. While a 
conventional sensor recording the electrical conductivity of 
liquids costs about 400 DM, its microelectronic descendant can 
already be purchased for down to 10 DM. 
  This rapid price reduction has been made possible by known 
silicon processing techniques. Just as in the production of 
microelectronic chips, several hundreds of sensors can be 
simultaneously mounted on one wafer: a disk of the size of a 
beer cap. 
  Most progress microsensor engineering has made in the 
automobile industry. Already in the middle nineteen seventies 
Mercedes-Benz and BMW began making the automobile more 
intelligent by use of sensors. Neither antilock braking system 
nor electronic transmission control and also air bags would be 
conceivable without microsensors. For their de luxe limousines, 
moreover, Mercedes-Benz and BMW have also advanced the 
development of sympathetic shock absorbing systems so far that 
they are ready for the production line. Aided by a small 
acceleration sensor, the computer in the vehicle recognizes the 
road condition as well as the operating mode and then, within 
milliseconds, adjusts the drive characteristic accordingly. 
  This is only the beginning. Automobile developers envision 
in 
the future a rainfall sensor controlling the speed of windshield 
wipers. When a child suddenly appears on the road, electronic 
microoptics will respond faster than the driver. Soon a 
miniradar could take over navigation through a fog. "Till now 
intelligence was vested in the driver only," explains 
Hans-Hermann Braess, "but today one tries to impart intelligence 
to the automobile and to thus relieve the driver of his burden." 
<H5>  High Tech </H5>
  Whether in vehicle design, process control, or environmental 
and medical engineering, the demand for bargain measuring 
sensors is increasing in leaps and bounds. While the total 
market volume of sensors worldwide already amounted to 30.6 
billion DM in 1990, projections by the VDI/VDE Technology Center 
for Information Engineering Ltd in Teltow near Berlin (VDI: 
Verein Deutscher Ingenieure = Society of German Engineers, VDE: 
Verein Deutscher Elektrotechniker = Society of German Electrical 
Engineers) indicate an increase of the volume to 65.1 billion DM 
by the year 2000. 
  This growth is attributable most of all to microsensors. 
Their share ad valorem will climb from 10.2 billion DM to 43.4 
billion DM. Whole armies of measuring "fleas" will conquer all 
areas of engineered life activities. 
  "So far the German sensor manufacturers hold a good position 
in this dynamic field" deems Walter Wiche at the Federal 
Ministry of Research and Technology (BMFT). A new assistance 
program has been unveiled by the BMFT offering financial support 
above all to small innovation-minded enterprises. 
  The pioneers in sensor technology can very well use this 
financial shot in the arm. It takes about four years for an idea 
to be converted into a marketable product. "For this one needs a 
long breath" knows Johannes Herrnsdorf, who five years ago 
together with Hans-Joachim Lilienhof has established the H.&amp; 
L. 
Planar Technology Ltd in the Dortmund Technology Park. Only now 
are these two entrepreneurs able to build up their market with 
miniaturized temperature, magnetic field, and angle sensors. 
Business director Herrnsdorf of the H.&amp; L. Planar is 
optimistic: 
"Next year we will finally find ourselves in the profit zone." 
  Yet innovations in microsensors are still advanced mostly by 
the large manufacturing firms, above all by Bosch, by both Dasa 
and AEG (General Electric Corporation) subsidiaries of 
Daimler-Benz, and by Siemens. The project developers are already 
working on second-generation sensors which will combine 
perception and comprehension, with sensors and signal processors 
integrated on one chip. Simultaneous fabrication of sensors and 
electronics is still in the experimental stage. "The 
semiconductor people become extremely anxious when etching is to 
be done on their contamination-free premises" complains Helmut 
Seidel, manager of microsensor engineering at Dasa in Munich. 
  For this reason Temic Telefunken Microelectronics Ltd, a 
joint enterprise of both Daimler-Benz subsidiaries AEG and Dasa 
established for consolidation of all microsystem activities of 
the parent corporation, is constructing its own manufacturing 
facility in its Swabian Nabern plant. Two years from now 
intelligent sensors, especially acceleration sensors, are to be 
produced in quantities up to millions of units. 
  The function they perform is based on the fundamental law 
pertaining to the moment of inertia of a body. On a silicon chip 
is etched out an almost entirely separate tiny square wafer 
which only three thin and narrow bridges connect to the 
remaining part of the structure. The position of this wafer 
changes during acceleration and during braking. Those thin 
bridges then bend so that their electrical resistance changes. 
The electronics compute that resistance and, when necessary, 
release the air bag. 
  In this way such a microsensor will in future vehicle models 
replace the present three-to-five conventional accelerometers, 
with the additional advantage that it tests itself every time 
the engine is started. 
  The Mannesmann Kienzle Ltd in Villingen-Schwenningen is 
already installing such sensors in one mass-produced device: an 
accident-data recorder used for retaining the circumstances of 
an accident. The innocent drivers can thus be readily exonerated 
and the drivers at fault need not be afraid of the others 
testifying as key witnesses. So long as it is not legally 
mandated, they may refuse to surrender their cassettes with 
relevant data. 

