BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hocine Ait-Ahmed, leader of Algeria's </F>
Socialist Forces Front, by Jean-Paul Mari; place and date not 
given: "The Third Way Is Our Only Hope"] 
  [Text] [Mari] Is violence continuing to gain ground in 
Algeria? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Yes, since the interruption of the electoral 
process two years ago, violence has progressively extended to 
most parts of the country. For the last three days, the army 
has surrounded and cut off the town of Larbaa, and there are 
very severe skirmishes. Rockets and artillery are in use 
throughout the region between Bouira, Boumerdes and Blida. On 
the coast, the Delys region has been encircled for three days 
and villages have been shelled. These are no longer police 
operations but real battles. On the Islamic side, they are 
moving away slightly from the strategy of individual attempts 
toward a concentration of veritable army units which are 
springing up everywhere in the country. The GIA (Armed Islamic 
Group) and the MIA (Armed Islamic Movement) are clearly out to 
provoke the collapse of what remains of the state and to get the 
whole population to change sides psychologically. 
  [Mari] One remains stupefied at the level of brutality which 
has now been reached in Algeria. 
  [Ait-Ahmed] The excesses, and the acts of barbarism on both 
sides are... senseless! Algeria is prey to a veritable throat- 
cutting syndrome. It is the result of what I would call a 
"private war." On the one hand, in the name of Algeria and a 
type of nationalistic integrationism, those in power are 
fighting to maintain themselves in power, to preserve their 
privileges and to last. On the other side the Islamists want, 
in the name of God, to take power and monopolize it, just like 
the present regime. 
  [Mari] Are we moving towards civil war? 
  [Ait Ahmed] The ingredients for this civil war are there. 
Violence, popular despair, economic and social conditions, the 
current impasse, and then, in the future, the consequences of 
the plan imposed by the IMF... everything is contributing to 
exacerbating the situation. But let us be clear: we are not as 
far as one part of the population having taken up arms against 
the other; we are not yet in a civil war. Moreover, the 
present situation cannot be reduced to this type of bipolar 
confrontation: army against Islamists. One is condemned to 
understand nothing in Algeria if one forgets a major political 
fact: The population is revolted and powerless, but does not 
want to go on being the hostage of this violence. Whatever the 
efforts of one side or the other, the overwhelming majority of 
Algerians have so far refused to tip into one camp. Since the 
coup d'etat, all attempts by those in power to involve the 
population at its sides have failed. But, just after the first 
round of the elections, hundreds of thousands of people marched 
through the streets of Algiers shouting "No police state, no 
Islamic state!" Today we could add: no civil war. 
  [Mari] Do Algerians today still have a choice between a 
policy of total security [politique du tout-securitaire] and an 
Islamic republic? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Algerians are retreating in on themselves and on 
their distress. Hoping that both groups realize that they 
cannot win. When we, the FFS (Socialist Forces Front), call for 
political opening, it is to permit this overwhelming majority to 
express itself, and to take its destiny in its own hand. This 
third way represents the only hope for the Algerian people. 
  [Mari] Right now, we hear only the noise of arms and 
declarations of war. Where are the forces of this third way? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] It is not because they are silent that these 
forces do not exist. They do exist! In the administration, the 
trade unions, other associations, in all the parties and even 
inside the army. It is all these forces which I wish to 
address, in order to form a "cross-party" movement, a democratic 
pole. Otherwise, if the total-security-policy disaster 
continues, we will end up with direct negotiations between those 
in power and the integrationists. 
  [Mari] With the danger of a military-Islamic power? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] With, just like in Iran, a power which cares 
nothing for the will of the people. If we are calling for 
openness, it is because we are persuaded that these forces, 
which are in the majority, are able to create a dynamism capable 
of reducing the extremists on both sides to their proper levels 
of importance. 
  [Mari] Can one discuss with the Islamists? And how far can 
one go without opening up the way towards an Islamic republic 
for them? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] One initial and elementary observation: the 
pursuit of total security is the pre-eminent road to bring the 
integrationists to power! For the last two years, we have not 
ceased to strengthen the mechanisms of repression. And what do 
we see? The Islamists are getting stronger. Second 
observation: the dialog is difficult, of course. But it was 
easier two years ago. The best way of avoiding violence was not 
to begin it! Every day which passes, every drop of blood which 
is shed complicates the situation. In the heat of action, we 
increase the amounts at stake. Today the breach is narrow, but 
we have to widen it! 
  [Mari] What must those in power do? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Open up the political field. Now. 
  [Mari] Legalize the FIS [Islamic Front]? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Yes! Why not? It is necessary to take 
appeasement measures: freeing political prisoners, ending 
condemnations, torture, closing of the camps in the South... 
  [Mari] Free Ali Belhadj and Abassi Madani? Issue an 
amnesty? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Yes for Belhadj and Madani. I would not go as 
far as talking of general amnesty. In any event, the country 
needs shock treatment. And not homeopathic treatment. In 
particular if, as the FIS maintains, certain detainees freed 
from the camps have been killed on their return. In short, we 
are not in an appeasement situation. On the contrary, reprisals 
and acts of horror are continuing. On both sides. It is 
important to take concrete measures, and turn the page on 
confrontation. 
  [Mari] This opinion is not shared by the RCD [expansion 
unknown], whose leader has just called for "armed resistance." 
  [Ait-Ahmed] I do not believe it is shared by the Algerian 
people. 
  [Mari] The fact remains that time is short. 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Yes indeed! We are now in a race against the 
clock. There is too much blood. Too much blood! The situation 
can become inextricable. It is a question of months, perhaps 
weeks. 
  [Mari] You are not in Algeria, but in Switzerland. Certain 
people criticize you for this. It is possible to lead a 
political combat today outside the country? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] I am not resolved to be a political exile. But 
staying there after the coup d'etat, Boudiaf's murder, and the 
closing of the democratic arena, was to fall into the hands of 
the regime. Moreover, I am not a Zorro, neither am I a 
dictator. I have a party, a party management which works, and 
with which I am in daily contact. But I am a person who acts 
responsibly. If a "fatal accident" were to happen to me in 
Algeria, what would be the reaction of the part of the 
population which supports me? I do not want to risk that. But 
I assure you that I shall rush back to Algeria at the smallest 
sign of democratization! 
  [Mari] You come originally from Kabylia, where your party 
has a strong presence. For certain people, this region is a 
haven of peace, for others, it is being put to fire and the 
sword. What is the situation in Kabylia? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] Kabylia is first of all a region of Algeria 
which is experiencing all the problems of Algeria. Plus that of 
cultural exclusion. Since 1963, our party has been doing 
everything possible to prevent this political vacuum, which has 
allowed integrationism to gain a foothold elsewhere. Our 
cultural demands are made within the framework of the Algerian 
nation. There is just one nation, the Algerian nation. 
Politically, Kabylia, along with other regions, is supporting 
by all means a national project. The blockages which the 
authorities have placed on political activity is exacerbating 
tensions. And the danger is of either withdrawing into oneself 
or going off course into violence. It is certain that the 
"eradicators" would like to tip this region into their camp, 
just as the integrationists are fully aware of Kabylia's 
importance on the political chessboard. 
  [Mari] And on 20 April, in a week, the anniversary of the 
"Berber spring". 
  [Ait-Ahmed] We will be holding a demonstration, like we did 
last January, but this time at Algiers, again with the same 
theme: demand for cultural recognition and peace. I do not want 
certain people eventually trying to put Kabylia off course into 
a situation of violence, by attempting to distort the Kabyl 
people's democratic opposition to the present regime, 
transforming it into a Kabyl combat against the Islamists. That 
would be extremely serious. I cannot keep silent about the 
consequences of the resulting confrontation. Do not forget that 
there are Kabyls throughout the country. Of course, mountain 
people are full of common sense, with their heads firmly on 
their shoulders. But we are afraid of spectacular provocations. 
It is also to defuse this situation that I am speaking today. 
  [Mari] Can and should France play a role? Or is it 
condemned to keep silent? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] It is clear that Algeria's problems have to be 
settled by Algerians. But the international community cannot 
disinterest itself from the fate of human rights in Algeria. 
Without counting the threat of destabilization throughout the 
Maghreb. No western country can be indifferent to this. What 
shocks and revolts us is that governments have fallen into the 
trap of bipolarization, ignoring the population and democratic 
forces. The fact is that we are there, that we are fighting, and 
that we are carrying the word into the popular quarters, where 
those in power do not even dare set foot. The people, 
democratic forces, need support. 
  [Mari] When one sees how events have accelerated in recent 
years, and observes the gap which is widening, in the last two 
years, at a dizzying pace..., is it not already too late? 
  [Ait-Ahmed] I do not believe in the fatality of the worst. 
Nothing is lost. Algerians are built in such a way -- which is 
something I witnessed immediately after the war of independence 
-- that they can be very hard at the time and, later, forget any 
idea of revenge. Algerians are a generous people. Perhaps too 
the experience of the past two years has made people wiser. The 
"knife-edge"" situation could make us wiser. So that we do not 
fall into civil war. 

