BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on economic developments through 12 April. 
  The Foreign Trade Institute (Incomex) has reported imports 
totaled $1.4 billion during February, a 36.3-percent increase 
over imports for the same month last year. Incomex has revealed 
$2.5-billion worth of goods were imported the first two months 
of the year, a 26-percent increase over imports for the same 
period in 1993. Raw materials and unfinished products accounted 
for 41 percent of imported goods, followed by consumer goods and 
capital goods. The largest supplier of goods to Colombia was 
the United States, with $922 million, followed by Venezuela, 
with $386.6 million. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 
21 March 94 p 2C) 
  According to data compiled by EL TIEMPO, food prices pushed 
inflation upward in March with an average increase of 3 percent. 
Most increases are reported in such products as meat, coffee, 
and certain fruits; nevertheless, there was a reduction in the 
price of onions, string beans, and guavas. Meanwhile, the 
Agricultural- Livestock Market Institute (Idema) has ruled out a 
massive importation of foodstuffs, saying national production 
will be enough to meet the demand. Between 5,000 and 6,000 tons 
of potatoes from Ecuador are expected to enter the country this 
semester, however. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 2 
April 94 pp 1A, 1C, 3C) 
  Shortly after the government adopted measures restricting 
internal and external credits to curb inflation, the effects 
began to surface. Such measures resulted in dissolved 
businesses, postponed purchases, noncompliance with payments, 
etc. Banking authorities on 15 March established a 2.2-percent 
monthly ceiling on the volume of loans granted by banks. This 
measure will be effective for four months, and it is expected 
the growth of loans in the financial sector will not exceed 30 
percent by the end of the year. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO 
in Spanish 3 April 94 p 1C) 
  In an interview with EL TIEMPO, Maria Mercedes Cuellar de 
Martinez, deputy chairperson of the Bank of the Republic, has 
said the economy could face serious hardships in the next few 
months if the government does not curb public spending. 
Martinez has said the measures restricting credits will have 
positive results only if the government does its part. The top 
bank official has said the country could not afford to maintain 
an overvalued peso, concluding a 12- to 13-percent devaluation 
would be "ideal." (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 3 
April 94 p 2C) 
  The National Administrative Department of Statistics (Dane) 
has revealed the March inflation rate totaled 2.21 percent, 
bringing annual cumulative inflation to 9.32 percent. In order 
for the government to meet its 19-percent annual inflation 
target, monthly inflation could not exceed 1 percent by the end 
of the year. The rise in basic basket product prices is mainly 
explained by increases in health, food, and housing services. 
Food prices alone increased by 2.55 percent last year, putting 
upward pressure on prices. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 3 April 94 p 3A) 
  Dane has reported industrial production rose by 6.04 percent 
last year, excluding coffee production, while in 1992 it 
increased by 4.46 percent in 1992. Dane has noted coffee 
production fell sharply due to reduced exports. Growth in 
industrial production was set at 4.05 percent in 1993. The Dane 
report has also indicated jobs in the industrial sector grew by 
1.36 percent last year. (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 8 April 94 p 1B) 
  Guido Nule Amin, mines and energy minister, has said 
investments in the energy sector are expected to total $24 
billion over the next eight years. Of this amount, Nule 
continued, "the government will only contribute $11 billion, 
because we hope the private sector will come up with the rest." 
Among the projects in the oil industry are the development of 
the Cusiana oil field, construction of oil pipelines, and new 
exploration projects. Nule has reiterated the government will 
promote the private sector's participation in petroleum-refining 
projec?s to liberalize gasoline production. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
EL TIEMPO in Spanish 8 April 94 p 4B) 

