Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Vilma Nunez, president of the </F>
Commission for the Defense of Human Rights in Central America, 
by Beatric Padron; place and date not given; from the "Evening 
Information Review" newscast] 
  [Text] The Commission for the Defense of Human Rights in 
Central America [Codehuca] has denounced in Geneva the ongoing 
U.S. blockade against Cuba as a vile aggression on an entire 
nation. 
  Vilma Nunez, president of Codehuca and of the Nicaraguan 
Human Rights Center, has traveled to Geneva to participate in UN 
Human Rights Commission sessions to expound on the current 
situation of those rights in the Central American region. 
  Nunez discussed this and other related issues with Radio 
Havana Cuba. 
  [Begin Nunez recording] With regard to the human rights 
situation, there exists what we might call a news embargo at the 
international level. The international media are telling the 
world that there is peace in Central America and that human 
rights are not being violated, but this is not true. Human 
rights violations remain part of the official policy of many 
governments. There are other cases. For example, in Nicaragua, 
Panama, and Costa Rica, neoliberal policies are pushing our 
people into poverty. This is taking place as part of a pattern 
of economic repression. The implementation of this policy, 
whether speaking in practical terms or in terms of human rights, 
comprises a systematic violation of economic and social rights. 
Neoliberal policies are pushing most of our people into 
poverty. [end recording] 
  One of Codehuca's strategic objectives is to mobilize its 
nongovernment member-organizations in defense of the Cuban 
people's self-determination and sovereign rights. 
  [Begin Nunez recording] We have asked nongovernment 
organizations that have the opportunity to speak at 
international forums, and particularly at the United Nations, to 
try to denounce the blockade as the main source of human rights 
violations in Cuba. Cuba is the only Latin American nation that 
has been able to produce specific achievements in the field of 
economic and social rights. This must be recognized and firmly 
pointed out. This is what we are promoting. We are also 
looking for ways to promote standard international laws and 
human rights in order that third-party countries may be 
considered violators of human rights in other nations. 
  Governments violate the human rights of the people in their 
own countries. In terms of the law, it is unimaginable that a 
foreign country be allowed to violate the rights of people in 
another country, but in this case we find that the Cuban 
people's limitations and the deterioration of their health and 
educational services are not the product of the will of the 
Cuban Government but, rather, the result of an action by an 
arrogant government -- namely, the United States. We want to 
find legal mechanisms in order that the U.S. Government may be 
condemned as a human rights violator. Through its actions, this 
government is not only violating Cuba's right to sovereignty and 
self-determination, it is acting against 11 million Cubans. 
[end recording] 
  At the end of the interview, Vilma Nunez spoke about what 
she 
has seen in Cuba. 
  [Begin Nunez recording] I have been able to see first-hand 
that the situation is difficult. I have also seen, however, 
that although the people sometimes appear to be tired, the 
majority of them are optimistic and dedicated to continuing 
their struggle. It is painful to be continually asked to 
continue struggling. In Nicaragua, we sometimes go through this 
experience. We are always being asked to continue struggling, 
but not to be discouraged. This is what we are telling the 
Cuban people: Do not be discouraged. Things have to change. We 
have to find ways to change things. They must realize that they 
have a responsibility, not only to their own future generations, 
to their own children, and their own grandchildren, but also 
because Cuba remains the only hope for the free people of 
America. [end recording] 

