CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shanghai Mayor, Huang Ju (7806 5468): </F>
"Government Work Report -- Delivered at the Second Meeting of 
the Tenth Shanghai People's Congress on 18 February 1994"] 
  [Text] Delegates: 
  Now, on behalf of the Shanghai Municipal People's 
Government, 
I will report to the Congress on the work of the government. I 
ask that you consider it, and I ask all members of the People's 
Political Consultative Congress and other personnel in 
attendance to express their views. 
<H5>  1. Retrospective on Work During 1993 </H5>
  1993 was the year in which Shanghai began to implement a 
development strategy to make the city an international economic, 
finance and banking, and trade center. It was also a year in 
which Shanghai strove to bring economic development to a new 
level, to break new ground in reform and opening to the outside 
world, and to effect new changes in the look of the city. Under 
leadership of the CPC Central Committee, the State Council, and 
the Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee, we took the theory of 
building a distinctively Chinese brand of socialism as our 
guide, completely carried out the Party's basic line and the 
spirit of the 14th Party Congress, diligently put into practice 
Central Committee measures for strengthening and improving 
macroeconomic regulation and control, and persisted in the 
intensification of reform to move ahead with all work. Thanks to 
the joint efforts of the people throughout the city, we 
victoriously completed all tasks set by the First Meeting of the 
Tenth Shanghai Municipal People's Congress for national economic 
and social development, and we rode the wind and cleaved the 
waves, surmounting all difficulties and move up another level in 
response to Comrade Deng Xiaoping's call in early 1993. 
  Maintenance of Sustained, Rapid, and Healthy 
Development of the National Economy; Marked Improvement in 
Quality of Economic Growth In 1993, the national economy 
continued a rapid growth momentum founded on markets, quality, 
and returns. The city's GNP for the year totaled 151 billion 
yuan, up 14.9 percent over 1992. This was higher than actual 
growth in 1992 and higher than national average growth. The 
quality of economic growth increased markedly. This was 
manifested largely in the following: steady improvement of 
structural benefits, tertiary industries primarily in the 
finance and banking, business and trade, transportation, 
communications, and real estate having become new growth points 
for economic development. Tertiary industries accounted for 38 
percent of the city's GNP versus 36 percent in 1992. Economic 
growth was driven mostly by secondary and tertiary industries in 
common rather than by secondary industries alone as in the past. 
The benefits of scale began to appear. A number of new mainstay 
industries grew up quickly in secondary industries, and they are 
gradually progressing toward benefitting from the economies of 
scale. Specifically, production of sedans and digitally 
programmable telephone exchanges has increased greatly, output 
value from new sales accounting for 16 percent of the city's new 
output value. Market returns began to expand gradually, 
industrial sales output value amounting to 323.7 billion yuan, 
up 20.1 percent from 1992. The industrial products sales rate 
reached 98.9 percent. Social commodity retail sales totaled 65.4 
billion yuan, up 33.5 percent from 1992. Foreign trade exports 
totaled $7.38 billion, up 12.7 percent from 1992. Economic 
growth, which was pulled mostly by investment demand, gradually 
shifted to being pulled by both investment and consumption 
demand. More groundwork for future benefits was laid in the form 
of changes in the functions of the municipal government and the 
development of large modern markets. This infused economic 
development with new vim and vigor. Overall economic returns 
continued to rise. Local government fiscal revenues calculated 
on the basis of the same specifications, totaled 24.23 billion, 
or 30.6 percent more than in 1992. This was the first time in 
many years that they exceeded the GNP rate of increase. 
  Steady Intensification of Economic System Reform; 
Steady Enhancement of the Basic Role of the Market in the 
Allocation of Resources. During 1993, reform scored 
substantive advances in many important fields. The pace of 
building large modern markets quickened, new large grain, 
chemical industry, petroleum, building materials, motor vehicle, 
agricultural means of production, and technology markets being 
built. Currently, the city has 11 exchanges (markets) in which 
total trading volume for the year broke the 1 trillion yuan 
mark, including 520 billion yuan in negotiable securities, or 
5.8 times the 1992 volume. Metals trading volume reached 388.9 
billion in initial expression of the central role of Shanghai 
markets in the allocation of resources. Price reforms moved 
ahead step by step, grain and edible oil prices being 
decontrolled, and some public utility prices such as for 
household fuels, water, electricity, and public transportation 
being moderately adjusted. A needed commodity reserve system and 
a grain and edible oil, vegetables, and nonstaple foods 
production risk fund system were set up. The market mechanism 
played an every increasing role in setting prices. 
Transformation of the enterprise operating system proceeded 
rapidly. The all-out promotion of all kinds of reform pilot 
projects in state-owned enterprises, and active promotion of a 
share cooperative system in city and countryside collective 
enterprises encouraged development of the privately owned and 
individually owned economy. Enterprises gradually became the 
main market entities; the elements of production were mostly 
assembled through the market, and all sorts of products were 
mostly traded through markets. The basic role of markets in 
allocating resources increased greatly. Reform of the social 
security system accelerated gradually. After listening to 
opinions from various quarters, the old age insurance system was 
completely reformed. Reform of government organs moved ahead 
steadily with the active establishment of pilot projects for 
reform of the state-owned assets management system, and further 
improvement of the "two level government and two level 
administration" system of the city and its districts and 
counties. The administrative system for operating the new 
Pudong zone was started up, and government functions were 
changed in accordance with needs for developing a socialist 
market economy, new management methods explored. 
  Rapid Expansion of Internal and External Opening Up, 
the Number of Initial Points Opened Up Rising Further. 
During 1993, 3,650 foreign investment projects were newly 
approved throughout the city. Agreements were signed with 
foreign traders for the direct investment of $7 billion. This 
was a respective 81 and 109 percent increase over 1992. The city 
newly approved investment by other provinces and cities in 4,641 
enterprises, the investment totaling 16.3 billion yuan, up a 
respective 95.7 and 56.7 percent over 1992. The number of 
initial points completely open domestically and to the outside 
world increased. First, there are more trans-national 
corporations and large projects. Well-known trans-national 
corporations that have invested in the operation of firms in 
Shanghai now number 128. The number of large projects in which 
the investment is $10 million or more is 205. Agreed-upon 
investment in foreign-owned enterprises accounts for more than 
60 percent of all agreed-upon foreign investment in the city. 
Eighty-percent of joint venture enterprises that have gone into 
production and are now making a profit. Shanghai joint venture 
enterprises that are making both a profit and earning foreign 
exchange number approximately one-sixth of the total for the 
country as a whole. Second is a widening of the areas open to 
the outside world. The scale of B share issuance has expanded; 
trans-national corporations have been attracted to set up 
holding companies; the use of foreign capital to construct 
housing for domestic sales is being explored; and more than 50 
overseas securities firms have entered the Shanghai securities 
market. All jurisdictions in the country take part in the 
development of Shanghai's large modern markets, more than 85 
percent of exchange members and more than 70 percent of 
investors coming from various jurisdictions throughout the 
country. Third is a quickening of the pace of meshing with 
international markets. Securities and metal exchanges have 
formed information networks with similar markets 
internationally, and they have set up central registration and 
settlement systems that conform to international standards. Some 
industrial and trading enterprises have begun to operate in 
accordance with international practice on product quality 
standards, their accounting system, their management system, and 
their motivation system. In addition, the number of countries 
and territories investing in Shanghai has increased from 40 to 
56; economic and technical cooperation with the outside world 
has expanded further; and international tourism, the contracting 
of projects abroad, and the export of labor services have also 
developed fairly rapidly. 
  Development of Pudong Moving Ahead Rapidly; Initial 
Appearance of Externally Oriented Economic Functions. 
During 1993, the new Pudong zone entered a new stage in which it 
began to function even while construction was going on. As key 
projects, such as the first phase of the Outer Gaoqiao new 
harbor area and the Pudong section of the inner circumferential 
highway continued to be completed and come on stream, except for 
the Outer Gaoqiao Electric Power Plant, the initial phase of 10 
major infrastructure projects in the new zone was basically 
completed two years ahead of schedule. Development goals in key 
sub-zones were realized ahead of schedule. The area in which the 
seven components of infrastructure [roads, running water, 
electricity, telecommunications, gas, drainage pipes, and sewage 
pipes] and the leveling of ground for construction have been 
completed has increased to 11.8 kilometers. The investment 
climate has gradually improved, and functional development is 
fully underway. Two square kilometers of the first phase of 
development of the Outer Gaoqiao bonded area have been sealed 
off and have begun to operate, and the country's largest bonded 
means of production exchange market has been built and has 
started operating too. International finance and banking, 
entrepot trade, and bonded warehouse businesses are coming along 
rapidly, the import-export-trade growing manifold. In the 
Lujiazui finance and trade zone, construction of 50 high rise 
buildings has begun, and the Wendeng Road commercial street has 
begun to take shape. In the Jinqiao export processing zone, 
domestic and foreign owned projects number more than 200. On 
average, the investment in each project is more than $13 
million. Work has begun on 100 of these projects, and 30 of them 
have been built and gone into production. After adjusting the 
scale and initiating rolling development, the Zhangjiang High 
Technology Park is gradually moving ahead with full development 
and construction of the park area. Externally oriented economic 
functions consisting primarily of finance and banking, trade, 
and export processing are beginning to appear in the new Pudong 
zone. The economy is developing at high speed, and its GNP has 
increased 30 percent, which is 15 percentage points higher than 
for the city as a whole. 
  High Intensity Inputs in the Building of 
Infrastructure; More New Changes in the Appearance of the 
City. The amount of money invested during 1993 in building 
the city's infrastructure reach at all-time high totaling 16 
billion yuan. Major advances were made in the building of a 
downtown transportation network. Work was completed on one after 
another key projects in the building of a surface and 
underground transportation network. Following construction of 
the big bridge in south Pudong, the imposing Yangpu Bridge was 
built across the Huangpu Jiang; two large crossovers were 
constructed and opened to traffic on Luoshan Road and Longyang 
Road. Trial runs have been made on the southern segment of the 
No. 1 subway line. On the inner circumferential highway, all the 
surface roads have been linked up, and the first phase elevated 
roadway on the inner circumferential highway has been built and 
is open to traffic. Advances have been made in building the 
urban environment. Building of the first phase of the "life 
project" that people throughout the city hope for -- cleaning up 
waste water from the confluence of streams -- has been 
completed. Once the concomitant ancillary facilities have been 
built, the quality of the water in Suzhou Creek will improve 
substantially, its dark color and bad odor largely eliminated. 
This will set the stage for improving water quality in the lower 
reaches of the Huangpu Jiang. One after another, major projects 
are being completed. These include the first phase of the coking 
plant's "triple supply," the first phase of the Shitongkou Gas 
Works, the People's Square Underground Transformer Station, and 
the expansion and improvement of the municipal telephone 
network. These projects will promote further improvement of the 
urban environment and the living environment. The large scale 
transformation of major streets and areas such as Nanjing Road, 
Huaihai Road, the New Passenger Station, and the Siccawei 
District will enhance the city's modern flavor. In particular, 
once the project for the complete transformation of the Bund has 
been completed, an entirely new scene will greet visitors from 
all over. It will become a new indicator that Shanghai is moving 
toward the future. 
  Steady Development of Various Social Endeavors; 
Continued Intensification of the Building of Spiritual 
Civilization. Scientific and technical work oriented 
further toward economic construction. Nearly 2,000 major 
scientific and technical achievement were made during the year, 
50 of them winning national science and technology awards. The 
rate at which scientific and technical achievements were applied 
rose further, high and new technology industries developing 
rapidly, the number of scientific and technical industry 
projects carried out exceeding 500. New achievements were also 
made in social science research. A multi-component school 
operating system in which government operation of schools is 
primary, with all quarters of society taking part, is in process 
of formation. The school management system is being completely 
reformed; money is being raised through many channels to 
increase investment in education; and school operating 
conditions continue to improve. Cultural and physical education 
developed vigorously. Some new plays that have a modern flavor 
and propagate ethnic culture were well received by society; 
large scale activities such as Shanghai's first international 
film festival were successfully run; and the building of key 
cultural facilities such as a new Shanghai library building, and 
a new Shanghai museum building continue. The first East Asian 
athletic meet was held excitedly, satisfactorily, and 
successfully in Shanghai, demonstrating to the outside world the 
vigor of Shanghai's people. Shanghai's athletes scored 
achievements in major international and domestic competitions, 
and the mass physical education campaign saw vigorous 
development. The widely conducted campaign to "study knowledge, 
study science, and study technology" served to raise the caliber 
of city residents. Advances were made in the building of medical 
ethics and medical demeanor for a gradual improvement in 
treatment conditions. Both the appearance of the city and 
environmental hygiene showed further improvement. Civil 
government welfare facilities steadily improved; a social 
atmosphere of reverence and respect for the old gradually took 
shape, and help for the disabled increasingly gained social 
concern and support. Double cherish work [the army cherishing 
the people and the people cherishing the army] intensified, the 
unity of the army and the government and the army and the people 
growing steadily stronger. Periodic achievements were scored in 
the fight against corruption; overall control of social order 
continue to improve; and the social order has remained stable. 
  Gradual Rise in the Standard of Living of Both City and 
Country People; Steady Improvement in Living Conditions The 
people's standard of living steadily improved as the economy 
developed. Staff member and worker wages averaged 5,600 yuan per 
year for a 9.1 percent increase after deducting for a rise in 
the cost of living. The net income of peasants living in the 
suburbs averaged 2,650 yuan in a 4 percent rise after deducting 
for a rise in prices paid for commodities. By yearend, city and 
countryside residents savings deposits showed a balance of 57.4 
billion yuan, up 39 percent. The shopping environment improved, 
both the amount and quality of citizens' consumption rising. 
Practical items closely associated with the people's life were 
readily available. The housing area completed was more than 6 
million square meters, civilian gas and telephone hook-ups rose 
further, the social services field expanded, and people's living 
environment and living conditions continued to improve. 
  New accomplishments were scored during the past year in 
Shanghai's reform and opening to the outside world, building of 
the economy, and development of the society. In this regard, I 
would like to express my heartfelt thanks on behalf of the 
Shanghai municipal people's government to the rank and file of 
workers, peasants, and intellectuals throughout the city who 
battled on all fronts, to the people's congress delegates, to 
CPPCC members and democratic parties, and to people in all walks 
of life who provided support and supervision, to all central 
government departments, fraternal provinces and cities, and to 
the PLA and People's Armed Police who provided energetic 
support, to Hong Kong and Macao compatriots, Overseas Chinese, 
and international friends, who supported the building of 
Shanghai's economy, to the masses of city residents who showed 
concern for the common good and made selfless contributions to 
the building of the city, and to the comrades and friends who 
showed concern for and supported the booming development of 
Shanghai. 
  Of course, while appreciating the accomplishments made, we 
must also realistically and extremely clearheadedly realize that 
numerous difficulties and problems lie ahead: Business concerns 
losses are large; the earnings of some staff members and workers 
have declined, and increasing numbers of personnel who have lost 
positions and are looking for employment are facing quite a few 
difficulties in their livelihood and in finding new employment. 
Transportation difficulties remain a rather conspicuous problem. 
Housing is in short supply for those who must be moved to make 
way for municipal government construction or when parcels of 
land are leased, and the facilities in newly built housing areas 
are not complete, occasioning much inconvenience in the daily 
life and work of large numbers of residents. Vegetables are in 
short supply and prices have risen substantially. The government 
is still in the exploration stage regarding regulation and 
control of the economy under market economy conditions. It lacks 
experience. Many weaknesses remain in urban planning and 
administration, social order, and safety in production. All 
these matters require our conscientious solution in the course 
of future work. 
  In reviewing the work of the past year, the main knowledge 
we 
have gained from experience is as follows: 
  First is adherence to "development is the last word," 
seizing opportunities to advance development. Socialism 
requires the development of productivity. If Shanghai is to 
realize the magnificent strategic goal of "a single turnkey and 
three centers," it will have to maintain high speed growth of 
the national economy for a fairly long time to come. During the 
past year, we seized the favorable opportunity that the world's 
good view of China, of Shanghai, and of Pudong provides to 
continue to attract foreign investment, which reached a new 
high. We made full use of the positive benefits for the speedy 
development of Shanghai that central government enhancement and 
improvement of macroeconomic regulation and control have 
brought. This has permitted us to maintain a fine momentum of 
sustained, speedy, and healthy development of the national 
economy. Practice makes us realize that development is the last 
word. We must accelerate development; we must seize favorable 
opportunities in the macroeconomic environment; we must dare to 
meet challenges; we must be adept at transforming pressures into 
motivation; do more to seize opportunities, developing our own 
sense of urgency about the time, inculcate a scientific attitude 
of seeking truth in facts, and use improvement of the quality of 
economic growth as a springboard for making the maximum effort 
to move ahead with the building of the economy. 
  Second is perseverance in reform and opening to the 
outside world to move out in front, taking the lead in building 
a socialist market economy operating mechanism. Shanghai's 
strategic position in the overall pattern of nationwide reform 
and opening to the outside world during the 1990s requires it to 
be in the forefront of the whole country in reform and opening 
to the outside world. During 1993, we further emancipated 
thinking, proceeded from Shanghai's realities, dared to tackle 
tough problems, and dared to break new ground, courageously 
explored the building of large modern markets, promoted reform 
of the state-owned assets administration system, developed the 
share system and the share cooperative system, and widened the 
opening to the outside world. Consequently the fundamental role 
of the market in allocating resources, and the central role of 
Shanghai markets in allocating resources were further exercised, 
infusing new vitality into the development of the economy. 
Practice shows that only by moving out in front in adhering to 
reform and the opening to the outside world can economic 
development steadily make new strides upward and can we 
discharge the heavy tasks that history has conferred on us to 
make new contributions to China's modernization. 
  Third is insistence on beginning at a high starting 
point in building the city, laying a foundation for the building 
of a modern international city. Building the city requires 
insistence on beginning at a high starting point. This is an 
objective requirement for Shanghai becoming a modern 
international city. In 1993, we convened a citywide planning 
work conference where we began to study the overall framework 
for amending the Shanghai municipal master plan, presented ideas 
for building a central commercial district, key commercial 
areas, and setting up a bi-level city, unfolded a strategic plan 
titled "Shanghai Striding Toward the 21st Century," and 
concentrated forces on building some major infrastructure 
projects at the international level. Facts show that Shanghai 
has entered a new stage of all-out promotion of urban 
modernization and transformation. Henceforth, we shall 
continue to move ahead steadily with modernization of the city, 
meeting needs in "orienting toward the world, orienting toward 
the twenty-first century, and orienting toward modernization." 
  Fourth is perseverance in correctly handling the 
correlation among reform, development, and stability to create a 
fine social environment for reform and development. Reform 
is the powerhouse; development is the goal; stability is the 
prerequisite. Without social stability, reform, opening to the 
outside world, and economic construction will accomplish 
nothing. During 1993, we adhered to a policy of working at 
multiple tasks at the same time, and working with might and 
main, vigorously buttressing the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization, and constantly regarding maintenance of social 
stability as a major matter bearing on the overall situation. We 
made timely readjustments in the intensity of reforms that had a 
substantial impact on enterprises, staff members, and workers; 
we set and gradually put into effect insurance measures such as 
minimum wage standards for incumbent staff members and workers, 
and minimum living standards for city and town residents; we 
worked hard to solve the problem of finding housing for people 
moved because of municipal government construction projects and 
the leasing of land; we arranged for supplies of principle farm 
and agricultural sideline products including grain, edible oil, 
and vegetables; we bent efforts to solve problems of major 
concern to the public and real difficulties in daily life; and 
we cracked down hard on all sorts of criminal activities. 
Through practice, we learned the need for carefully considering 
the timeliness and intensity of reforms; we unflaggingly 
bolstered the building of socialist spiritual civilization; we 
channeled, protected, and made the most of the enthusiasm of the 
broad masses; and we employed every means to safeguard social 
stability and unity. This is the only way to ensure new advances 
in reform and opening to the outside world, to move ahead 
steadily with development of the economy, and to bring about new 
changes in the appearance of the city. 
  Fifth is concentration on key matters to ensure change 
in one year and big changes in three years. In the course 
of building "one turnkey and three centers," Shanghai must do a 
very great number of things. It must be adept at giving 
attention to those things that have a major effect on the 
situation as a whole, and on key links that play a decisive role 
in bringing about change in a single year. During 1993, we 
placed the emphasis in economic development on fostering new 
mainstay industries. In building the city, we concentrated on 
the major project of building the framework for a surface and 
underground transportation network. In reform, we emphasized the 
building of a modern city. In opening to the outside world, we 
emphasized the new approach of increasing the use of foreign 
investment; and in the development of Pudong, we focused on 
function. Practice has demonstrated that only by emphasizing key 
points, and being adept at concentrating forces on crucial links 
in all our work can we effect a change in one year and big 
changes in three years. 
<H5>  2. Seize Opportunities To Promote Development and Continue </H5>
To Usher in a New Situation in National Economic and Social 
Development 
  Shanghai has now entered an important stage of sustained, 
fast, and healthy economic development that offers extremely 
favorable opportunities. Internationally, the whole world looks 
with favor on the trend of China's economic development. 
Shanghai and Pudong have become investment hot spots both 
domestically and abroad. Domestically, China's overall national 
strength is steadily growing. Reform and opening to the outside 
world have infused economic development with powerful vitality. 
They have created a favorable macroeconomic environment for 
Shanghai's reform and development. In Shanghai itself, overall 
economic strength has increased markedly. Strategic adjustment 
of the industrial structure has accelerated, the investment 
climate has steadily improved, and the basic material conditions 
are in being to maintain fairly rapid economic growth. Even 
though there may be difficulties and detours along the way, we 
are fully capable of developing better and faster; we are fully 
capable of shouldering the important historic mission that 
history has bestowed on us. 
  The year 1994 is a key one for China's promotion of reforms 
for the building of a socialist market economy, and it is also a 
decisive year for the people of Shanghai to bring about a change 
in one year and great changes in three years. The overall 
guiding thought for the economic and social development of 
Shanghai is as follows: full implementation of the spirit 
of the 14th Party Congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th Party Central Committee, and the Second Plenary Session of 
the 6th Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee, emancipating thinking, 
seeking truth in facts, daring to innovate, and being skillful 
in breaking new ground; to take more solid actions from a newer 
and higher base point, seizing opportunities, deepening reform, 
expanding the opening to the outside world, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability; to score new 
ground-breaking advances for taking the lead in establishing a 
socialist market economy operating mechanism, striving to 
maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
national economy, promoting social progress, and bringing about 
coordinated economic and social development. 
  With this guiding thought as a foundation, during the coming 
year we will have to strive to complete the following six main 
tasks in economic construction and social development: 
  First is continuing to maintain a fine momentum in the 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the national 
economy. Shanghai's realization of its long-term 
development objectives will require continued implementation of 
the "3, 2, 1" industrial development policy, persisting in 
taking domestic and foreign market demand as the orientation, 
doing all possible to readjust the industrial structure, 
accelerating technological progress, developing the city in 
every way, effecting a complete rise in economic returns, and 
ensuring sustained and steady ground of the economy. Plans 
call for a 12 percent increase in the city's GNP during 1994. In 
the actual process of achieving this, we must strive for real 
growth that is no lower than last year while simultaneously 
controlling at around 15 percent the degree of rise in overall 
retail prices. 
  Acceleration of the strategic adjustment of the industrial 
structure. Optimization of the industrial structure is an 
important foundation for improving the quality of economic 
growth. The percentage of tertiary industries' contribution to 
GNP must be increased to around 40 percent together with the 
fostering and development of modern markets, and emphasis on the 
development of finance and banking, commerce and trade, real 
estate, transportation, communications, information, tourism, 
and service businesses, with more progress being made in the 
automation of finance and banking, and trade. Secondary 
industries must strive to increase output, increase markets, and 
improve quality and returns. They must particularly concentrate 
energies on 18 key technological transformation projects having 
a high level of technology, good market prospects, marked 
economic returns, and that are able to play a supporting role 
such as the second phase of the Sangtana [phonetic] sedan 
project, and the Bell programmable switchboard expansion project 
to raise the overall level of Shanghai's industry. They must 
vigorously develop mainstay industries including motor vehicles, 
communications, electric power stations, computers, and 
household appliances, actively advancing high and new technology 
industrialization, particularly in the microelectronics and 
biological engineering fields. They must continue to emphasize 
key new product development and production, shaping a complete 
development system for new products that includes promotion, 
opening up new markets, and keeping stocks on hand. They must 
initiate "turnkey plans" that enhance ability to export, 
emphasizing support for the 100 products and firms whose exports 
earn upward of $50 million in foreign exchange. The primary 
industry must accelerate structural readjustments as the market 
requires to spur the further development of agriculture toward 
high yields, premium quality, and high returns. 
  Opening of markets everywhere: The constantly expanding 
ultimate requirement is maintenance of dependable power for 
sustained economic growth. All concerns must maintain a market 
orientation, increase their consciousness of market competition, 
improve their sales ability, and vigorously open up markets, 
making increase in Shanghai products' market share, coverage 
rate, and customer satisfaction rate both at home and abroad the 
premier task in promoting economic development, and doing it 
solidly, painstakingly, and well. They must increase the degree 
to which commodity circulation is socialized and organized by 
readjusting the organizational structure of wholesale firms, 
developing nationwide or regional chain enterprises, setting up 
commodity distribution centers, and forming highly efficient, 
rational, and open commodity wholesale and retail networks made 
up of firms under different forms of ownership and having 
different forms of organization. They must borrow successful 
domestic and foreign experiences to improve their sales methods, 
to improve their sales corps, to do a good job of providing 
service before and after sales, to institute various kinds of 
distribution stimulation mechanisms, and to increase the 
enthusiasm of sales personnel. They must open up markets in 
order to expand sales and to ensure that high speed economic 
growth is sustained and stable. 
  Use of many channels to raise money for building the 
economy: 
Increased investment is necessary to support sustained economic 
growth. Many methods such as the auctioning of medium and small 
concerns, real estate transfers, land leasing, sales of business 
premises, and speedier building of commercial housing were 
employed in moving state-owned assets to the market to turn them 
into money, thereby opening new channels for raising money for 
economic construction. The amount of foreign capital used 
continued to be expanded, efforts focusing on increasing the 
rate at which foreign capital was provided, the actual amount of 
foreign capital invested increased, and new means actively 
explored to use foreign capital to accelerate the building of 
urban infrastructure. Planning was coordinated, all categories 
of funds used well and imaginatively to increase returns from 
the use of funds. Investment tilt policies continued to ensure 
the building of Pudong development projects, major municipal 
government infrastructure projects, high and new technology 
industry project, important technological transformation 
projects, and foreign-capitalized projects for which contracts 
had already been signed. 
  Second is continuing to move ahead with development of 
the Pudong new zone. 
  In the development of Pudong during 1994, we must continue 
to 
hurry to take the lead in establishing a socialist market 
economy operating mechanism and in meshing with international 
markets, making further use of the zone's "turnkey" role, basic 
development, functional development and urban area development 
proceeding at the same time to produce a new situation of 
all-around acceleration of Pudong's development and opening up. 
The degree of increase in main economic indicators in the new 
zone must be higher than the average for the city as a whole. 
  Highlighting of key points, paying close attention to 
progress in construction that conveys an image. Efforts must be 
concentrated on urgent construction of the highway 
transportation network in the new zone, on starting construction 
of the Zhangyang Road widening project, on the Yanan East Road 
tunnel and multiple ancillary road projects in the Pudong 
section, on the first phase of the outer ring Grand Canal water 
conservancy project, and on the Jinqiao crossover project; on 
doing a good job on the Pudong section of the outer ring road, 
and the Outer Gaoqiao power plant second stage project's early 
stage preparatory work. The total area developed in the key 
sub-zone must reach 15 square kilometer areas. In the Lujiazui 
finance, banking, and trade area, the beginning of work and 
construction of nearly 100 high rise buildings must be speeded 
up, thirty buildings rising more than 40 meters above the ground 
during 1994, and nearly 20 buildings being capped to display an 
image of a group of modern buildings in Pudong's downtown area. 
In the Jinqiao export processing zone, close attention must be 
given to the completion of work and coming on stream of 80 
enterprises, and work on 150 projects now under construction to 
make this area an important new export processing base. In the 
Outer Gaoqiao bonded zone, the sealed off operating area must be 
expanded to 4 square kilometers to bring the bonded means of 
production exchange market to proper size that enhances its 
function as a point from which free trade emanates to maintain 
the trend toward manifold increase in total import-export trade 
volume within the zone. In the Zhangjiang High Technology Park, 
the building of infrastructure such as roads and a transformer 
station must accelerate, a widespread campaign must be launched 
to attract traders, development and construction taking on a new 
appearance as quickly as possible. 
  Planning and Construction of Downtown Pudong. The new Pudong 
zone is a symbol of the new Shanghai. Simultaneous with close 
attention to revision of the new zone's urban development master 
plan, a detailed control plan should be drawn up as quickly as 
possible for downtown Pudong that sets forth the layout of 
commercial zones, industrial zones, and living areas. The new 
Pudong zone should be the area between the main street in Pudong 
and Yanggao Road centering on the existing main development 
sub-zone. Four main zones should be planned and built, namely 
Outer Gaoqiao to Gaoqiao, Jinqiao to Qingning Temple, Zhangjiang 
to Beicai, and Lujiazui to Huamu. The central axis avenue 
through the Lujiazui area must be opened up quickly, and the 
building of a group of modern structures along both sides of the 
avenue planned. Close attention must be given to the 
construction of a number of hospitals, schools, and cultural and 
amusement facilities to promote the advancement of all social 
endeavors. In addition, with the completion of work on main 
parts of the infrastructure, scenic roads, and the main 
landscape, transportation, plantings, environmental sanitation, 
and environmental protection tasks should be tackled to spruce 
up the appearance and ambience of the new zone. The new Pudong 
zone must improve government at the grassroots level, increase 
social control, and fashion a more complete administrative 
system. 
  Third is moving ahead vigorously with the city's 
modernization. 
  Speeding up the city's modernization, steadily changing the 
look of the city is not only the most important mark of the 
major changes to be made in three years, but even more a 
necessity for building a modern international city. We must 
insist on a high starting point and high standards, incessantly 
advancing the modernization of the city. 
  We must continue to concentrate energies on the building of 
municipal government projects, particularly on roads and 
transportation arteries. We should complete a large number of 
major engineering projects within the year as follows: the 
number one project is the inner circumferential highway, work on 
the second phase elevated road on the inner circumferential 
highway completed to permit opening of the entire highway to 
traffic. The number two project is complete transformation of 
People's Square including completion of the square's roads, 
plantings, lighting, government administration buildings, and 
decoration of the museum's exterior walls, as well as cleaning 
up the roads in the vicinity of the square so that it can be 
completely opened for the national anniversary. The number three 
project is the subway's number 1 line, the whole line from new 
Longhua to the new passenger station opened and tested. Other 
projects are linking together the sections of the entire six 
lane elevated portion of the Chengdu Road elevated highway 
project; beginning of construction on the Yanan East Road tunnel 
and multiple lanes; phase two of the water diversion in the 
upper reaches of the Huangpu Jiang should enter the substantive 
construction stage; early stage preparatory work must be done 
for Pudong International Airport, the number 2 subway line, the 
deep water port at Jinshanzui, the southwest section of the 
outer circumferential highway project, and the river crossing 
project. More work must be done on the feasibility of the Chang 
Jiang water diversion plan. Power plant construction must be 
speeded up to ensure that the Outer Gaoqiao Power Plant's first 
300,000 kilowatt unit generates power for the grid. Every effort 
should be made to start work within the year on the eighth phase 
of the Wujing Power Plant project. We must continue to implement 
the principle of concentrating energies to wage a war of 
annihilation, ensuring availability of project funds and 
materials, rigorously enforcing construction controls, and 
giving substance to measures for producing premium quality, 
expert, and safe construction to ensure that the building of all 
major projects moves along smoothly. During the coming year, we 
must also address the construction of a number of medium and 
small size highway transportation projects that require little 
investment, can be completed in a short time, and that show 
quick results. We must repair and renovate three seriously 
damaged roads including Honghe New Road. We must build or 
renovate four crossovers such as those on Jiangsu Road and 
Shandong Road; and we must encourage and support jurisdictions 
in widening and building a number of local roads to improve the 
city's road transportation facilities and ease the city's 
traffic problems. 
  Large Scale Housing Construction. We must attain the goal of 
10 square meters per capita of living space by the end of the 
present century. We must arouse the interest of all quarters for 
continued acceleration of the housing construction pace, 
striving to vault ahead during 1994 to completion of 7 million 
square meters of housing. Each year from now on, we must break 
new ground each year, and gradually improve housing construction 
and design standards. At the same time, we must raze 1 million 
square meters of dangerous old houses. This will require finding 
accommodations for the residents who will have to move. 
Realization of the above goals will require, first, finding 
project financing channels, actively moving ahead with 
attracting foreign investment in pilot projects for the sale of 
houses in China for a widening of sources of funding for 
dwelling construction. Second, it will require close attention 
to advance preparations for the state-stipulated "peaceful 
dwelling project" for the energetic building of economically 
practical housing in the shaping of an economical practical 
housing supply system. Third, it will require better control 
over real estate dealings and development corporations, the 
energies of many quarters aroused to accelerate residential 
housing construction. Governments at all levels must tilt land 
use, funds, and policies in favor of housing construction, and 
they must genuinely pay close attention to the public 
construction of amenities in newly built residential areas. 
  Moving Ahead With the Building of the Urban Ecological 
Environment. Environmental protection is a basic national policy 
in China, and creation of a fine ecological environment is a key 
task in Shanghai's construction of a modern international city. 
  In 1994, we shall focus on "greening projects" in the 
building of the city's ecological environment. Work has begun on 
building a large green strip 500 meters wide around the entire 
city outside the circumferential highway; in the upper reaches 
of the Huangpu Jiang, various forest belts have been built; and 
inside the Zhongshan circumferential highway, various type of 
green lands have been newly planted and expanded in connection 
with the transformation of the old area. Planting of greenery on 
building balconies and rooftops is strongly encouraged as part 
of the greening of residential and factory areas and greater 
greening of public places. Willful encroachments on green areas 
in violation of the law will be resolutely halted. During 1994, 
the public green space is to reach 1.4 square meters per capita 
for a 15 percent coverage. Close attention shall be given to 
cleaning up the urban environment, the emphasis being on 
prevention and control of industrial pollution. The spread of 
seriously polluting industries and projects is to be strictly 
controlled. The movement and cleaning up of seriously polluting 
enterprises (workshops) is to be accelerated. Real actions will 
be taken to protect sources of potable water, and to control 
urban noise to advance the integrated development of the economy 
and the environment. At the same time, vigorous efforts will be 
made to intensify propaganda and education about environmental 
protection and greening for further enhancement of ecological 
awareness. Thus people throughout the city can make a positive 
contribution by adding a little green and adding a little beauty 
to improve the appearance of Shanghai's urban environment. 
  Efforts To Improve Urban Administration. Full hearing of the 
views of experts and all quarters forms the basis for amending 
and improving the urban development master plan. Legal, 
economic, and administrative means will be used in accordance 
with the principle of level-by-level administration and showing 
efficiency to improve urban plan control to ensure realization 
of plan objectives. More must be done to improve urban traffic 
control, traffic controlled strictly according to law. The 
traffic clean-up and propaganda campaigns should continue, the 
removal of clutter on the streets, violations of regulations 
corrected, and promotion of smooth traffic flow being the 
emphasis. The traffic methods used in large international cities 
should be studied, priority going to public transportation to 
ensure a smooth flow of public transportation. Certain public 
transportation roads should be opened or extended to ease 
problems in traveling via public transportation. The city's 
appearance and environmental sanitation should be better 
controlled to make Shanghai a city renowned for its cleanliness 
throughout the country, celebration of the forty-fifth national 
anniversary [1994] serving as the turning point. While moving 
ahead actively with the building of environmental sanitation 
projects, we must go all out to improve the city's appearance 
and improve environmental sanitation, further raising the 
overall level of sanitation in the city. We must also improve 
fire prevention, flood prevention, and production safety in an 
effort to reduce losses from disasters and to prevent major 
accidents. 
  Fourth Is Better Work in Agriculture and Rural Villages 
To Spur All-Around Development of the Suburban Economy 
  The suburban economy holds an extremely important place in 
Shanghai's development strategy. We must conscientiously carry 
out the spirit of the central government's rural work conference 
for genuine improvement of agriculture, actively exploring new 
avenues for the economic development of the suburbs of an 
exceptional large city. 
  We must continue to stabilize agricultural production by 
vigorously developing the economy of the suburbs. All trades and 
industries must show concern for and vigorously support 
agriculture. Numerous channels and numerous levels must be used 
to raise funds for the development of agriculture. We must 
continue to increase investment in agriculture, persevere in 
relying on science and technology to develop agriculture, work 
hard to increase capital construction for farmland water 
conservancy, and improve ability to withstand natural disasters. 
We must set up commodity grain field sanctuaries and year-round 
vegetable field sanctuaries in a planned way; set up 
agricultural demonstration zones and horticulture demonstration 
zones that produce high yields, premium quality, and high 
returns; perfect agricultural risk funds; protect the peasants' 
interests; and promote the stability and improvement of suburban 
agriculture. We must solidify and improve "market basket" 
projects to ensure that the suburban vegetable growing area 
remains at 150,000 mu, properly adjust the pattern of vegetable 
growing and nonstaple food growing bases, and begin to build a 
number of new vegetable and horticultural farms to be ready 
within three years. This will enable an increase from the 
present 170,000 mu to 250,000 mu in the high yield, assured 
harvest, canopied vegetable field area, thereby stabilizing and 
increasing vegetable and nonstaple food production in an effort 
to even out supplies reaching market. We must optimize the 
varieties produced, speed up the pace at which vegetables and 
nonstaple foods are deeply processed, and develop small 
packaging of cleaned vegetables and nonstaple foods to meet the 
consumption needs of different strata. We must actively support 
vegetable growing areas set up vegetable dealing group 
corporations, experiment with the operation of vegetable 
exchanges mostly for wholesaling, practice a "combination of 
agriculture and trade and linking urban districts with rural 
counties" in greater Shanghai, gradually set up sales networks 
in the urban area, and organize the direct marketing of 
vegetables to ensure the vegetable supply and to stabilize 
vegetable prices. At the same time, we must improve control over 
country fair markets, resolutely halting the jacking up of 
prices, and cracking down on efforts to dominate markets. How 
well the suburban economy develops depends on the overall 
economic strength of large cities. We must avail ourselves of 
the chance that strategic readjustment of the city's functions, 
industrial make-up, and layout provides to match up and link 
together counties, districts, and locales to reinforce each 
others strengths, the counties (or districts) having requisite 
conditions thereby combining to expand the use of foreign 
capital to concentrate on the building of an industrial 
development zone having a certain scale and characteristics that 
increase the overall caliber of suburban economic development. 
  Continued Intensification of Rural Economic System Reform. 
We 
should actively try out reform of the agricultural land use 
system, separating the "three rights" of land ownership rights, 
contracting rights, and operating rights as a means of improving 
the protection of land resources, developing farming on a proper 
scale, and raising the level of agricultural production. We 
hould accelerate reform of the rural commodity flow system, 
organizing the peasants to expand from the production area to 
the commodity flow area, combining the development of 
agricultural and sideline products processing with the fostering 
of rural markets, particularly rural key elements of production 
markets. We must suit general methods to specific circumstances 
to build a number of high starting point, regional agricultural 
and sideline products exchanges for vigorous development of an 
economic system in which production, processing and marketing 
are part of a whole for gradual raising of the level of 
socialized services in agriculture. We must continue to promote 
the joint-stock cooperation system for further increase in the 
vitality of township and town enterprises. We must make fullest 
use of the positive role of arms in accelerating reform of the 
rural economic system and development of a modern suburban 
economy. 
  Active Advances in the Urbanization of Rural Villages. 
Acceleration of the urbanization of suburban rural villages is 
an important integral part of Shanghai's modernization. We are 
moving ahead step by step with the urbanization of suburban 
rural villages, actively setting the stage for the gradual 
development of secondary cities within the city in accordance 
with the requirements of Shanghai's urban development master 
plan, and using a unified plan as a premise. The aim is moderate 
development of small cities and towns. We will closely link the 
building of cities and towns with the building of small 
industrial zones, the building of infrastructure, and the 
development of tertiary industries. We will accelerate planning 
and building of suburban tourism facilities, concentrating on 
the development of the Sheshan modern tourism and amusement area 
and the Dianshan Hu resort area. We will continue to do early 
stage preparatory work on the Huangsha Island tourist vacation 
area. We will do a good job of planning and building suburban 
road transportation, striving to build a fairly complete, high 
standards, arterial road transportation network in each county 
(and district) during the next two or three years. Running water 
is to be supplied to suburban rural villages this year. In 
addition, we must devote serious attention to improving the 
peasant's cultural level and overall quality of life, and 
improve overall rural administration to set the stage for early 
urbanization of rural villages. 
  Fifth Is Vigorous Development of Scientific and 
Technical, and Educational Endeavors To Provide Strong Technical 
and Intellectual Support for Modernization 
  Maintenance of sustained, rapid, and healthy development of 
the national economy relies, in a fundamental sense, on the 
development of science and technology, and improvement of the 
caliber of the citizenry. We must accelerate reform and the pace 
of development of scientific and technical education to make the 
fullest use of Shanghai's scientific and technical, and human 
resources advantages. 
  Scientific and technical work must be further suited to the 
development of a socialist market economy. We must actively spur 
close links between science and technology and the economy. We 
must accelerate the transformation of traditional industries 
through high and new technology. We must devote serious 
attention to the assimilation and absorption of imported 
technology, and to innovation. We must use biological 
engineering and pharmaceuticals, and computers and their 
applications to break into high and new technology industries. 
We must translate important scientific and technical research 
results into production, stressing support for the 100 
scientific and technical items that can help readjust the 
make-up of industry, whose market prospects are good, and that 
bring substantial sales within the next several years. We must 
further develop and perfect technology exchanges, and build 
associated technology exchange service centers. We must 
intensify reform of the science and technology system, 
accelerate the transformation of scientific research organs and 
institutions, promote readjustments in the make-up of scientific 
research institutes, encourage research units and enterprises to 
forge links with each other, when possible, or enterprise 
entrepreneurial blocs or become scientific and technical 
enterprises. We must continue to pay close attention to basic 
research, and we must maintain continuity among and train a 
number of middle age and young permanent research cadres. We 
must intensify research in the social sciences, actively 
exploring important theoretical and practical problems in reform 
and opening to the outside world, and in development. We must be 
sure to study the major development strategy for "Shanghai 
marching into the twenty-first century" to provide scientific 
data for government macropolicies. 
  In education, we must conscientiously put into practice 
"China's Educational Reform and Development Program," and the 
"Teachers' Law," further establishing education's strategic 
position in overall and leading basic industries in Shanghai's 
economic development to score new advances in developing 
undertakings, straightening out systems, transforming 
mechanisms, and increasing investment. We must put into practice 
a high quality nine-year compulsory education system, continue 
to move ahead with reform of intermediate and primary school 
courses and teaching materials, generally improve teaching 
quality and the ways schools are run, accelerate the building of 
a vocational and technical educational system, pay close 
attention to carrying out the "training project for talent in 
short supply in Shanghai during the 1990s," actively move ahead 
with key construction projects at institutions of higher 
education and make changes in their layout, do a good job of 
running pilot projects for the "joint building" of institutions 
of higher education in Shanghai in conjunction with central 
government ministries and commissions, and promote an optimum 
allocation of educational resources. We must accelerate reform 
of the school operating system, improve level-by-level 
administration and tailored guidance in education, and intensify 
guidance and administration of non-government run schools and 
international cooperatively run schools. We must intensify 
reform of schools internal administrative systems, do more to 
build the teaching corps, further rouse the zeal of the rank and 
file of teachers, and strive to improve returns from the 
operation of schools. We must continue to move ahead with reform 
of the school enrollment and employment system. Depending on 
social need and the ability of the public to pay for it, we must 
expand somewhat the percentage of student enrollments at their 
own expense, and perfect a series of associated measures. 
Schools of all kinds at all levels must intensify and improve 
ethical education to promote students' full development. 
Governments at all levels must continue to increase investment 
in education, raising money for education through many channels, 
Society as a whole must be concerned about and support education. 
  Sixth Is Intensification of the Building of Spiritual 
Civilization to Improve Further the City's Cultural Level and 
Maintain Social Stability 
  Under the new circumstances of moving ahead vigorously with 
reform and opening to the outside world, and accelerating 
economic construction, we must persevere in working at multiple 
tasks at the same time, and working with might and main. We must 
persist in developing the economy and society together, 
intensify the building of socialist spiritual civilization, and 
strive to safeguard the fine social atmosphere and social order 
to create a stable and fine social environment for reform, 
opening to the outside world, and development of the economy. 
  During 1994, we must be guided by the theory for building a 
distinctively Chinese brand of socialism. By way of celebrating 
the forty-fifth anniversary of the liberation of Shanghai and 
the national anniversary, and in order to improve the caliber of 
the people of Shanghai and the city's cultural level, we must 
intensify education in patriotism, collectivism, and socialism. 
We must intensify education in ethics, social morality, and 
family precepts and ethics. We must continue mass spiritual 
civilization building campaigns such as "study knowledge, study 
science, and study technology." We must encourage fine social 
mores and refined and healthy life styles, and strive to 
nurture a new generation of people possessed of ideals, virtue, 
culture, and discipline. We must focus the creativity of the 
public on the magnificent goals of making Shanghai prosper and 
developing Pudong. We must continue to do a good job of the army 
and the people building together, and the army supporting the 
people and the people supporting the army to intensify unity 
between the army and the people. We must intensify national 
defense education, do a good job of finding work for retired 
servicemen, and of militia and reserves work. We must accelerate 
the building of cultural and physical education facilities, 
substantially completing construction of the Pearl of the Orient 
Television Tower, and the new wing of the Shanghai Museum during 
1994, ensure that work begins on building the big Shanghai 
Theater, and take in hand fund raising and preparatory work for 
construction of an 80,000 seat sports stadium. We must persist 
in serving the people, in serving socialism, and in a policy of 
letting a hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of 
thought contend so that cultural endeavors will flourish even 
more. We must propagate main themes, promote diversity, and 
actively support refined arts and outstanding literary works to 
enrich the spiritual life of the people. We must do a good job 
of running a series of major activities including the Shanghai 
International Culture and Arts Festival, the Shanghai 
International Youth and Children's Cultural and Arts Festival, 
the Fifth Shanghai International Television Festival to promote 
Shanghai's cultural exchange and cooperation with the outside 
world. We must accelerate cultural system reform, gradually 
shaping a new pattern in which the government and society run 
cultural events together, government putting up most of the 
money. We must run pilot projects to transform and reform 
literary and artistic groups to increase the vitality of 
literary and artistic groups and promote improvement of literary 
and artistic creativity and performances. We must make a major 
effort to develop cultural enterprises, continue to improve 
control of the cultural market, and perfect cultural economics 
policies. We must actively conduct mass cultural and physical 
education activities, promote development and improvement of 
physical education, strive to raise the level of Shanghai's 
sports activities, and do a truly good job of preparing for the 
Eighth All-China Games. We must do more to develop medical 
treatment and health work to improve medical care. We must 
improve the level-by-level administration and management by 
objective responsibility systems. We must pay close attention to 
sanitation and sickness preventions work, particularly 
intestinal tact diseases to control the incidence of 
communicable diseases. We must take strong action to control the 
soaring cost of medical treatment. We must do more to build 
medical ethics and medical demeanor in an effort to improve the 
quality of medical treatment. We must continue a fine 
performance in planned parenthood, adhering to a policy of 
producing fine offspring who receive fine nurture, earnestly 
improving floating population planned parenthood control. 
  While reforming and developing, we must maintain stability. 
Governments at all levels must take effective actions for proper 
solution to various conflicts and problems that arise in the 
reform and development process. They must particularly exercise 
a high degree of responsibility and pay close attention to 
problems affecting the basic livelihood and personal interests 
of the masses. They must devote extreme energy to freeing the 
public from worries and hardships. When problems cannot be 
solved at once, they must be carefully looked into to gain the 
understanding and pardon of the public. We must strive to remove 
conflicts of all kinds to eliminate factors causing instability. 
In no case may negligence and dereliction of duty be 
countenanced. A diligent job must be done in controlling the 
floating population from elsewhere. Control systems must be 
established and perfected. Workers from elsewhere who are taking 
part in Shanghai's economic construction and are engaged in 
legitimate businesses should be provided needed conditions and 
services. We must safeguard their legitimate rights and 
interests in an effort to maintain social stability. We must 
further improve overall control of social order, crack down hard 
on all forms of criminal behavior, and spend greater energy on 
maintaining order in public places. We must continue to 
"prohibit prostitution, prohibit pornography, and prohibit 
narcotics," effectively controlling the proliferation and spread 
of all kinds of social ills to promote a further change for the 
food of the social atmosphere. 
<H5>  3. Intensification of Reform, Emphasizing New Approaches, </H5>
and Hastening the Pace of Establishing a Socialist Market 
Economy Operating Mechanism. 
  "Decisions of the CPC Central Committee on Various Problems 
in Establishing the Socialist Market Economy System" is the 
master plan for China's establishment of a socialist market 
economy system. It is the operating program for economic system 
reform during the 1990s. Proceeding from the overall 
requirements of economic system reform, the CPC Central 
Committee and State Council set forth major reform measures 
regarding fiscal revenues, finance and banking, planning, 
investment, foreign trade, and state-owned assets. These will 
help shape an overall administrative system suited to 
requirements for developing a socialist market economy. They 
will help advance economic construction, and they will also help 
implementation of Shanghai's long-term development strategy. 
Shanghai must unswervingly and completely organize 
implementation. Shanghai must do a good job of putting in place 
a new fiscal system in the city proper, its districts, and rural 
counties, following the principle of a uniform tax code, fair 
tax burdens, a simplified taxation system, and reasonable 
division of authority. It must also gradually improve the local 
tax collection system. It must open financial markets, 
accelerate the separation of banks that do business for policy 
reasons from commercial banks, and found urban cooperative banks 
and rural cooperative banks. It must spell out who are to be the 
main investors, and regulate investment conduct. It must 
gradually set up a foreign trade operating mechanism that is in 
keeping with international practice; and it must continue to 
move ahead with pilot projects for reform of the state-owned 
assets control system. While actively and completely 
implementing major central government reform measures, it must 
continue to break new ground in important areas and key links of 
reform and opening to the outside world as Shanghai's 
circumstances require and in accordance with the need to be a 
leader. 
  First Is Acceleration of the Building of a Modern 
Enterprise System Establishment of a modern enterprise 
system holds important significance for improving the 
administration and management of large- and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises, and for improving competitiveness, the 
better to exercise a leading role. Shanghai is a place in which 
state-owned enterprises, particularly large and medium 
state-owned enterprises are fairly highly concentrated. It is 
necessary to set up modern enterprise systems to speed up 
clarification of equity rights, the division of authority and 
responsibility, the separation of government administration and 
enterprise management, and for management science. Share system 
corporations that are already listed on the stock market must 
improve their internal organizational and administrative systems 
to meet the basic requirements of a modern enterprise system. 
State-owned large and medium size enterprises that have gained 
marked results in the transformation of their operating 
mechanisms may reorganize according to law to become single 
investor sole proprietorship limited liability corporations. In 
addition, is faster readjustment of assets on hand to enable 
some enterprises or companies to become limited liability 
corporations having multiple investment entities, nd to 
encourage various kinds of enterprises invest jointly for an 
organizational change to limited liability joint-stock 
corporations. Ways and means must be studied to solve the 
various historical burdens of state-owned enterprises in order 
to created the necessary conditions for reorganizing in 
corporate form. Following approval, state-owned enterprises that 
have sustained losses for a long period may be permitted to halt 
payment of interest, which suspended from accounts or posted to 
accounts. Needed associated policies should be added to help 
these enterprises get out of their predicament. For the small 
number of enterprises who have no prospect of reversing losses 
even after making an effort to do so, and who are unable to 
repay indebtedness on time, bankruptcy should be conducted 
according to law in separate, step-by-step, orderly ways. 
Special attention must be given to finding jobs for the staff 
members and workers of bankrupt enterprises, and enterprises 
that are doing well should be encouraged to buy or merge with 
these enterprises, bankruptcy and buy outs or mergers being 
meshed for gradual formation of a survival of the fittest 
mechanism. In order to ensure that enterprise reform proceeds 
smoothly, we must further improve the unemployment and old age 
insurance systems, actively setting the stage for hastening 
implementation of a staff member and worker medical insurance 
system, and the inauguration of commercial insurance for the 
rapid formation of a multilevel, multiform social insurance 
system that covers all workers. 
  Second Is Founding of Many Kinds of Large Enterprise 
Blocs. Innovation of an enterprise organizational system in 
which the founding of large blocs is the key element not only 
helps establish a modern enterprise system, but also helps 
develop economies of scale to improve the competitiveness of 
Shanghai's enterprises in domestic and foreign markets. 
Industries, foreign trade, commercial, scientific and technical, 
and township and town enterprises having a development potential 
should be selected for the founding of large enterprise chains, 
conglomerates, enterprise blocs, and trans-national corporations 
that combine science, industry, commerce, and trade, in which 
finance and banking are the medium, assets are the bond, 
purchases and mergers are the basic methods, and expansion of 
domestic and foreign market share is the goal. Such blocs should 
be supported with an overall policy to promote the blending of 
industrial capital, finance capital, and commercial capital to 
make fullest use of combined economic and technical strength and 
economic self-control capabilities for the conduct of 
diversified business. This would enable them to become models 
and stimulators for Shanghai's establishment of a modern 
enterprise system. International experience should be vigorously 
applied to the founding of large blocs, conditions actively 
created for their founding and each bloc founded when conditions 
are ripe. Rushing headlong into mass action is to be guarded 
against at all costs. Enterprise blocs must focus on a 
transformation mechanism, develop the advantages of scale, and 
increase returns from the economies of scale, entering highly 
competitive domestic and international markets like a combined 
arms army. Thus, they will become the main growth point 
propelling Shanghai's economic development. 
  Third Is Hastening the Building of a Modern Market 
System. Only by building a modern systematized, 
regularized, and international modern large market can fullest 
use be made of the central role of Shanghai's markets in 
allocating resources. In 1994, the emphasis is on early 
systematization of markets, building new foreign exchange 
exchanges linked by a nationwide computer network; making active 
preparations to build gold markets that include gold jewelry and 
gold bars, gold negotiable instruments and the trading of gold 
futures; setting up equity trading markets to promote the 
monetarization of enterprise assets in being; further expansion 
of national debt exchanges to serve as open national operating 
centers; establishment of computer networks and integrated 
national financial credit centers, using the existing discount 
business as a basis for improving discount and rediscount 
markets; opening insurance markets and finance leasing markets; 
exploration of the founding of information markets; and setting 
up and perfecting standard, full service labor markets. Large 
markets of all kinds must speed up standardization, those having 
requisite conditions meshing with international markets as 
quickly as possible. We must make a positive effort to form as 
quickly as possible a large, modern market system that can plug 
into domestic and foreign financial flow, commodity flow, 
technology flow, human resources flow, and information flow. 
  Fourth, Concentrate Energies on Development of a 
Central Commercial District. A central commercial district 
is the main mark of a modern international city. Shanghai must 
accord an extremely important strategic position to the planning 
and construction of a central commercial district. Shanghai's 
central commercial district includes both the small Lujiazui 
district in Pudong and the Bund in Puxi. While speeding up large 
scale development of the small Lujiazui district, we will soon 
sell real estate and conduct open auctions in the Bund area to 
free up government office buildings so that finance and banking, 
trade, and other commercial institutions can congregate in this 
area as quickly as possible. First a finance and banking street 
is to built on the Bund. This is a major action that can be 
taken that requires little investment, will not require much 
time, will yield good results, and will have a great impact. 
Work will begin as quickly as possible in 1994. Income obtained 
from real estate sales minus costs involved in relocating 
people, will be applied exclusively to the building of the 
central commercial district. 
  Fifth Is Moving Ahead With Making Large State-Owned Key 
Enterprises Joint Ventures. As part of the orientation 
toward industrial restructuring, various means will be used, 
including inviting tenders from businessmen for whole 
industries, industries that cut across industrial lines, and 
industries that integrate production, marketing, and sales to 
stimulate joint ventures and cooperative ventures between large 
state-owned key enterprises with well-known foreign 
corporations, particularly in the fields of motor vehicles, 
communications, electronics, power station equipment, computers, 
petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals, and 
metallurgy to create large industrial joint ventures in which 
the technology content is high, the advantages of size are 
great, and from which economic returns are good. This will bring 
in top flight technology and increase the scope of key 
industries, thereby enabling Shanghai's industry to maintain its 
leading position and attain the international advanced standard. 
  Sixth Is the Opening Up of New Fields for the Use of 
Foreign Capital. We must further widen the opening to the 
outside world, more actively and more effectively opening up new 
fields, new methods, and new approaches for the use of foreign 
capital. We must open bidding to foreign traders in connection 
with the mounting of the 10 major urban infrastructure 
engineering projects such as the outer ring of the 
circumferential highway, the subway number 2 line, and the 
Pudong International Airport. We must encourage foreign traders 
to take part in the construction of housing for domestic sale; 
and we must adopt new forms such as comprehensive investment and 
development, Sino-foreign joint venture stock companies, and 
BOT, using foreign capital to accelerate modernization of the 
city's infrastructure. We must expand both direct and indirect 
use of foreign capital to speed up the building of water 
conservancy for suburban farmland, and for developing more 
agricultural resources. We must try running Sino-foreign joint 
venture foreign trading companies; try out the establishment of 
Sino-foreign joint venture commercial wholesale enterprises and 
means of production retail enterprises; and explore joint 
ventures and cooperative ventures for commercial retail 
enterprises and foreign chain stores in an effort to get 
Shanghai's products into the international sales network. We 
must try operating and developing various kinds of overseas 
institutions for investment including joint finance, investment 
trust, and holding companies, operating in accordance with 
international practice in soliciting business in order to 
attract more medium and small investors abroad. We must attract 
foreign financial institutions, trans-national corporations, and 
well-known enterprise blocks to move their regional headquarters 
to Shanghai. We must organize foreign-owned financial 
institutions in Shanghai to provide syndicated credit. We must 
advance the opening to the outside world to a new level, to many 
fields, and more deeply. 
  Seventh Is Urging Township and Town Enterprises To Take 
a New Sino-Foreign Joint Venture Development Road Right 
now, we must especially explore the operation of modern joint 
venture enterprises with foreign traders by suburban township 
and town enterprise, large urban area industries, and large 
foreign trade enterprises. In conjunction with the strategic 
readjustment of the industrial structure and the location of 
productivity, we must use joint ventures and cooperative 
ventures as a means of linking the advantages that foreign 
businessmen have in the form of access to capital, technology, 
management, and the opening of foreign markets to the advantages 
that suburban villages possess in the form of low differential 
land rent, low labor costs, and plenty of space for development, 
and the advantages stemming from an exceptionally large city's 
overall total economic strength and general investment climate, 
the science and technology and the human resources in large 
industries, the market network and the business of large scale 
foreign trade. By so doing, township and town enterprises can 
move upward, improve quality, improve scale, and improve 
returns, township and town enterprises in the suburbs of an 
exceptionally large city, thereby taking a new road of 
development. 
  Eighth Is Continuance of Pilot Projects for Housing 
System Reform. We must diligently put into effect "State 
Council Decisions on Rapid Reform of the City and Town Housing 
System," adhering to the principle of simultaneous "selling, 
leasing, and building" to bring about the commercialization of 
housing actively and steadily. Dwelling sale prices must be set 
fairly, and the price ratio between renting and buying of 
publicly owned housing must be readjusted. We must used various 
forms of payment for housing purchases, payment in full being 
accorded favorable treatment, interest paid and profit earned on 
installment purchases; and application for mortgage payments may 
be used as well. We must make full use of public accumulation 
funds to set up mortgage funds to create conditions for low 
income staff members and workers to buy dwellings. Income 
derived from the sale of publicly owned housing should be used 
entirely for housing construction. At the same time, housing 
should be better managed, a concomitant real estate management 
service system set up. 
<H5>  4. Better Building of the Government Itself To Strive for </H5>
Realization of Shanghai's Strategic Goals 
  Realization of Shanghai's strategic goals is a magnificent 
but daunting task requiring that better building of the 
government itself be given an extremely important position. 
Acting under the supervision and with the support of the 
people's congress and its standing committee, and under 
supervision of democratic discussion by the CPPCC, governments 
at all levels should make policies democratic and scientific, 
increase economic administration and coordination capabilities, 
raise consciousness of administration according to law, promote 
honesty among government workers, and constantly open up new 
work vistas. 
  First Is a Genuine Transformation of Government 
Functions, Increasing Economic Administration and Coordination 
Capabilities. Governments at all levels must work in 
accordance with the principles of separating government 
administration from enterprise management, simplicity, 
uniformity, and effectiveness. They must gradually separate 
government's social and economic administrative functions from 
its state-owned enterprise ownership functions. They must 
completely grant to enterprises all the rights and 
responsibilities they should have. Government's economic 
management function is largely one of improving overall 
integration of the economy, doing a good job of building urban 
infrastructure, and creating a fine environment for economic 
development. The transformation of government functions, 
together with reform of the state-owned assets management system 
and the founding of large enterprise blocs should set the stage 
for the use of many methods for gradually reforming specific 
economic administrative organizations, and for improving 
multipurpose, audit, and economic oversight departments, 
particularly setting up and perfecting a citywide overall 
economic regulation and control committee, and a market 
administration committee. We must closely watch the direction 
and volume of flow of all funds, monitor and provide early 
warning about operation of the economy, improve follow-up 
analysis and study of the economic situation, and make timely 
recommendations on ways to maintain the economy's healthy 
development to improve government's ability to administer and 
regulate the economy. We must energetically develop various 
kinds of intermediary social institutions, found all kinds of 
self-regulated trade associations, and promote indirect 
government administration to set the stage for the reform of 
government organizations. We must do more to improve the caliber 
of government employees, actively doing the preparatory work 
needed to put in place a national civil service system. 
  Second, gradually Straighten Out Relations Between the 
City and Its Districts and Counties, Steadily Improving the "Two 
Level Government, Two Level Administration" System Shanghai 
is an exceptionally large city. Only by steadily improving the 
"two level government, two level administration system" on the 
basis of a clarification of responsibilities and the separation 
of powers can the vitality of the entire city be increased. 
During 1994, we must act in accordance with the principle of 
commensurate powers and responsibilities, and commensurate 
fiscal authority and authority over matters in general to spell 
out the responsibilities and powers of the city and its 
districts and counties regarding streets, municipal government 
facilities, municipal administration, district and country 
planning, and reform and development of district and county 
departments. The municipal government must take more 
responsibility for overall planning, and the coordination of 
administration. It must improve overall coordination and 
tailored guidance for each of the districts and counties. In 
addition, it must set up a joint city and district or county 
conference system for specific matters based on the each 
district's or county's local situation and functions. It must 
jointly study avenues for reform, opening to the outside world, 
and development, jointly discuss ways and means of solving 
problems, and jointly explore new approaches for enhancing and 
improving city administration. District and county governments 
must do more in the way of building grassroots level government 
and democracy, and make full use of the role of street, township 
and town, and residents committees, and of village committees in 
providing social services, social order, and environmental 
sanitation. 
  Third, a High Degree of Attention to Government Legal 
System Work, Running the Government Strictly According to 
Law. Establishment of a socialist market economic system 
requires a sound socialist legal system to provide direction, 
standards, and support. During 1994, the municipal government 
must work hard on drawing up a number of government regulations 
that are needed urgently for the development of a socialist 
market economy, including equity exchange control, futures 
market and futures brokerage company control, control over the 
sale of state-owned land use rights, control over real estate 
exchanges, and staff member and worker medical insurance 
regulations. In places where conditions permit, local laws and 
regulations should be drafted to presentation to the municipal 
people's congress and its standing committee. At the same, 
government regulations not suited to a socialist market economy 
system should continue to be checked and either promptly amended 
or scrapped. The municipal people's congress and its standing 
committee should be asked to amend or scrap local regulations 
that do not apply. A good job must be done in planning the 
building of a government legal system. Close attention must be 
given to the advisory and staff officer role of experts in 
building a government legal system. Administrative law 
enforcement and monitoring of law enforcement must be improved, 
governments at all levels administering according to law, 
handling matters according to law, and being adept and 
application of legal methods to manage the economy and the 
society. Leading cadres at all levels must study the law 
diligently to improve their understanding of the law. Separate 
government regulations for regulating operation of the market 
economy should be specially checked for enforcement for resolute 
correction of situations in which the law is not followed, not 
strictly enforced, or violations go unpunished. An unremitting 
struggle must be conducted particularly against those who 
violate the law when they are supposed to enforce the law, and 
who bend the law for the benefit of relatives or friends. 
Governments at all levels must truly give an important position 
to the task of setting up a government legal system. They must 
do more to build government legal institutions and the legal 
corps, and to improving the caliber of law enforcement personnel 
and law enforcement. 
  Fourth Is Changing Work Style and Work Methods. 
New situations and new problems constantly arise in the 
process of building a socialist market economy system. 
Governments at all levels must energetically encourage the 
practice of conducting investigations and study. Leading cadres 
at all levels must immerse themselves in realities and go down 
to the grass roots to find through practice major problems in 
need of solution, or difficulties that have lingered without 
solution for a long period of time, making them the emphasis of 
investigation and study. Through investigation and study, they 
can comprehend circumstances, work out approaches, and provide 
remedies and actions for solving problems. Cadres at all levels 
must inculcate the concept of looking at the situation as a 
whole, subordinating themselves to and serving the main goal of 
invigorating Shanghai and developing Pudong. They must 
subordinate limited interests to the overall interest, and they 
must subordinate departmental interests to total interests. They 
must be adept at examining problems, analyzing problems, and 
solving problems in terms of the overall situation and 
macroeconomically, doing their work creatively within the terms 
of the master plan and deployments for the whole city. The must 
establish and perfect a democratic and scientific 
decision-making system that truly ensures that the masses are in 
charge, and have the right to take part in democratic 
administration and democratic decisionmaking. They must 
implement all major reform measures, pay close attention to the 
views of all, and gain the understanding and support of the 
masses. They must pay close attention to the views and 
suggestions of consulting and research institutions and of 
experts on government work. They must use to the full the role 
of mass organizations such as the trade union, the Young 
Communist League, and the Women's Federation as bridges bonds. 
They must be more responsible to letters and visits from the 
people. They must diligently implement the Party's ethnic and 
religious policies, and do a good job on overseas Chinese 
affairs and regarding Taiwan. 
  Fifth Is Greater Building of Clean Government, Adhering 
to the Purpose of Serving the People Wholeheartedly. 
Maintenance of clean and dutiful administration at all levels of 
government is a necessary condition and an important support in 
establishing a socialist market economy system, and promoting 
economic development. We must vigorously carry forward the 
glorious tradition of arduous struggle and painstakingly and 
frugally handling all matters. We must be honest in the 
performance of official duties, and be earnest in government for 
the people. We must use the results obtained in the fight 
against corruption to continue to move ahead during 1994, 
concentrating on the punishment of corrupt acts like misuse of 
authority for private gain, misuse of ones job for private gain, 
and trading authority for money, investigating and punishing all 
cases that violate discipline or the law. We must be willing to 
take harsh measures, positively not acting leniently. In the 
struggle against corruption, we must use treatments that strike 
at the root of the problem, focus on existing problems, and 
actively explore new mechanisms for building clean government in 
order to root out corruption. We must build a self-policing 
system for leading cadres at the department level and above in 
counties, and set up supervisory stems for the rotation of 
people to different positions periodically, for the open 
handling of matters, and for avoiding conflicts of interest. We 
must conduct multilevel supervision and prevention work for 
greater examination of administrative effectiveness thereby 
putting government workers, particularly leading cadres at all 
levels, under effective supervision. 
  Governments at all levels must pay extremely close attention 
to the living conditions of the masses. As the economy develops, 
they must continue to raise the real income level of both city 
and country people, striving to ensure that the broad masses of 
people generally receive the benefits that reform and opening to 
the outside world brings. We must continue to carry on the fine 
tradition of doing things for the masses, diligently completing 
the 10 deeds that the municipal government has set for 1994, 
including improvement of communications facilities, improving 
environmental sanitation, increasing public green space, 
increase hydroelectric and gas supply capabilities, increasing 
the number of telephone subscribers, accelerating housing 
construction, and perfecting community services. Governments at 
all levels must pay close attention and solve promptly various 
social "hot spot" "tough spot" problems. regularly conducting 
various kinds of campaigns for providing a little cheer. We must 
work hard at caring for orphans, widows, the sick, and the 
disabled, and pay attention to the living conditions of retirees 
and staff members and workers having special difficulties. We 
must do more in the way of vocational training for unemployed 
workers who have lost their jobs in enterprises, actively 
creating opportunities and conditions for their re-employment. 
We must do good civil affairs work, actively developing various 
social welfare endeavors, thereby demonstrating to the full the 
superiority of socialism. 
  Delegates! 
  Shanghai has entered the decisive year for realizing three 
years of major changes. The new situation urges us to battle 
ahead, and the tasks we face are more daunting. We must take 
firm grip on this historical opportunity for major advances, 
adopt a spirit of seizing the day, seizing the hour, and seizing 
every minute, striving to be the best, open new avenues, and 
create new prospects. We deeply believe that guided by Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory of building a distinctively Chinese brand 
of socialism, under leadership of the CPC Central Committee, the 
State Council, and the Shanghai CPC Committee, and with the 
support of the people throughout the country, thanks to the 
joint efforts of the people throughout the city, Shanghai will 
certainly be able to realize the goal of three years of major 
changes, and Shanghai will also certainly be able to follow a 
road of development that is distinctively Chinese, that has the 
character of the age, and that has a Shanghai character, making 
even greater contributions to China's socialist modernization. 

