Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["CD News" report: "Rural Firms to Blame for Nation's </F>
Polluation"] 
  [Text] Township industries are seriously polluting the air 
and water in Tianjin, Shanghai and Beijing, according to the 
National Environmental Protection Agency. 
  Rural enterprises are also pumping out massive amounts of 
industrial waste water and sulphur dioxide fumes in the 
provinces of Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi, Jiangsu, Sichuan 
and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region. 
  The agency's nationwide survey of the environmental hazards 
caused by township enterprises is the first of its kind. 
  The aim is to help central and local governments improve 
pollution control by identifying the worst offenders. 
  The discharge of industrial waste water around the three 
major cities and in the worst hit provinces accounted for almost 
60 percent of the China's total township water pollution, 
according to the agency. 
  Places facing grave air pollution problems are listed as 
Shanghai Jiangsu, Henan, Shandong, Beijing, Shanxi, Tianjin, 
Zhejiang and Sichuan. 
  The rural industries in these areas produced 57.2 percent of 
the pollutants piped into the air by rural firms around the 
country. 
  These areas were also to blame for 60 per cent of 
township-produced sulphur dioxide, 63 percent of the smoke and 
55.8 percent of the industrial dust of the country's total, 
according to the agency's investigation. The survey, which was 
started in 1989, covered 570,000 enterprises in almost every 
county in the country. Only the Tibetan Autonomous Region and 
Taiwan were left out. 
  Fourteen types of factories were named as major polluters. 
  They included industries involved in asbestos, coke, cement, 
chemicals, paper-making, leather processing, dyeing and brewing. 
  Many of the small industries had out-of-date production 
technology and a high rate of waste discharge. 
  To date less than one-fifth of rural industry reaches State 
standards for waste water disposal. 
  The investigation also revealed that for every five rural 
firms there was only one environmental protection officer. 
  This clearly showed that factory managers in these areas 
still cared little about their environment says the survey. 
  Industrial waste and gas were found to be the major causes 
of 
rural pollution. 
  The Farmers' Daily [NONGMIN RIBAO] has said that 
pollution-control technologies must be introduced into rural 
enterprises and the construction of dirty factories and mills 
must be limited. The best way of controlling pollution is to 
adopt advanced waste disposal technology, according to the 
newspaper. 

