Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu Zhichao (4151 0037 6389) and responsible </F>
editor Liu Xing (0491 1041): "Mao Zedong's Three Great 
Breakthroughs, Three Great Tragedies"] 
<H5>  [1 Dec pp 18-21] </H5>
  [Text] The Second Breakthrough and Tragedy: On 
Contradictions Among the People and the "Double Hundred" (Let a 
Hundred Flowers Blossom and a Hundred Schools of Thought 
Contend) Policy 
  The purpose of socialism is to tackle economic construction, 
develop social productive forces, and make society prosper and 
flourish across the board. This lies at the heart of socialist 
construction. At the same time, it is inherent in socialism to 
develop socialist democracy in national life and social life, 
protect the democratic rights and freedom of the people, and 
promote science and culture. As with the Chinese socialist 
construction road he pioneered on the economic front, the string 
of theories and policies advanced by Mao Zedong about 
contradictions among the people and the "double hundred" policy 
as well as his vision of a lively dynamic political scene indeed 
constituted another great breakthrough in socialism. This 
breakthrough dispelled the clouds that had been hanging over 
socialism in the wake of the revelations about Stalin and 
brought forth the new look of and new development prospects for 
a socialist society. A brave new world beckoned. After Mao 
Zedong put forward these theories and policies, the whole party 
and the entire population, now energized, worked hard to put 
them into effect. Regrettably, things did not turn out as 
originally envisaged. Once again, there were serious setbacks 
and failures mainly because Mao Zedong himself violated the very 
theories and policies he had put forward. First came the 
rightist offensive of 1957. Subsequently, the anti-rightist 
campaign widened. After the failure of the Great Leap Forward 
mentioned above, internal dissensions appeared in the party, 
followed by the struggle at Lushan conference. Legitimate 
opinions and correct proposals within the party were labelled 
rightist opposition and wrongly criticized. Worse, this kind of 
internal party dispute was characterized as serious class 
struggle, the continuation of the life-and-death struggle 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. As domestic 
contradictions multiplied and the international situation 
changed, particularly as tension rose between China and the 
Soviet Union and changes unfolded within the Communist Party of 
the Soviet Union [CPSU], all these theories and ideas were 
increasingly shunted aside by the erroneous theory of taking 
class struggle as the key link between the 10th Plenum of the 
8th CPC Central Committee in 1962 and the Cultural Revolution. 
In his waning years, many of Mao Zedong's ideas and theories, 
whether they be correctly handling contradictions among the 
people, the "double hundred" policy, or creating a lively 
dynamic political scene, had ceased to exist in fact. We cannot 
but regard this as a profound tragedy for Mao Zedong and even 
the entire nation. 
  It is not only theoretically but also practically 
significant 
to analyze the reasons why such innovative theories and policies 
were not carried through but turned out to be disappointments, 
failures, and tragedies, and the lessons to be learned 
therefrom. Needless to say, this analytical exercise would be 
just as complex and difficult as the one above involving the 
economy. What follows is a preliminary analytical attempt. 
  The issue can be analyzed at two levels. 
  At the first level are the direct reasons that prevented Mao 
Zedong from persevering in the policies and theories he had 
advanced and the lessons we can draw therefrom. The reasons can 
be divided into two categories at least. 
  The first category has to do with institutional and legal 
construction. Mao Zedong espoused his theory of contradictions 
among the people and the "double hundred" policy essentially on 
the theoretical plane. He explained them and propagated them 
inside and outside the party. In addition, party and government 
cadres at all levels were required to follow them ideologically, 
as a method of leadership, and as a style of leadership. 
However, he neglected to institutionalize them or write them 
into law. Nor was there enough time to do so. He overlooked 
institutional and legal construction for the party and the state 
and failed to ensure their survival by making them part of the 
institutions and writing them into law, which had greater 
restraining force and was more stable. The distinction between 
contradictions among the people and contradictions between 
ourselves and the enemy was a political concept. This demand and 
some general standards were not sufficient. Appropriate legal 
limits should have been set to ensure that the distinction was 
not obscured. The people should have freedom of speech, freedom 
of the press, freedom of scientific, artistic, and literary 
creation, and even the freedom to demonstrate and hold rallies 
as a way of expressing themselves. However, they must show 
discipline. In exercising their personal freedom, they must not 
hurt social and national interests, disturb social order, or 
interfere with the freedom of another individual. All these 
principles should have been translated into detailed rules and 
regulations to make up part of the legal system. We could not 
afford anarchy if we were to fully exercise democracy, ensure 
the people's democratic rights, and achieve centralization on 
the basis of democracy. This demand should be made part of the 
democratic order and democratic procedures and be legally 
protected. Only thus could we eliminate arbitrariness and avoid 
the kind of change brought about by a change in leadership or by 
a change in the priorities of a leader. This, however, was not 
fully appreciated and emphasized by Mao Zedong at the time. He 
set great store by the leadership of the communist party and the 
socialist road, which he considered essential to implementing 
the various correct principles he had put forward. Yet he failed 
to see that now that the CPC had become the ruling party and the 
leading force of the national regime practicing people's 
democracy, actions should be taken as soon as possible to ensure 
the stability of the regime through legal construction and ward 
off any disruption and damage from all quarters, including the 
leadership itself. At the time socialist transformation was 
still in its infancy and society as a whole was still in a state 
of flux. To institutionalize and write into law a string of 
policies and theories regarding contradictions among the people 
and the "double hundred" policy indeed would have presented some 
practical difficulties. The reason is that institutionalization 
and legalization required a relatively stable order and 
considerable experience. At a minimum, however, the importance 
of institutionalization and legalization should have been fully 
appreciated, which would have served as the starting point of an 
earnest effort in that direction. Unfortunately, Mao Zedong 
overlooked this point. The entire party, including most leaders 
at the top echelon, were equally ignorant. Thus seeds of trouble 
were sown, leading to the arbitrary changes in later years of 
many correct theories, policies, and measures. 
  Then there were methodical errors. Campaigns and criticisms 
in the mass-movement mold were used instead of gentle and 
persuasive ideological education and discussions emphasizing 
reasoning on an equal level. Mao Zedong said, "Let a hundred 
flowers blossom, let a hundred schools of thought contend." With 
a desire for unity as his point of departure, Mao Zedong said we 
should resolve our contradictions through criticism or struggle 
and proceed from there to a new unity. This was a democratic way 
of resolving contradictions among the people that was different 
from the class struggle of the past. From the very beginning, 
however, this method was interpreted one-sidedly and departed 
further and further from its original intent as time went by. 
Contradictions among the people included more than differences 
in ideological understanding. Even more important were competing 
interests, rights, and demands. Accordingly, we must begin by 
spelling out the equality, freedom, democracy and other rights 
that every citizen is entitled to and honoring such rights. 
Needless to say, we should at the same time specify the 
appropriate corresponding obligations. Only by balancing rights 
with obligations properly or through criticism and 
self-criticism can we achieve a new unity. The party as well as 
party and government workers who constituted the principal 
leading force and were primarily responsible for resolving 
contradictions among the people were particularly duty-bound to 
acquire the skill of persuasion by argument and reasoning within 
the framework of respecting the people's freedom, democratic 
rights, and other civil rights and to master the methods of 
reconciling all sorts of interest relations in accordance with 
the law. This required raising the entire population's 
democratic consciousness and legal consciousness and its 
awareness of the citizen's rights and obligations. It also 
required equipping it with skills fundamentally different from 
the confrontational methods of the past. Yet Mao Zedong did not 
make these things his priority. While stressing the differences 
between the two kinds of contradictions and the two ways of 
handling such contradictions, he remained wedded to the mass 
movement so frequently resorted to during the confrontational 
struggles in the past. A rectification movement was launched in 
the spring of 1957 targeting subjectivism, factionalism, and 
bureaucratism in the party. In theory, small democracy, "like a 
gentle breeze and a mild rain," was the modus operandi. In fact, 
the masses were aroused to expose and criticize, which was 
precisely why a tiny handful of rightists were able to mount 
their "big democracy," namely, speaking out freely, airing views 
fully, holding great debates, and writing big-character posters. 
Following the anti-rightist campaign, Mao Zedong ironically 
reviewed and endorsed these methods, adopting them for use not 
only against the rightists but also as a way of handling 
differences of opinions among the people. He applied the 
"four-bigs" in every field and every arena of work, turning them 
into the synonyms of exposure, criticism, and struggle in real 
life. The original goal--having the people engage on an equal 
footing in discussion, debate, criticism, and self-criticism in 
accordance with their democratic rights--was completely lost 
sight of. The worst was yet to come; during the Cultural 
Revolution, the "four-bigs" became a tool of confusing friend 
with foe, the so-called mass dictatorship. 
  The two groups of reasons mentioned above were the obvious 
ones, issues that Mao Zedong failed to clarify and resolve when 
he put forward the idea of contradictions among the people and 
"double hundred" policy. 
  At the second level were the deeper social and historical 
factors that led to this tragedy, as well as reasons that had to 
do with Mao Zedong's own personality. 
  First, let us look at Mao Zedong's personality as an 
explanation. Because he wielded paramount power, his thought and 
conduct could not but have an enormous, even decisive, impact on 
how things actually turned out, whether they be the innovative 
breakthroughs at the beginning or the subsequent changes. Both 
in education and in life experience, Mao Zedong was inevitably 
influenced by China's long feudal past and certain feudal ideas 
still existing in real life, which found expression in his 
actions at critical points in time. All that is undeniable. 
However, this writer cannot go along with those who seek to 
explain Mao Zedong's mistakes with reference to the thought of 
feudal monarchs. Ever since his youth, Mao Zedong had pursued 
individual liberation and democratic freedom. He was a radical 
democrat and populist who abhorred feudal rule. Later he 
embraced Marxism and, analyzing Chinese society from the 
perspective of historical materialism, found the road that would 
lead to total victory for the democratic revolution in China. 
For that he struggled throughout his life, practicing what he 
preached. That he could rise above the Soviet model and Stalin's 
mistakes and come up with creative breakthroughs proves that he 
was a great proletarian democrat. Be that as it may, there were 
also inconsistencies in Mao Zedong's character. Besides the 
feudal ideas noted above, even more important were his extreme 
sensitivity about class struggle, a product of the protracted 
and brutal class struggle and revolutionary war in which he had 
been involved, and his highly developed sense of authority and 
swift manner of making decisions, cutting through all 
opposition, which were the results of his occupying the position 
of party leader, and rightly so, for so long. At the time these 
attributes were correct and essential to defeating the enemy and 
seizing victory. Under the new circumstances, however, they 
became barriers to the transition to a democratic system. For 
decades the goal of the revolution led by the CPC was to strive 
for democracy. Yet the brutal struggle between friend and foe, 
both the climate of the struggle itself and the methods, could 
not but hinder normal democratic construction and prevent 
democratic habits from taking hold. After seizing power and with 
the ferocious class struggle largely behind it, the environment 
began to allow more democracy and freedom and there was a need 
to shift to regular democratic procedures. That Mao Zedong was 
the first to realize. At the slightest sign of trouble, however, 
he immediately tightened the bow of class struggle and went back 
to the old beaten track. The fact of the matter is that a 
revolutionary is most likely to fall victim to this kind of 
tragedy in times of upheaval when his mission as well as the 
circumstances change radically. Something similar happened to 
Mao Zedong's contemporaries, that is, the older generation of 
revolutionaries. It is just that Mao Zedong stood out more. 
  Second, there were China's own social and historical 
reasons. 
Old China was a semi-colonial semi-feudal society without the 
foundation for practicing democracy, operating a free market, or 
creating a free society. Nor were there a democratic tradition 
or democratic practices. The primary mission of the democratic 
revolution of the proletariat under the leadership of its party 
was to overthrow reactionary rule and seize power through a 
revolutionary war. It could only experiment with an elementary 
democratic system to a limited extent (principally revolutionary 
units and revolutionary bases). For China as a whole, 
patriarchalism and ultra-democracy (or crude anarchism) were the 
order of the day. For seven or eight years after the PRC was 
founded, this pattern basically remained intact despite 
earth-shaking changes which vastly complicated the effort to 
correctly handle contradictions among the people, implement the 
"double hundred" policy, and social democratic construction. In 
fact, the process in which the "double hundred" policy and the 
concept of contradictions among the people took shape was 
accompanied by heated arguments and struggles, both inside and 
outside the party, which continued after they were put forward. 
Many unexpected things happened. At first the main problem was 
that many people in the party did not understand, were not 
accustomed to, and had no experience in the new situation and 
the new policies. Comrades with dogmatic ideas also resisted 
them. Wedded to the rigid Stalinist concept of socialism being 
complete unanimity, on the one hand, and accustomed to the 
ideology and practices of fierce friend and foe struggles of the 
past, they found the policy of "letting a hundred flowers 
blossom and a hundred schools of thought contend" unacceptable. 
They contended that it would lead to chaos all over the land and 
undermine the CPC's leadership. Others were full of nostalgia 
for the patriarchal style of leadership. (It may be noted in 
passing that Soviet leaders including Khrushchev at the time 
also disagreed with the "double hundred" policy and the concept 
of contradictions among the people.) Mao Zedong repeatedly 
criticized this situation, pointing out that we must adapt to 
the new circumstances ideologically and, learning from the 
[former] Soviet Union, overcome metaphysics. Later, there was 
also a widespread misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the 
"double hundred" policy and the notion of contradictions among 
the people. Some people even misread it to mean liberalization, 
freedom without discipline, democracy without centralism; 
rejected the Marxist theory of class struggle; and denied that 
class struggle still existed to a substantial degree. There was 
much confusion in the rectification movement between the spring 
and summer of 1957. At the same time, there was indeed a handful 
of people who took an antagonistic stand to the democratic 
revolution and socialist revolution in China and tried to launch 
a counterattack on socialism and CPC leadership by expanding and 
taking advantage of the prevailing confusion. Between them these 
two trends led to the serious error of expanding the 
anti-rightist movement, which, in turn, soon caused Mao Zedong 
to reassess the class struggle situation. These facts show that 
it is an enormously complex and arduous task to develop 
democracy and make democracy and freedom exist side by side with 
unity, stability, and centralization in a society like China 
today with a long feudal history which is also economically and 
culturally backward. Such a task must proceed in tandem with 
economic and cultural development in an orderly way step by 
step. A two-pronged approach covering both ideological education 
and institutional construction is necessary so that the various 
democratic institutions and related laws can be gradually 
created and perfected and that the masses as well as government 
workers can enhance their democratic and legal consciousness 
over time, develop democratic habits, and acquire the democratic 
way of life. We absolutely cannot afford to be impatient and 
resort to the mass movement. On this matter, as with economic 
construction, Mao Zedong failed to fully consider China's 
national conditions or the stage Chinese socialism was in at the 
time. At the beginning, it was full speed ahead; there was an 
over-eagerness for quick success. After running into a problem, 
though, he overreacted and over-corrected, resulting in massive 
setbacks and ups and downs. This is a profound lesson for us. 
  Thirdly, there were changes in the domestic and 
international 
situation. Nineteen fifty six and the spring of 1957 were 
devoted to the "double hundred" policy and contradictions among 
the people--both propaganda and implementation. By the fall of 
1957, an anti-rightist movement was under way, the first setback 
in the drive to carry through with the policies mentioned above 
and develop democracy. At the time, Mao Zedong reiterated that 
class struggle was the principal contradiction, but it was both 
his expectation and his hope that after retraining in the 
"socialist revolution on the ideological front and political 
front," he could refocus his energies on economic construction 
shortly. In early 1958, therefore, he proposed that 
technological revolution be the new center of party work, 
calling on the party to adapt to the existing and emerging surge 
in production, to pay special attention to agriculture, finance, 
and trade, and to catch up with and overtake Britain in 15 
years. In other words, the Great Leap Forward of the future 
would be in economic construction. The expansion of the 
anti-rightist movement was by and large just a temporary, 
limited setback. The resultant reassessment of class struggle by 
Mao Zedong was also a limited one. In general he still insisted 
that we redirect the focus in our work to economic construction. 
Contradictions among the people were legion. The more serious 
setbacks and mistakes came after the failure of the Great Leap 
Forward when the domestic economy was deeply mired in numerous 
problems, and deep dissensions occurred within the party. 
Simultaneously, tension rose in Sino-Soviet relations as well as 
China's relations with the West and a number of neighboring 
nations. In these circumstances, every contradiction worsened, 
objectively presenting the effort to develop democracy, carry 
out the "double hundred" policy, and create a lively and dynamic 
situation with a host of difficulties. Subjectively, Mao 
Zedong's class struggle was intensified. Moreover, the two 
interacted with each other, setting up a vicious circle. 
Consequently, at the Lushan conference of 1959 intra-party 
differences of opinion were elevated to the level of a 
continuation of the life-and-death struggle between the 
bourgeoisie and proletariat. In the next three beleaguered years 
there was a deliberate effort to ease the strained atmosphere 
here and concentrate on economic adjustment. In reality, tension 
both inside and outside China intensified relentlessly. At 
Beidaihe in November 1962 Mao Zedong brought up class struggle 
again, finally totally abandoning the new socialist ideological 
and political society that he had hoped would be established in 
the wake of his "double hundred" policy and contradictions among 
the people. This also paved the way for the 10-year disaster, 
the Cultural Revolution. The lesson here is that it is easier to 
develop socialist democracy and freedom and create a lively and 
dynamic situation when the government is having more success in 
the economy, in domestic politics, and in international affairs. 
In contrast, it is harder when problems are mounting and there 
is tension all around. In the latter situation, leaders are more 
prone to emphasize struggle and rely on the centralization of 
state power and coercive methods. But these simple tactics are 
effective only for a limited period of time and, in the long 
haul, actually militate against the consolidation and 
development of socialism. The only fundamental way to ensure the 
long-term stability of socialism is to build democratic 
institution with perseverance step by step and create a 
political situation in which democracy and centralization, 
freedom and discipline, individual satisfaction and common 
aspirations go hand in hand in accordance with the principle of 
correctly handling contradictions among the people and the 
"double hundred" policy. Troubles and tension at home or on the 
international front hamper the development of democracy and 
freedom to a certain extent, but they should not cause us to 
depart from this fundamental position. Moreover, public 
understanding of this issue and the correctness or otherwise of 
the actions on it in turn play an important part in determining 
the direction in which the situation will evolve. Accordingly, 
whether or not the principal characters have a clear 
understanding and handle the situation properly is critical to 
determining whether or not we will end up with a vicious circle 
or positive circle. In putting forward the theory of 
contradictions among the people and the "double hundred" policy, 
Mao Zedong took warning from Stalin. (As we all know, the 
centralization of state power by Stalin and his despotism had 
something to do with the situation both inside and outside the 
Soviet Union at the time.) Yet after advancing these correct 
theories and policies, Mao Zedong was subsequently forced by 
circumstances to modify them for the worse, with dire 
consequences. This tragedy shows that the odds are stacked 
against those who want to build socialism in a backward nation 
amid difficult circumstances. 
  Today we have mastered and inherited from Mao Zedong his 
correct theories and policies, at the same time correcting his 
errors. Things are now radically different from Mao Zedong's 
days. We stand on the shoulders of a giant. Nevertheless, our 
feet are still planted on Chinese soil. We still frequently 
encounter the kind of objective and subjective conflicts and 
difficulties Mao Zedong confronted back then and are not able to 
resolve them instantly. Thus studying his breakthrough 
innovations and tragic lessons has highly practical significance. 
<H5>  [15 Dec pp 4-8] </H5>
  [Text] The Third Breakthrough and Its Tragedy: On the 
Advanced Nature of CPC and Its Ties to the Masses 
  Mao Zedong knew full well that "seizing national victory is 
only the first step in the long march." "The road after 
revolution will be even longer and more bumpy." To turn 
populous, poor, and backward China into a prosperous and strong 
socialist nation would be an historic and extremely complex and 
difficult mission that required long-term exploration and 
effort. As in the case of revolution, we could not mechanically 
duplicate the experiences of other nations when it comes to the 
construction of China. This was what Mao Zedong always thought. 
As noted above, his goal was to take an economic road different 
from that of the Soviet Union and bring about a lively and 
dynamic social, political, scientific, and cultural scene. In a 
nutshell, to create a socialism bursting with energy that meshes 
with the characteristics of China and meets the needs of the 
Chinese people. Clearly, it was impossible to accomplish this 
mission and fulfill this mission without a CPC that integrates 
theory with reality, that has close ties to the masses, and that 
always maintains a proletarian advanced nature. This is why Mao 
Zedong paid close attention to the construction of the party at 
a time when it was wielding state power and leading 
construction. He studied the matter endlessly and came up with 
major breakthroughs, both theoretical and practical. Here too, 
however, he later failed with tragic consequences. 
  In China, both the democratic revolution and the socialist 
revolution triumphed under CPC leadership. How to build a 
communist party marrying Marxism with the workers' movement to 
take up the heavy responsibility of revolution in a large 
Oriental nation where peasants accounted for the bulk of the 
population, where the proletariat is minuscule, and where the 
people's scientific and cultural standards were fairly low? This 
was a question that deeply interested Mao Zedong and other older 
revolutionaries. Their solution was a good one. An important 
part of this solution was the advanced intellectuals who were 
schooled in modern education and had a personal need for 
national democratic revolution. On the one hand, they applied 
Marxism to the reality in China. On the other hand, they linked 
up with advanced elements among the workers and peasants to 
launch a revolutionary struggle together. The Chinese 
proletariat was under triple pressure. Not only did it unleash 
on its own a mighty anti-imperialist anti-feudal workers' 
movement, but, joining forces with advanced intellectuals, its 
staunchest members went to the countryside where conditions were 
most difficult to mobilize and unite vast numbers of peasants 
and conduct a protracted revolutionary war. Peasants were the 
backbone of the Chinese revolution. It was only natural 
therefore for a host of outstanding elements to emerge from 
among the ranks of the peasantry, educated by the CPC and 
tempered by the revolutionary struggle. China's anti-imperialist 
anti-feudal revolutionary war put the party's key members 
(advanced intellectuals, advanced workers, and impoverished 
peasants) under military communism for a long period of time, 
strengthening their proletarian character. In other words, 
during the revolution not only was the CPC composed of 
revolutionaries most eager to change China's semi-feudal 
semi-colonial look, but it had a proletarian advanced nature and 
was representative of the oppressed masses of workers and 
peasants of China, with whom it maintained intimate ties. All 
efforts on behalf of party construction, including the Marxist 
political line and ideological education, the organizational 
principle of democratic centralism, the practices of criticism 
and self-criticism, and methods of rectification movements, 
rested on this foundation. 
  During the period of revolutionary change, particularly 
after 
the victory of the democratic revolution, Mao Zedong went beyond 
affirming the Marxist revolutionary line; he also took special 
pains to maintain the party's proletarian advanced nature and 
remain in close touch with the masses. During the Yanan era, he 
called for a wide-ranging campaign to study Guo Moruo's [6753 
3106 5387] "Commemorating the 300th Anniversary of Jiashen." He 
wanted the whole party to learn a major lesson from the story of 
King Chuang, who entered the capital but, letting success go to 
his head, became arrogant. Corruption and dissensions set in and 
he was soon defeated. On the eve of the triumph of revolution 
nationwide, he warned all party members to be on guard against 
arrogance, rashness, and the bourgeoisie's sugar-coated bullets. 
After liberation, he repeatedly admonished all party cadres not 
to change their revolutionary nature and degenerate just because 
of the change in their status after victory. In conjunction with 
the solution of the various tasks inherited from the democratic 
revolution and the series of procedures in socialist 
transformation, he took a string of measures to solve the new 
problems that had emerged in party construction. For instance, 
he severely punished the party members and cadres who failed to 
make clear distinctions in land reform and sentenced Liu 
Qingshan [0491 3237 1472] and Zhang Zishan [1728 1311 0810] to 
death during the movements against the three evils and five 
evils. At the time, what needed to be done most of all were the 
tasks inherited from the democratic revolution, such as 
continuing to move troops around to eradicate the bandits and 
oppose local despots and carrying out land reform and other work 
relating to socialist transformation, including the abolition of 
the exploitation system. As far as party construction is 
concerned, past experiences sufficed as a guide. By and large, 
the state of the party was quite good in this period of change. 
  By 1956 and 1957 the situation in which the party found 
itself had changed in a fundamental way and economic 
construction had become the overriding mission. In these 
circumstances, how to mesh Marxism into the new reality and work 
out correct lines, policies, and principles in such areas as 
economic construction, social development, and democratic, 
political, scientific, and cultural construction took on special 
importance. But as ar as the party itself was concerned, even 
more important was how to preserve the party's advanced nature 
and its ties with the masses. For instance, as leaders and 
members of the ruling party, how were CPC members to be advanced 
elements in economic construction and, at the same time, 
correctly reconcile personal economic interests with those of 
the masses? That was a brand-new topic, totally different from 
anything in the revolutionary years. Or how should the party 
correctly handle the contradictions among the people which were 
multiplying? This had become the theme of national political 
life. Many contradictions among the people directly and 
indirectly manifested themselves as relations between the 
leaders and the led. As leaders and rulers, how should CPC 
members handle these contradictions? This was an unprecedented 
topic. For this very reason, since 1956 Mao Zedong had 
highlighted the issue of maintaining the party's advanced nature 
and its close ties with the masses in the new situation, giving 
it special consideration. The negative side of the CPSU during 
the Stalin era that came to light after the 20th CPSU Congress 
as well as complex contradictions inside the CPSU at the time 
only served to make Mao Zedong pay even closer attention to 
party construction. A proposal was made at the Eighth CPC 
National Congress in 1956 to combat subjectivism, factionalism, 
and bureaucratism through party rectification. In the spring of 
1957, after Mao Zedong raised the issue of correctly handling 
contradictions among the people, a party-wide rectification 
movement targeting subjectivism, factionalism, and bureaucratism 
went under way. Masses outside the party were mobilized to 
criticize party members, particularly those in leadership 
positions, so as to help the party rectify its style. At that 
time Mao Zedong sharply criticized the desire for personal fame 
and gain on the part of some people in the party and attacked 
them for forgetting their fine tradition of arduous struggle, 
for losing their revolutionary spirit, and for acquiring such 
bad habits as scrambling for position and fame and putting on 
bureaucratic airs. He emphasized that party members must 
maintain the revolutionary zeal and spirit of the revolutionary 
era and identify themselves with the masses. If combating 
subjectivism was necessary to solve problems relating to 
ideological line, then the fight against factionalism and 
bureaucratism was needed essentially to sort out relations 
within the party and without, particularly those between the 
party and the masses. The goal was to make the party, now that 
it became the ruling party and leader, stay in line with the 
masses in everything, from the way of life to thinking to 
feelings, which would prevent some party leaders from going down 
the road of bureaucratism and privilege. At the time Mao Zedong 
and other leaders were sincere and firm in this matter. 
Unfortunately, they later misjudged the situation and the 
anti-rightist movement spread, so the mission was not 
accomplished. At the peak of socialist construction in 1958, Mao 
Zedong put forward a string of policies, including cadre 
participation in labor, and over time came to endorse two 
participations, one reform, and three-way combination (cadre 
participation in productive labor and worker participation in 
management), reform of irrational and outmoded rules and 
regulations, and close cooperation among workers, cadres and 
technicians). The purpose was always the same: to maintain close 
ties between the party and the people. Unfortunately, because 
the Great Leap Forward proved to be a mistake and soon failed, 
these policies and measures were not systematically followed 
through. After the 1960's, Mao Zedong, learning from the Soviet 
Union, again and again voiced objection to the bureaucratic and 
revisionist thought and style of some party members, especially 
leading cadres, which cut them off from the masses. He called 
for the training of successors to the cause of proletarian 
revolution and opposed peaceful evolution, both indicative of a 
concern to keep the party's proletarian nature, maintain 
intimate relations between the party and the masses, and prevent 
the party's degeneration. At the same time, however, he erred by 
exaggerating class struggle more and more, even portraying 
intra-party contradictions as class struggle on many occasions. 
Misled by this flawed theory, he increasingly confused the 
preservation of the party's purity with ultra-leftist party 
struggle, finally culminating in the tragedy of the Cultural 
Revolution. 
  The tragedy for Mao Zedong here was different from that in 
the two areas mentioned above. It was not a case of correct 
policies and theories going awry and failing in the course of 
implementation. Instead what happened here was that the right 
and the wrong often got confused or a host of erroneous 
conclusions were drawn from a correct premise. The situation 
here was so complex that a serious and careful analysis is 
called for. 
  To begin with, Mao Zedong attached the utmost importance to 
preserving the party's proletarian advanced nature and 
revolutionary purity. His subsequent perception that the CPSU 
had degenerated only served to reinforce his concern for this 
matter. Besides taking care to combine the universal truths of 
Marxism with the actual reality in China and seeking a correct 
way to build Chinese socialism (there were both innovations and 
lessons here, as noted above) Mao Zedong in the early years of 
the PRC emphasized recruiting workers into the party in large 
numbers and enhancing the proletarian element of party 
membership, a proposal that was implemented. Even more 
important, he often emphasized carrying out Marxist ideological 
education among all party members and demanded that all party 
members, particularly the cadres, equip themselves with 
socialist and communist ideals and beliefs and fight for the 
final abolition of the exploitation system in China. He wanted 
all party members to serve the people wholeheartedly and make 
unyielding efforts to bring about China's industrialization and 
modernization and improve the people's lives all round. He 
wanted them to oppose the bourgeois desire for personal gain and 
fame and preserve their revolutionary fervor and revolutionary 
spirit of fighting heroically for the revolution and the people, 
not afraid of sacrificing personal interests. All of that was 
intended to preserve the party's advanced nature during the 
construction period and enable it to become an ideologically 
advanced force that was also capable of leading all strata in 
society in practical action. 
  Secondly, he was always concerned to prevent the CPC from 
degenerating after seizing political power nationwide and for 
this reason never stopped stressing the party's traditions of 
arduous struggle and close ties with the masses. In successive 
party rectification movements, particularly the one in 1957, he 
talked about this issue repeatedly, demanding that leading 
cadres at all levels get along with the workers and peasants as 
ordinary laborers on an equal footing and overcome 
bureaucratism. He even criticized the bureaucratism of those 
occupying high-ranking positions who had no concern for the 
suffering and hardships of the masses and were far removed from 
them and reality as examples of anti-people thinking within the 
party and reactionary KMT practices. Subsequently he sought to 
prove each and every way that if the ruling CPC degenerated, the 
socialist political regime and social system would inevitably 
degenerate also. Many measures initiated by Mao Zedong were 
adopted to solve this problem. In distribution, for instance, 
the party adopted a low-wage system and wage differences between 
party leading cadres and ordinary workers were closely watched. 
Leading bodies at all levels were required to conduct studies 
deep at the grassroots regularly and leading cadres at all 
levels must go to the workers or peasants under their leadership 
and participate in physical labor at fixed intervals. 
  Third, to achieve the objective mentioned above, he set 
great 
store by conducting socialist and communist ideological 
education throughout society, particularly within the CPC, and 
mobilizing the masses to supervise party members. He suggested 
that we emulate Comrade Lei Feng [7191 6912] and turn him into a 
role model for serving the people wholeheartedly. He reviewed 
and promoted the experience. He was constantly on the look out 
for and publicized advanced figures and advanced thought within 
the party and in society at large. This was systems engineering 
aimed at planting over the fatherland the flag of positive 
healthy advancement that was consistent with the principles of 
the CPC and changing the Chinese people's spiritual outlook. 
Throughout Mao Zedong pushed the vast number of CPC members, 
especially leading cadres at all levels, to the forefront of the 
construction of spiritual civilization. He never stopped 
severely criticizing all sorts of corrupt feudal and bourgeois 
thinking for corrupting the party. For instance, he condemned 
pursuing fame and fortune, acting as lords and masters, 
pleasure-seeking, indulgence, love of luxury, worshipping and 
having blind faith in things foreign, and envying and imitating 
the corrupt bourgeois way of life, so on and so forth. By 
consolidating the party organization and rectifying incorrect 
styles of work, he appealed to the masses to criticize and 
supervise those erroneous ideas and practices within the party 
and advocated running the party strictly. 
  By and large the leadership headed by Mao Zedong, or what we 
call the older generation of revolutionaries, and the 
rank-and-file leading cadres all had a high degree of 
consciousness on this matter, so much so that they set a 
personal example in resisting all sorts of privileges and 
corruption. This was an important reason why despite the party's 
numerous mistakes, it still managed to maintain a high degree of 
popular trust among the masses. 
  Mao Zedong put forward the three points mentioned above and 
never loosened his grip on them. In the course of 
implementation, there was one-sidedness sometimes. Other times 
there were ambivalent views and practices. On the whole, 
however, it is critical that he came to grips with these issues. 
As it led the people on the protracted and difficult journey of 
exploring ways to build socialism after seizing state power, the 
CPC must turn itself into an advanced social force, the 
representative of the interests of the vast majority of working 
people, and maintain intimate ties with them. It must burst with 
revolutionary willpower and spirit and be able to resist the 
corrosion by every manner of erroneous and corrupt thinking by 
relying on public supervision both inside and outside the party. 
Wasn't this a basic guarantee of the CPC looking for a way to 
combine Marxism with reality and leading society to move forward 
in the correct direction? From the tumultuous changes in the 
Soviet Union and its disintegration, we learn one lesson: 
Anti-communist forces of all shapes and stripes swept through 
the Soviet Union with full force. The CPSU and the regime it led 
collapsed instantly like a house of cards, demonstrating that 
the party had utterly lost the trust and support of the people, 
totally shorn of its prestige. It also shows that if ruling 
communist parties in socialist nations fail to correct their 
mistakes and stave off degeneration and peaceful evolution, they 
would be overthrown and their nations would change political 
color. Isn't this a profound lesson? Although what Mao Zedong 
proposed at the time seemed commonplace, therefore, we cannot 
but call them major breakthroughs in socialist construction. 
  As noted above, Mao Zedong's thought as to how to intensify 
party construction after it seized power indeed erred in many 
ways, something that was related to his skewed interpretation of 
socialism. Briefly it can be summed up in two ways: First, as 
part of his utopian socialism and egalitarianism, Mao Zedong 
made many unrealistic demands on CPC members and cadres. For 
instance, he correctly opposed some party leaders acting as 
lords and masters and distancing themselves excessively from the 
ordinary people in material living. Yet because of his objection 
to the bourgeois right, he would not permit any status and 
material disparities derived from distribution according to 
work, which was pernicious and totally divorced from reality. He 
called on all cadres, again rightly, to participate in labor. 
During the Great Leap Forward, however, particularly during the 
Cultural Revolution, he demanded that all party members and 
cadres at all levels "learn from the workers," "learn from the 
peasants," and "learn from the soldiers" alongside the masses, 
"criticize the bourgeoisie," and carry out the so-called 7 May 
Directive of 1966, which too was pernicious and removed from 
reality. As a result of these utopian socialist demands, party 
construction in reality had lost all objective criteria. True 
CPC members and cadres were at a loss as to what to do, whereas 
sycophants, opportunists, swindlers, and hypocrites were able to 
advance rapidly, which did enormous harm to the party's image 
and credibility. Second, even more serious, he misapplied the 
concept of the expansion of class struggle not only to a 
socialist society, but also to the party itself. He not only 
regarded some unhealthy trends within the party as signs of 
class struggle, but he also considered many correct ideas, 
policies, and practices within the party as wrong, revisionist, 
and bourgeois, and opposed them vehemently on those grounds, 
citing them as evidence that there was class struggle within the 
party. Worse, he considered the differences of opinion inside 
the party over various specifics in socialist construction, 
primarily the differences in thinking between himself and other 
leaders, as the struggle between the two lines, between the two 
classes. Not only did this confuse right with wrong and blur the 
direction and objectives of party construction, but it also 
gradually led to the Cultural Revolution, which severely 
depleted the party's ranks and undermined its leadership, a 
major tragedy in the history of socialist construction in China 
as well as the history of the party. 
  At a deeper level, there were even more important reasons 
why 
Mao Zedong, having proceeded from a correct premise (preserving 
the party's advanced nature after it became the ruling party), 
went on to draw the wrong conclusions in many ways (demands 
smacking of utopian egalitarianism and the expansion of class 
struggle). It is that he and other top leaders at the time were 
deeply colored by past experiences and traditions. Having done 
no in-depth studies on certain fundamental issues relating to 
party construction at a time when the party wielded state power 
and presided over construction, they could not offer a proper 
solution. 
  The first issue had to do with the party's social and class 
nature. The party was the vanguard of the proletariat; as such, 
it was capable of leading the Chinese revolution and 
construction. In terms of its social composition, the party 
should include a mix of people from the working class and 
advanced elements from the laboring class, primarily advanced 
elements from the workers, advanced elements from the 
proletarian intelligentsia, and advanced elements from the 
collective peasants. These advanced elements must establish 
close ties with the rank-and-file workers, peasants, and 
intellectuals. They should be able to reflect and represent 
their interests and aspirations and should lead and unite them 
to fight for the realization of their interests and aspirations. 
The important thing was that the term "advanced elements" must 
be rethought and redefined in the period of construction 
vis-a-vis the revolutionary years. In the past, advanced 
elements usually refered to people at the very bottom of a 
society where classes were polarized. The subjects of class 
oppression and national oppression, these people realized that 
only by organizing themselves to overthrow such oppression and 
abolishing the social system of exploitation of man by man could 
achieve personal liberation and class liberation. Hence their 
firm commitment to revolutionary struggle. Under the new set of 
circumstances, that is, after the CPC led the people in seizing 
political power and abolishing the exploitation system and began 
socialist construction, "advanced elements" were people who had 
a sober understanding and a correct approach to the class 
struggle that remained to a limited extent. Even more important, 
advanced elements were the active participants in economic, 
political, and cultural construction. They felt urgently about 
changing China's backward and impoverished look and ending their 
poverty and that of the masses around them and through their own 
efforts were able to lead the masses to achieve wealth and 
civilization. Here arises an issue that represented a departure 
from the past. As advanced elements among the masses, and after 
mastering some skills, acquiring a measure of power, and 
obtaining a certain social position and economic interests, how 
should CPC members handle their relations with the lasses around 
them and preserve their advanced nature? In other words, how 
could they continue to appear as ordinary workers, serve the 
people wholeheartedly, genuinely maintain flesh-and-blood ties 
with the people, think what the people think and be eager to 
meet their needs so that they would not become a privileged 
group, a bunch of bureaucrats seriously divorced from and high 
above the masses? Whether or not this problem was handled 
properly had a significant impact on party construction. In a 
socialist society, particularly during its underdeveloped stage, 
there should be differences between one individual and the next 
in social status, especially economic earnings, because of 
variations in nature and nurture. Even in the Mao Zedong era, we 
still affirmed the principle of distribution according to work 
and the principle of the exchange of equal values. On the other 
hand, socialism is basically opposed to people using their 
superior political and economic circumstances to encroach upon 
others' wealth and restoring the social system of the 
exploitation of man by man. Advanced elements from among the 
workers, peasants, and intellectuals therefore should be able to 
mesh their own interests closely with collective and national 
interests. Mao Zedong's limitation was that theoretically he 
could not bring himself to admit the differences in status and 
distribution between CPC members, particularly the party's 
leading cadres at all levels, on the one hand, and the masses 
around them, on the other, even though in reality he had no 
choice but to allow such difference. He constantly called on 
people at the lowest strata of society, the poorest people, and 
the least educated people to rise up and oppose those who had 
obtained secured some social status, knowledge, and wealth, 
calling this sweepingly "class struggle" and "revolutionary 
rebellion" regardless of how the differences came about. The 
most typical examples were the "four clean-up movement" and the 
Cultural Revolution. What Mao Zedong did not only blurred the 
standards for advanced elements but also undermined the forces 
for social development. Subjectively speaking, of course, Mao 
Zedong was well-intentioned in what he sought to do. What 
worried him most was that some people in the party, especially 
leading cadres at all levels, would, after acquiring a measure 
of power, standing, and wealth, seek to aggrandize their power 
and wealth unscrupulously, taking up a position diametrically 
opposed to that of the masses and degenerate, instead of leading 
the masses to achieve common wealth. This kind of people must be 
resisted. But at the time the wrong methods were used to resist 
them. Besides, in general these people were few and few between 
in the party, so the struggle against them should not have been 
a broad-based one. Ironically today the ranks of these people in 
the party have indeed swollen, something we should be on guard 
against. How to combat corruption and resist the degeneration of 
these people has truly become one of the priorities today. In 
short, we must study Mao Zedong's contributions and lessons in 
light of the reality nowadays, clearly define the CPC's advanced 
nature, make it clear that as advanced elements of workers, 
peasants, and intellectuals, CPC members must be people who can, 
on the one hand, effectively lead the masses in obtaining 
practical results in economic, scientific, and cultural 
development, and, on the other, correctly harmonize personal 
interests with collective interests and national interests. The 
CPC is opposed to egalitarianism, but it is also opposed to 
degeneration and bipolarization. Only then can our party develop 
a solid social base and put itself in an invincible position. 
  Second, about democratic life and democratic institutions 
within the party. At a time when it was exercising state power 
and presiding over construction, practicing democracy would have 
been the most fundamental way to preserve the party's advanced 
nature and continuously rid it of corrupt elements and 
phenomena. To begin with, develop democratic life within the 
party and perfect the intra-party democratic system. This was 
actually Mao Zedong's recipe. In 1945, democratic figures like 
Huang Peiyan [7806 3508 1014] went to Yanan on an inspection 
tour. He saw unity between soldiers and civilians in the CPC-led 
liberated area. Everybody from top to bottom was joined in a 
common struggle. The place was bursting with vitality and 
flourishing, in sharp contrast to the corruption-plagued 
KMT-ruled areas. He was deeply moved. He said to Mao Zedong at 
the time, "Be they a person, a family, an organization, a 
locality, or a nation, they all rise rapidly and fall just as 
rapidly. Things tend to go in cycles. Nobody has broken this 
cycle. How is the CPC going to escape from this cycle in the 
future?" Mao Zedong replied, "We have found the solution, 
namely, democracy." 
  After the PRC was founded, particularly after socialist 
construction went under way in 1956, Mao Zedong and the 
leadership core at the time did take intra-party democracy 
seriously, especially after a mountain of facts came to light at 
the 20th CPSU Congress about Stalin's personality cult and his 
destruction of democracy. Before and after the Eighth CPC 
National Congress, Mao Zedong went out of his way to stress 
intra-party democratic construction and made some efforts. By 
and large, however, intra-party democratic construction did not 
receive full guarantee; on the contrary, it was increasingly 
disrupted and weakened. First, there was no sound democratic 
life. On situations, policies, and similar topics, you could 
usually still freely discuss, criticize, and self-criticize 
within the party. But when it came to major topics, however, Mao 
Zedong often silenced others first by flexing his muscle, that 
is, labelling those who disagreed with him as "left," "right," 
or "bourgeoisie." This put the party under some kind of 
pressure, preventing the free and honest discussion of both 
theoretical and practical issues. Over time, this 
one-man-alone-has-the-say situation came to replace what a 
proletarian political party should have: a lively interesting 
political scene of free discussion that aimed to seek out the 
truth. Wasn't that precisely what happened in the "anti-advance" 
movement in early 1958; the "anti-fence sitters" and 
"anti-conservative" campaigns during the Great Leap Forward; the 
full-fledged anti-rightist movement launched after the Lushan 
conference of 1959; the movements against bourgeois reactionary 
line, royalists, and later, restorationists, and a right 
deviationist verdict-reversal trend, all of which happened in 
the Cultural Revolution? Second, there was no institutional 
construction. Democracy is, first and foremost, a set of 
institutions. The fundamental tenet of the party's democratic 
centralism was the minority subordinating itself to the 
majority. It means centralism based on democracy. Other 
principles derived therefrom were the individual subordinating 
itself to the organization, the lower level subordinating itself 
to the higher level, the party subordinating itself to the CPC 
Central Committee, and democracy guided by centralism. 
Principles need to be translated into detailed rules and 
regulations. By regulations, we mean regulations that have a 
universal binding force. For instance, at all party meetings a 
member may express his opinions fully on the party's theoretical 
and policy issues. Motivated by a desire for unity, a party 
member or a lower level may offer all sorts of well-meaning 
criticisms to leaders at all levels. Important policy matters 
are discussed and debated at a conference with a specific set of 
terms of reference. The party's policy must be decided by vote 
in strict accordance with the principle of the minority 
subordinating itself to the majority. Provided they comply with 
the party's resolutions in action, the minority may keep its own 
different opinion. The leaders of party committees at all levels 
are to be elected on a fully democratic basis. Not only are 
detailed regulations necessary, but so were operating procedures 
and methods of supervision and restraint. Once a regulation is 
made, it cannot be violated by anybody. Regrettably Mao Zedong 
and some comrades in our party often looked upon democracy as a 
mere tool, a certain work style. Mao Zedong repeatedly called on 
leaders at all levels to listen to the opinions of the masses 
inside and outside the party, to draw on collective wisdom and 
absorb all useful ideas, and to make the right decisions after 
collecting the masses' opinions. Further, he again and again 
called on them to submit themselves to criticism and supervision 
by people inside and outside the party and overcome 
bureaucratism and other unhealthy trends. But while he often 
publicized and advocated these attributes and practices, he 
seldom made an effort to set up a coherent democratic system 
within the party complete with mechanisms for the effective 
supervision of power. The party constitution and other 
regulations were often too rigid and inoperable as they were 
written and were not strictly enforced after being drawn up. In 
particular, party leaders were the first to break the rules. The 
consequences were disastrous: democracy was damaged and so was 
the force most essential to a proletarian political party: the 
necessary centralization and discipline. During the Cultural 
Revolution, on the one hand, personal arbitrariness, which was 
anti-democratic, reached a peak. On the other hand, anarchism, 
which goes against centralization and unity, also hit an apex. 
This was epitomized by the unprecedented destruction done to 
democratic centralism. 
  Intra-party democracy is the foundation of socialist 
democracy. Practicing democracy inside the party is totally 
consistent with and complements practicing democracy among the 
people. Whether or not we can implement and continuously perfect 
democratic centralism will not only impact party construction, 
but will also decide whether or not there will be a normal 
political life in the nation, whether or not the socialist 
enterprise would develop smoothly. China is fairly backward 
economically and culturally, with a long feudal history behind 
it but no democratic tradition. The creation of socialist 
democratic institutions is a difficult task, a long drawn-out 
historical process. But the CPC, comprising advanced elements 
from the workers, peasants, and intellectuals, is a more 
conscious group. Leading cadres at all levels have a relatively 
high scientific and cultural standard and considerable work 
experience. Thus we can say the CPC is both equipped and 
duty-bound to make rapid progress in the development of 
democracy and democratic institutions, which should serve as the 
engine of the development of socialist democracy as a whole. Mao 
Zedong's failure to tackle this after the PRC was founded must 
be described as a gigantic error that led to a string of other 
mistakes. 
  As a great historical figure, Mao Zedong represents a 
meaningful stage in the development of socialism in China. With 
Marxist theoretical courage, he made bold departures from the 
problem-beset model of socialism fashioned by Stalin. This 
article is a preliminary analysis of the road and model of 
socialist construction, socialist political and social 
development, socialist scientific and cultural development, the 
preservation of socialist leading forces, namely the class 
nature and revolutionary purity of the CPC. The overall sense is 
that while Mao Zedong's breakthroughs and explorations in these 
areas were varied and deep, his tragic failures here also teach 
us an important lesson. In short, both his glorious 
breakthroughs and tragedies bequeath to posterity a precious 
legacy. 
  The best way for a CPC member to commemorate Mao Zedong's 
100th birthday should be to study and learn from Mao Zedong's 
legacy in earnest in order to improve and strengthen our 
socialist construction enterprise. 

