BFN 

<F P=106> [By Milagros Duran] </F>
  [Text] Deputy Julio Montoya (MAS) [Movement Toward 
Socialism], vice president of the Drug Committee, said Congress 
must reach a consensus on the drug trafficking and money 
laundering problem, because Venezuela cannot continue to sit 
back and do nothing while the drug cartels carry out their 
assaults both abroad and at home. 
  Montoya warned yesterday of plans by the agents of drug 
traffickers to free members of the Grecian-Latin Connection 
whose cases are being handled by a judge in Sucre State. 
  Montoya also spoke about drug trafficking operations in 
various parts of the world such as Operation Polar, which is 
related to drug trafficking, and Operation Rainbow, which is 
related to money laundering. 
  He said that according to a Disip [Directorate of 
Intelligence and Prevention Services] report, more than 300 tons 
of cocaine will leave the country's ports and airports in the 
coming days, thus our authorities must be on alert. 
  Deputies Julio Montoya and Julio Elias Mayaudon (National 
Convergence) announced their support for Judge Mildred Camero 
[not further identified]. 
  Montoya also commented on a ruling by Luis Contreras Pernia, 
judge of the Third Superior Court of Tachira, to release certain 
people allegedly linked to drug trafficking. 
  "This is a narco-loving judge. According to information 
available to us, he has a history of ruling in favor of drug 
traffickers." 
  Legislators will vote today on the proposals made by various 
political blocs during this week's debates in the Chamber of 
Deputies on drug trafficking and money laundering. 
  The numerous proposals range from the most controversial 
one, 
presented by Deputy Lindolfo Contreras, to legalize drugs in 
Venezuela to others presented by Deputy Luis Emilio Rondon, 
president of the Committee against Improper Drug Use, which 
include the creation of a narcotics police force and a permanent 
chair on basic, intermediate, and diversified education with 
emphasis on the struggle against this scourge and on preventive 
measures. 
  During the debates, most legislators referred to the case of 
Tachira Judge Luis Contreras Pernia as a "blow dealt by drug 
traffickers" to which the authorities and the entire country 
must respond. 
  Another much debated issue is drug legalization, which has 
its supporters and opponents. Most legislators think that other 
actions to stop drug trafficking in general must be considered 
before drug consumption is legalized in Venezuela. 

