Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installment No 60-63 of the serialized memoirs of Xu Jiatun </F>
(6079 1367 1470): "Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
<H5>  [3 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Joint Rescue of the Stock Market -- Finance 
Department Head Zhai Kecheng Asks for Joint Rescue of Stock 
Disaster 
I telegrammed our conclusions to the Chinese Communist Party 
Central Committee and to the State Council, asking for approval. 
  The next day, the Chairman of Hui Feng asked to see me at 
the 
XINHUA SHE Branch. When we met, he brought up the same request. 
I responded that, in principle, it could be considered and that 
I had already telegrammed Beijing to ask for guidance. That 
afternoon or the next day I would be able to tell him the 
results. I also mentioned to him, "It would not be quite fair 
for Hui Feng and the Bank of China to put up 500 million each. 
You should put up a bit more." Pu Weishi indicated his gratitude 
for the cooperation of the Bank of China and said that the 
amount put up by each could be negotiated. At the same time, the 
Foreign Affairs Office of the XINHUA SHE Branch received the 
same request from the Political Department of the Hong Kong 
government. Finance Department Director Zhai Kecheng also asked 
someone to convey the same request to me. (Hong Kong British 
government officials had never done this before.) I conveyed the 
same message to him that I had given to Pu Weishi and asked him 
to give it consideration. 
  After dinner every night, I waited for a response from 
Beijing and, at the same time, asked some experts to give me 
lessons in the stock market. I wanted to study the stock market 
situation and also to research the participation of Chinese 
capital in the stock exchange. My preliminary understanding was 
that, apart from "Guangda" (which was operated by Wang Guangying 
and reported directly to the State Council), there was little 
participation. It was not clear how much XINHUA SHE's "Shin 
Long," a "periodic indicator," had lost, but the figure was not 
large. At that time, the regular meeting of the National 
People's Congress Standing Committee was beginning and I had 
been contacted to attend. Because of the stock market rescue, I 
had sent a telegram to the Standing Committee of the National 
People's Congress asking for leave to stay in Hong Kong and join 
the Hong Kong British government's "rescue of the market." 
  On the third day, Jiang Wengui of the Bank of China called 
me 
several times to say that Hui Feng was anxious to get a 
response. Pu Weishi also called me once directly to ask the same 
thing. They were clearly anxious. At about three o'clock in the 
morning, Zhai Kecheng sent someone to find me and ask for the 
results (during those few days, I never slept until the early 
morning hours). I immediately placed a direct call to Zhao 
Ziyang. I assumed he would be sleeping. When the call went 
through, my first words were, "I must have awakened you." I 
would not have guessed that the response would be "it's nothing, 
we are having a meeting." I told him about the "joint rescue of 
the market" and that the Hong Kong government was extremely 
anxious. I asked him to give a response as soon as possible. 
Zhao Ziyang said "We are discussing it now. I'll ask Comrade 
Jingfu to tell you about it." Zhang Jingfu, Secretary-General of 
the Central Economic Leading Group, then asked me about my 
situation over the phone and gave me this response, "We agree 
with your suggestion to support the Hong Kong British government 
and participate in the rescue of the market. They must agree to 
three conditions: The first is that the main burden must be 
carried by the Hong Kong British government. The second is that 
our burden must not be as much as Hui Feng's. If they put up 500 
million, we will put up a little less. The Central Committee has 
agreed to allow the Bank of China to put up 300 million. The 
third is that the Hong Kong British government must guarantee 
that they will be responsible for any losses incurred by the 
Bank of China." I immediately told Jiang Wengui and asked him to 
inform our counterparts. During this period, the Bank of China 
Group also issued a talk on supporting the stock market to 
reassure people. 
  Afterwards, some people told me that Hui Feng not only did 
not lose money during the stock market disaster but actually 
reaped great profits through the "market rescue." A certain Hong 
Kong tycoon also made a huge profit. Some people thought that 
the Chinese Government and the NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY had done a 
"foolish" thing. Some colleagues in the economic leading group 
in the News Agency felt the same way. I explained that we should 
not just look at this in economic terms but consider it mainly 
from a political perspective. Our support for the Hong Kong 
British government and cooperation with them let Hong Kong and 
the international scene know that we support the stipulation of 
the Joint Communique -during the 12 years remaining of British 
control of Hong Kong, China will cooperate and coordinate with 
Britain. How can this be "foolish?" Wang Guangying's stock 
transactions were approved by the State Council as a "trial." He 
did not admit to any losses and we had no way of verifying this. 
"Shin Long" as a "periodic indicator" lost over 10 million Hong 
Kong dollars. The other companies with Chinese funding had not 
yet been allowed to participate in the stock market and did not 
not lose much. This stock market disaster increased their 
understanding of the stock market to a certain degree. 
  3. Tearing Down and Moving the Walled City of Kowloon: 
Sending Qiao Zonghuai To Participate in the Organization of a 
Joint Team 
In 1986, the British Government directly informed the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of their intent to demolish Kowloon's Walled 
City and move out its residents. Qiao Zonghuai brought back this 
news and added that the Hong Kong and Macao Office and the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs leaned toward agreement but wanted 
the views of the Working Committee. 
  The Walled City of Kowloon was still Chinese territory in 
name but, in fact, China could not control it. The British also 
could not control it, due the restrictions of the treaties. 
Furthermore, the China U.K. Joint Communique had already 
confirmed that Britain would return Hong Kong to China in 1997. 
What motivation could the British Government have for 
demolishing the Walled City now and turning it into a park? 
That was worth careful consideration. The strongest possibility 
was that Britain wanted to do more good works to leave a good 
impression on the people of Hong Kong. 
  I went to the Walled City and learned that many residents 
there made their living on the special characteristics of the 
Walled City. For example, unlicensed dentists, many of whom were 
not at all itinerant charlatans but medical practitioners from 
the mainland, with relatively long academic training and good 
standing in the medical community in the mainland. They had come 
to Hong Kong for various reasons but could not practice medicine 
in Hong Kong due to the restrictions of Hong Kong law. Thus, 
they were forced to practice in the Walled City to make a 
living. What would happen to their livelihood when the Walled 
City was demolished? 
  At first, I did not approve of demolishing and moving the 
Walled City at that time. I especially did not agree with the 
reason given by some people in the Hong Kong and Macao Office 
that "it will be trouble in the future anyway, why not let the 
British deal with it and let the British Government pay for it." 
How can a responsible government worry about being troubled on 
behalf of its citizens? Doesn't the Hong Kong British government 
get its funding from taxes paid by Hong Kong residents? Doesn't 
it use the money of our Hong Kong compatriots? 
  Many colleagues at the News Agency Branch, including Qiao 
Zonghuai, approved of demolishing and moving the Walled City. I 
sent him to ask for the views of the local residents' welfare 
promotion society. Their response was that they could accept 
being moved if certain conditions were met. Thus, I agreed with 
the suggestion to demolish and move the Walled City under 
certain conditions. The two firm stipulations were: First, the 
Hong Kong government would have to take responsibility for 
living arrangements for residents removed from the Walled City 
and provide conditions for their livelihood, with better housing 
after the move than their current residences. Unlicensed 
dentists must be given a means to continue their practices or 
assistance in changing professions. Second, some members of the 
residents' self-governance organizations must be allowed to 
participate in the Hong Kong government's group which is 
organizing the demolition and removal and their opinions must be 
respected. 
  Qiao Zonghuai informed Beijing and they agreed. Qiao 
Zonghuai 
was also in touch with the relevant people in the Hong Kong 
British government and communicated with them on behalf of the 
Hong Kong and Macao Office, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and 
the NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY branch. Later we designated him to 
participate in the China-U.K. Joint Work Team organizing the 
demolition and move, but this was not made public. [End of 
Installment No. 60] 
<H5>  [4 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Solving the Ka Wah Bank Crisis Hong Kong 
British Government Agrees To Use Foreign Exchange Fund to 
Guarantee Bad Loans; CITIC gets Approval To Take Control, Jin 
Deqin becomes Chairman of the Board 
  In 1985, a crisis occurred at Ka Wah Bank, for reasons 
similar to those which had caused crises in a series of ethnic 
Chinese-owned middle and small sized banks since 1983. In 
addition to the effects of the sluggish economy in Hong Kong 
since 1982, many of these banks were family-owned, with 
inappropriate internal management and illegal loans, including 
too many bad loans. 
  Ka Wah Bank was a family bank owned by the Chen family. When 
the crisis occured, they went to the Hong Kong Macao Management 
Office of the Bank of China and to the China Travel Agency of 
Hong Kong hoping that Chinese funds could be used to invest in 
their stock and help them overcome the crisis. 
  At that time, the China Travel Agency had obtained the 
approval of the Overseas Chinese Committee (the State Committee 
for Overseas Chinese Affairs, the director of which at that time 
was Liao Hui) to work with a Malaysian businessman and 
considered investing in Ka Wah Bank stock. Perhaps because the 
bank was already having difficulty maintaining, the Hong Kong 
British government could not allow any further delay which could 
cause a total banking crisis. Therefore, the Hong Kong Office 
for Oversight of the Banking Industry sought out Jiang Wengui of 
the Hong Kong and Macao Management Office of the Bank of China 
to ask for China's assistance in solving the problems of Ka Wah 
Bank. 
  When Hang Lung Bank, Overseas Investment Trust Bank, Union 
Bank, and other banks had experienced crises in the past, the 
Hong Kong British government had handled the problem, to avoid 
disrupting the order of the whole finance market, maintain Hong 
Kong's position as a finance center and guarantee interest on 
deposits. In the case of Hang Lung Bank, for example, the Hong 
Kong British government enacted a new law and mobilized 
government foreign exchange reserve funds to take it over as a 
government bank. 
  The Hong Kong Management Office of the Bank of China brought 
the question to the Working Committee's Economic Leading Group 
to discuss. I was the leader of the Group. We discussed three 
different aspects of the issue. 
  One - After the two countries signed the China 
U.K. Joint Communique, the relationship between China and 
Britain had developed well. If the Hong Kong British government 
was now having difficulty handling the Hong Kong finance market, 
we should cooperate with them. We guessed that the reason they 
were now asking for China's assistance may have been related to 
the Hong Kong public reaction and criticism from all circles 
they had received the previous times when they had come to the 
rescue by directly using foreign exchange funds. 
  Two - According to the preliminary understanding 
of a Bank of China representative sent to examine Ka Wah Bank's 
books, Ka Wah had made a large number of bad loans. Many of 
these were made in the name of another holding company belonging 
to the family which did not have the means to repay the loans. 
This was a violation of Hong Kong's banking laws. Furthermore, 
many of the bank's high ranking officers were family members who 
did not concern themselves with the bank's losses or profits but 
still drew high salaries. 
  Therefore, the Bank of China Hong Kong Office had two views 
on whether to acquire stock in Ka Wah. One view was opposed to 
assisting Ka Wah, due to its poor management and bad loans. The 
other view was that, from a political perspective, we could 
consider helping, if the Hong Kong government were willing to 
take care of the bad loans. 
  Three - On the question of funding from China - 
the Overseas Chinese Committee had already agreed that the Hong 
Kong China Travel Agency could work with an overseas Chinese 
businessman to buy stock, but China International Trust and 
Investment Corporation [CITIC] was also interested in being a 
sole invester in the stock. If we agreed to provide assistance 
and cooperate with the British, who would provide the funding 
from China? Would we purchase stock or receive it? We needed to 
make a policy decision. 
  Apart from the third aspect, the group decided that we 
should 
agree to the British request, but we should ask them to 
guarantee the bad loans. We reported this simultaneously to the 
Central Committee, the State Council, and the People's Bank of 
China to ask for approval. We also asked Beijing to determine 
who would contribute the funds from China. 
  I immediately went to Shenzhen and telephoned my report to 
Zhang Jingfu, asking him to give us a reply as quickly as 
possible. The Central Overseas Chinese Committee and CITIC both 
showed a great deal of interest in Ka Wah. The Central Overseas 
Chinese Committee wanted the Hong Kong China Travel Agency to go 
to Chen Daming (who was responsible for the work of the Hong 
Kong and Macao Overseas Chinese Committee) and ask for his 
support in participating in the stock or taking over control. 
CITIC Chairman of the Board Rong Yiren had his Vice Chairman 
Tang Kewei seek out my views. I indicated that in principle we 
had no objections, as long as the State Council and the relevant 
ministries agreed. But the Central Overseas Chinese Committee 
had the same idea, and they had already had contact with Ka Wah 
before CITIC did. Therefore, we asked all parties to look to 
Beijing to decide who would paricipate in the stock and who 
would take control. 
  The final result was that the Hong Kong British government 
agreed to use foreign exchange funds to provide guarantees and 
to take responsibility for the bank's bad loans. The State 
Council gave approval for Rong Yiren's CITIC to take control and 
sent former Bank of China Chairman of the Board Jin Deqin to 
serve as Ka Wah's Chairman of the Board and General Manager. 
After one year of rectification, the Bank was finally 
straightened out. [End of Installment No. 61] 
<H5>  [5 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Temporary Cooperation--The Storm over the 
Daya Bay Nuclear Plant: At Li Peng's Request, I Encourage 
Kadoorie to Sign Agreement; Deng Xiaoping Instruction to 
"Resist" the Anti-Nuclear Tide 
  [Text] The Daya Bay nuclear power plant project was 
initiated by the Hong Kong China Power and Light Company long 
ago. Later, the Hong Kong British government, with the agreement 
of the Chinese Government, also decided to participate in the 
establishment of a nuclear power plant at Daya Bay. At the end 
of April 1986, the nuclear power plant accidents at Chernobl in 
the Soviet Union and at Three Mile Island in the United States 
caused the residents of Hong Kong to fear for their future 
safety and inspired an unprecedented extent of anti-nuclear 
activities among the citizens of Hong Kong. 
  The nuclear reactor for this nuclear plant was built by a 
French manufacturer, and the power generating equipment was 
built by a British manufacturer. The joint venture between a 
company set up by the Chinese Ministry of Water Resources and 
Electric Power and the China Power and Light Company, led by 
Hong Kong British industrialist Kadoorie, received support from 
both governments. The "Daya Bay Nuclear" Agreement signed by 
both sides in March 1986, seven years from the inception of the 
project, received a positive reaction from society. The view was 
that the plant would help maintain the confidence of Hong Kong 
and foreign businessmen in investment in China. During the final 
phase of negotiations between the two parties there was a period 
when they bargained and disputed but could not reach agreement 
over a few "conditions." At that time Li Peng was the Vice 
Premier charged with the oversight of water resources and energy 
affairs. He invited me to come to the Shenzhen Hotel where he 
asked me to act as an intermediary with Kadoorie. He was 
extremely polite to me, constantly addressing me as "Bureau 
Chief." He explained the situation to me and asked me to speak 
with Kadoorie. I was to transmit Li Peng's position that if 
agreement could not be reached, China would disband the project. 
(Exactly which issues were at an impasse, I did not know.) In 
the end, when he escorted me to the door of the hotel, he smiled 
and said, "Sorry to trouble the `Bureau Chief' for his help." 
  After I returned to Hong Kong, I invited Kadoorie to a meal 
at the "Meixin" restaurant in the World Trade Center Building. I 
conveyed Li Peng's view to him very indirectly, without bringing 
up the word "disband." I told him that Vice Premier Li hoped for 
cooperation and that Hong Kong already understood the bottom 
line of the relevant ministries on the disputed areas. I said 
that Hong Kong already knew that Li would not change his mind 
and that we hoped to come to agreement and not have to terminate 
the discussions. Kadoorie did not demur. It appeared that he 
understood. The old man may have been suffering from Parkinson's 
disease. His hands shook so badly that it was difficult for him 
to feed himself, so I assisted him repeatedly. Not long 
afterwards, the parties signed an agreement. 
  The Daya Bay nuclear power plant is located 50 kilometres 
from Hong Kong, upwind from Hong Kong. In the beginning, some 
environmental groups opposed it. Then some pressure groups 
joined in. Finally, in late April the anti-nuclear movement 
developed great momentum and, with reputedly one million 
signatures, sent representatives to carry these signatures to 
Beijing to petition the State Council to either cancel 
construction or move the Daya Bay nuclear power plant. 
  The anti-nuclear movement was growing daily. The slogan most 
appealing to the people of Hong Kong was, when it comes to 
safety, "don't be afraid of most cases, just be afraid of what 
if." This was an irrational but emotionallly appealing notion 
which was very difficult to counteract. At the same time, it 
also indicated a lack of confidence in China's management 
ability. 
  I made a special trip to Beijing to see Zhao Ziyang and ask 
him "Could we consider moving the nuclear power plant to another 
site further away from Hong Kong?" 
  When Hua Guofeng was in charge, I was working in Jiangsu. I 
had obtained permission from the Central Committee to construct 
China's first nuclear power plant at Changshan in Jiangyin 
County. The generating power was to be 900,000 kilowatts. We 
also set up a nuclear power research institute in Suzhou to do 
preparation work. Thus, the Ministry of Water Resources and 
Electric Power decided to move its planned project for a 
Ministry-designed 300,000 kilowatt nuclear power plant in 
Jiangsu to Qinshan in Zhejiang in order to concentrate all 
resources on a major nuclear power plant. Later, the movement to 
oppose "premature advances" forced the "dismount" of the 
Changshan nuclear power plant project. At the beginning of 
opening up and reform, Guangdong Province grabbed the 
opportunity and moved this "dismounted" project to Daya Bay to 
"remount" it. 
  I joked with Zhao Ziyang, "If the nuclear power plant were 
still in Jiangsu, we wouldn't have this problem!" Zhao Ziyang 
responded "This issue has already been considered. Either it 
stays where it is or it is moved elsewhere. Comrade Xiaoping has 
aleady inquired into this matter, so we must follow his 
opinion." Zhao told me to wait a few days. 
  The next day Zhao Ziyang called me to his office and told 
me, 
"Comrade Xiaoping's view is that we must hold firm and not 
change our original plans. Comrade Xiaoping's meaning is that if 
China cannot hold firm now it will be even more difficult to 
hold firm if the Hong Kong government runs into trouble later." 
  The Central Committee had decided. After I returned to Hong 
Kong, I could strive for the assistance of the Hong Kong British 
government in making every effort to work on the Hong Kong 
people. 
  The Working Committee considered two points on this "nuclear 
panic" and "nuclear demonstrations" movement." There must be an 
appropriate response to "pressure." We must strive for the 
support of the Hong Kong people and quell the disturbances. 
First we must work for the cooperation of the Hong Kong British 
government in solving this problem, because the nuclear power 
plant is a cooperative project between China and Britain. 
  The Hong Kong British government was very cooperative. They 
sent a delegation of Executive Council and Legislative Council 
members to France, the United States, and Japan to gather 
information, and the delegation concluded that safety could be 
guaranteed. In November of the same year, Finance Department 
Director Zhai Kecheng issued a public report saying that the 
approved agreements to purchase power from the nuclear power 
plant and to allow Hong Kong China Power and Light Company to 
participate in the nuclear power plant plan could not be 
arbitrarily abandoned without greatly affecting the credibilty 
and foreign relations of Hong Kong. 
  China and Britain both set up nongovernmental organizations 
to enhance the citizens' understanding of the nuclear power 
plant. The Nuclear Safety Advisory Council was also established 
at that time and is still operating. We sent the News Agency 
Deputy Chen Daming to liaison with the Ministry of Water 
Resources and Electric Power and the Daya Bay nuclear power 
plant planning office. With the assistance of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, we published a research report on the 
technical safety of the nuclear plant. The conclusions were 
consistent: the French style reactor is safe and different from 
the one used in the Soviet Union. We also organized a group of 
specialists from the mainland to present a nuclear technology 
fair in Hong Kong and took people from Hong Kong to visit the 
Daya Baya construction site. Nuclear power experts from China 
and natural science professors from several universities in Hong 
Kong published articles in the mass media on the world progress 
in nuclear power technology, the effects of leaked radiation on 
the human body, etc. 
  The Hong Kong government provided close cooperation on all 
of 
these efforts. Although many people in Hong Kong still object to 
the plant, the intense "anti-nuclear power plant" wave gradually 
subsided. [End of Installment No. 62] 
<H5>  [6 July 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] The Storm at Beidaihe (1) Sudden Attack 
NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY Branch Elevated; Conflicts Arise 
between Hong Kong Macao-Working Committee and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs; Ji Pengfei Wants Self-Criticism of Hong Kong 
Macao Working Committee at Beidaihe 
  [Text] In the summer of 1986, the Chinese Communist Party 
Central Committee office called me to Beijing for a meeting. 
When I arrived in Beijing, the person who met me from the office 
told me to go to Beidaihe where the authorities of the Central 
Committee were holding a meeting. Ji Pengfei had also gone there. 
  After I arrived at Beidaihe, I went to see Ji Pengfei. He 
did 
not say much but just told me to rest for a couple days. On the 
next day, he sent a secretary to deliver two batches of 
materials to me. These were drafts of two documents under 
preparation for transmission to the central committees of all 
the provinces and municipalities. One was on the work in Hong 
Kong and included a critique of the current work of the Hong 
Kong Macao Working Committee as well as regulations for 
personnel sent from all localities to Hong Kong and Macao. The 
second document was several principles which should be upheld by 
the Chinese side during the drafting of the Basic Law. After 
reading these documents, I could see that the first one was 
actually a criticism of our work in Hong Kong and was directed 
against me. The submission of a document for discussion by the 
Central Committee's Political Bureau, as a plan to use a formal 
document of the Central Committee to report my "errors" to all 
the provinces, municipalities, ministries and commissions of the 
entire country, without even discussing it with me first, was 
not a normal approach. I read the documents in the morning and 
called up Ji Pengfei at noon. I said, "I have read both 
documents and have no objection to the one on the `Basic Law' 
but I do object to the other document. Has this document been 
finalized? If not, and it is discussed at a meeting of the 
Central Committee, I intend to speak and raise my views on this 
document. I request your view on handling the matter this way." 
  Ji Pengfei indicated that he wished to consider this a 
while. 
That evening, he asked the secretary to inform me that he had 
discussed this with Secretariat Secretary Hu Qili and that, at 
the meeting the next day, the Central Committee would only 
discuss the document on the Basic Law. Conditions were not yet 
ripe for discussions of the other document and therefore it 
would not be discussed at this meeting. Thus, the matter was 
temporarily dropped. 
  As soon as I began working in Hong Kong, the Hong Kong Macao 
Working Committee was elevated to a central agency, the 
equivalent level of a Provincial government, under the direct 
supervision of the Central Committee. The Hong Kong Macao Office 
of the State Council and the Hong Kong Macao Working Committee 
became "brother organizations" at the same level. According to 
the organizational principles of the Chinese Communist Party, 
local party committees should accept guidance on work from 
central government ministries and commissions. The position of 
the Hong Kong Macao Working Committee within the party differed 
from that during Wang Kuang's era in that, at that time, Wang 
was supervised by Liao Chengzhi, who served as representative of 
the Central Committee, whereas we were supervised directly by 
the Central Committee. On everyday tasks, Wang Kuang could not 
submit reports or requests for guidance directly to the Central 
Committee, the State Council or any authority of the central 
government. After I assumed office, according to our 
organizational principles, the reports of the Hong Kong Macao 
Working Committee could be submitted to the Central Committee or 
the State Council. After receiving the document, the Secretary 
General, the Standing Committee Secretary, or Standing 
Vice-Premier, of the Central Committee or the State Council 
would then direct the document, with instructions to offer 
criticism or implement a task to the relevant ministries. During 
the first few months, I followed this procedure. Later I heard 
that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Hong Kong and Macao 
Office had reacted negatively to this. Therefore, I had all 
reports and guidance requests addressed to the Central Committee 
and the State Council readdressed to the "Central Committee, the 
State Council, cc: the Hong Kong and Macao Office." If the 
report concerned party issues only, then it would be addressed 
only to the Central Committee. If it concerned foreign affairs, 
it would be sent to the "State Council, cc: Hong Kong and Macao 
Office; Ministry of Foreign Affairs." At the same time, for 
issues of a purely business nature, or relating to a ministry, 
reports and guidance requests would not be submitted under the 
name of the Working Committee or the Hong Kong Branch Office but 
submitted directly by the relevant ministry to the Hong Kong and 
Macao Office or the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Hu Qili once 
said to me, "the document header does not need to include the 
Hong Kong and Macao Office, we will assign the document to the 
relevant ministry to handle." To smooth out relations, I 
continued to use the "courtesy copy" method. Ji Pengfei was a 
senior member within the party and my long-time superior. I had 
always respected him. When he assumed the Directorship of the 
Hong Kong Macao Office, at the request of the Central Committee, 
he took on the supervision of the work in Hong Kong and Macao 
and became my direct supervisor. When I needed to report to or 
request guidance from the Central Committee or the State 
Council, in addition to written reports, I always first made a 
verbal report to Ji Pengfei and followed his guidance. 
  During the past few years, there have been many changes in 
the assignment of cadres to the Hong Kong and Macao Working 
Committee and the authority to assign mainland cadres to work in 
the Hong Kong Branch of the NEW CHINA NEWS AGENCY. In fact, 
there was a change in the authority of the Hong Kong and Macao 
Office and they strongly resisted it. Based on our request, the 
Hong Kong and Macao Office relinquished the authority to assign 
working level personnel (technician level) and allowed the Hong 
Kong and Macao Working Committee to handle this matter. They 
were reluctant, however, to relinquish the authority to assign 
cadres. Later, the Central Organizational Bureau intervened and 
decided that Office level cadres would be selected and assigned 
by the Working Committee, with passport procedures handled by 
the Hong Kong and Macao Office and the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. This was later expanded to the Division level. Finally 
it was decided that cadres equivalent to the vice-minister level 
would also be nominated and chosen by the Working Committee, 
with approval from the Central Organizational Bureau. The 
organization procedures would be handled by the Central 
Organizational Bureau and the foreign affairs procedures would 
be handled by the Hong Kong and Macao Office and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. Of course, I would not venture to guess the 
mood of the Hong Kong and Macao Office after the authority was 
released to this latter degree. 
  From the chilly reception when I assumed office to the 
negative reception at the Shenzhen Meeting, from the debate 
stirred up by the Kowloon Walled City to the handling of the 
book storm, I gradually came to recognize that there were many 
conflicts between myself and the Hong Kong and Macao Office and 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on the understanding, specific 
work approach, and policies on Hong Kong. Furthermore, these 
conflicts were continuously growing. Although this "circular" 
type document was temporarily not to be submitted to the Central 
Committee for discussion, the matter was not really over. I had 
a premonition that before long there would be trouble. 

