Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of a letter sent by inhabitants of San Cristobal de </F>
las Casas to the three branches of the Mexican Federal 
Government and the Chiapas State Government, Peace Commissioner 
Manuel Camacho Solis, and Jorge Madrazo, president of the 
National Human Rights Commission; date not given] 
  [Text] We hereby inform you that on 7 March 1994 
approximately 2,000 inhabitants of the community of San 
Cristobal, duly accredited as representatives of various urban 
and rural area civic groups, met in San Cristobal de Las Casas. 
These groups include the Constitutional Municipal Council; 33 
community aid and participation councils; the National Chamber 
of Commerce; the Rotary Club; the Lions Club; the Junior Chamber 
of Commerce; hotel operator, restaurant owner, and travel agent 
associations; the Peasant Grassroots Committee representing 
20,000 Indian residents of 74 rural communities throughout the 
municipality; professional lawyers, doctors, dentists, and 
builders associations; the Municipal Parent Teacher Association; 
Territorial Movement grassroots social committees; members of 
the National Federation of Organizations and Citizens (FNOC) 
[Federacion Nacional de Organizaciones y Ciudadanos]; the 
Confederation of Mexican Workers (CTM); the Revolutionary 
Confederation of Workers and Peasants (CROC); the General 
Confederation of Workers (CTG); homemakers associations, and 
foundations. 
  During the meeting, the current situation in the San 
Cristobal District was examined in full detail, in light of the 
current events following the 1 January armed incursion and, in 
addition, the arrival of groups of peasants from other states 
and from communities within Chiapas. Said groups have violated 
the peace of our town with acts that range from demonstrations 
of disrespect for our dignity and our municipal integrity to 
outright acts of provocation and hostility and the commission of 
crimes against our property. Such crimes include damage to 
private property, looting, illegal occupation of public roads, 
illegal representation, accessory to crimes, illegal 
association, threatening schools, and other unlawful acts. The 
community has reported these acts to the appropriate authorities. 
  The entire population of San Cristobal de las Casas strongly 
condemns these events. Despite this, and to demonstrate our 
compliance with the principals of justice and democracy for the 
Indians -- one of the issues that inspired the movement -- we 
have been respectful toward the events related to the peace 
negotiations. In addition, we have patiently cooperated 
throughout the peace process regardless of the personal 
annoyance and economic harm said process entails. 
  However, we the Coletos, the true community of San Cristobal 
by birth or affinity -- despite the deceitful propaganda 
displayed by many members of the media -- say ENOUGH. 
Therefore, in an appeal to what is our last hope before 
emotions explode beyond control, with faith in our state of law, 
and with the prior approval and verification of the people, we 
hereby publicly DEMAND: 
  1. The immediate eviction of those occupying the 
Municipal Palace, Plaza 31 de Marzo, and Parque de los Arcos. 
  2. Immediate eviction of those who have invaded urban and 
suburban properties. 
  3. That the peace agreements be signed in another town. 
  4. Active participation of the Armed Forces in 
maintaining law and order throughout the community. 
  5. Full effect and application of the law. 
  6. Immediate deportation of those troublemaking 
foreigners who cannot prove their legal status in this 
municipality and in the country. 
  7. Impartial performance of the human rights commissions 
and nongovernmental organizations, in light of their evident 
tendency to favor criminals and offenders of the law. 
  8. Respect for our Municipal Urban Development Plan to 
administrate the use and adjudication of lands, implement 
ecological conservation areas, and ensure an orderly development 
process, without allowing any more irregular human settlements 
to develop. 
  9. Respect for municipal autonomy, thus allowing the true 
members of the San Cristobal community to participate in the 
decision making process that affects our town. We will not 
allow any person, group, or authority from outside our 
municipality to decide whether our municipal authorities, who 
were elected by the sovereign will of the people, should remain 
in place or not. 
  10. We request that Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia be 
transferred to a different dioceses once his job as mediator in 
the peace and reconciliation talks is over. The assembly of the 
San Cristobal community publicly charges him, along with his 
catechists, deacons, and priests -- all of whom preach 
liberation theology -- of being the mastermind of these 
movements. This demand must be sanctioned by the inhabitants of 
the other municipalities within the dioceses. 
  11. Temporarily closing all Catholic churches for public 
worship or any other use. To this end, the Government 
Secretariat and Social Development Secretariat must immediately 
take control of the buildings until the San Cristobal assembly 
decides differently, given that both religious worship and the 
use of the buildings have been distorted, mainly to defend 
crimes. The resident reaffirm that being devout does not 
require the work of priests at this time. 
  12. Strengthening neighborhood organizations to 
consolidate the organization of the people of San Cristobal. 
  13. The objectivity of the international, national, state, 
and municipal media, requesting they investigate and be aware 
who are the real San Cristobal residents because, so far, they 
have only heard the usurpers of our community and have distorted 
the real expression of our people. 
  14. Political organizations must be prohibited from using 
our municipality as a stage for their disputes and our city must 
not continue to be a ring where candidates to the presidency of 
the republic, the Nobel Peace Prize, and the Chiapas 
governorship are negotiated. Special note must be made of the 
public charge presented at the assembly against officials who 
helped create and finance the State Committee of Indian and 
Peasant Organizations, responsible for the seizure of our 
Municipal Palace. 
  15. Our vigorous protest must be presented to the Oaxaca 
Government and Elba Esther Gordillo, national leader of the 
Union of Education Workers, on the participation of Oaxaca 
citizens and union teachers in the seizure of land and the 
occupation of public buildings. 
  16. Peace and Reconciliation Commissioner Manuel Camacho 
Solis must demand the necessary impartiality from Bishop Samuel 
Ruiz Garcia in his position as mediator so that the interests of 
the Mexican community will be expressed freely and without 
pressures. It is obviously hoped that this objectivity will not 
produce revenge or reprisals, in the face of which the people of 
San Cristobal will remaine unified and dignified. 
  It must be clear that the people of San Cristobal are 
confident in the peace negotiation process. We support it and in 
no way will we permit that our just demands be used as a pretext 
or argument to hinder those talks. Moreover, we ask the peace 
and reconciliation commissioner that these no less legitimate 
demands, which also entail peace and justice, be included in the 
dialogues, even though this city is no longer the site of the 
talks. 
  We also express solidarity with the Indian people's demands 
for development and all the support mechanisms that the 
government and civilian society will establish for their 
benefit. Like them, we also demand honesty and sincerity as well 
as efficiency and productivity to lift them from their state of 
under development. We know the beneficiaries will assume their 
responsibilities as active participants in their development, 
with sufficient maturity so as to not need unofficial 
interlocutors. 
  In defense of these demands, the San Cristobal assembly 
unanimously decided to request the presence of the state 
governor as soon as possible so the previous charges can be 
confirmed by the civilian population, and so the San Cristobal 
assembly can become a permanent civic assembly through the 
Citizens Front for the Defense of San Cristobal Dignity, 
legitimately represented by the signatories. 
  Respectfully: 
  Jorge Mario Mescieur Talavera, constitutional municipal 
president; Sergio Alberto Pastrana Orega, municipal secretary; 
Ricardo Diaz Martinez, coordinator of the Civic Defense Group; 
Lucio Flores Lopez, representative of the Peasant Grassroots 
Committee (CNC); Margarita Martinez Paniagua, representative of 
the Neighborhood Participation and Cooperation Councils; Sixto 
Gonzalez Rovelo, president of the San Cristobal de las Casas 
National Chamber of Commerce and Tourism Services; Javier de 
Jesus Zepeda Constantino, vice president of National Chamber of 
Commerce; Ariel Ortega Oseguera, president of the Junior Chamber 
of Commerce; Fernandez Hernandez Cancino, representative of 
hotels and motels; Javier Ortega Lopez, Copresan [expansion 
unknown] and Credit Union; Rafael Solorzano Penagos, National 
Front of Organizations and Citizens; Cristiana Ocampo de 
Cordero, representative of the Friendship Group; Roberto Perez 
Velasco, Union of Market Vendors; Jose Castillo Tielemans; Alejo 
Dominguez Salazar, Association of Small-Scale Rural Property 
Owners; Jorge Alberto Ruiz Cacho, Association of Architects; 
Javier Rotter Maldonado, secretary general of the Revolutionary 
Confederation of Workers and Peasants; Francisco Cordero Moreno, 
secretary general of the Revolutionary Confederation of Workers 
and Peasants; Jaime Mario Morales Gonzalez, secretary general of 
the FTSE [expansion unknown]; Francisco Lazos Zea, assistant 
secretary of the General Confederation of Workers; Heriberto V. 
Castaneda, president of the Municipal Parents Association; Lucas 
Ramos Lara, representative of the Lions Club; Filiberto Flores 
Lopez, president of the Rotary Club; Juan Oscar Lievan Narvaez, 
president of the Bar Association; Julio martinez Solis, 
Association of Dentists; Carlos Gutierrez Lievano, Association 
of Builders; Benjamin Rojas Castro, president of the City's 
Consultative Council; Carlos Rodriguez Morales and Miguel Zepeda 
Bermudez, advisers. 

