CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with former KGB Chairman Vadim Bakatin by Yuriy </F>
Shchekochikhin; place and date not given: "Lubyanka: The Fantasy 
and the Reality"] 
  [Text] [Shchekochikhin] Vadim Viktorovich, you are indeed 
called the destroyer of the KGB, although you were its chairman 
for a very short period of time... 
  [Bakatin] I do not know how I should feel about this label. 
On one hand, I may be proud that I am one of those who broke the 
pillar of the party-state system. Because the KGB (like its 
predecessors) served that system and ensured its security--first 
and foremost, of course, that of the Politburo. Although 
officially all this was presented as "defending the Motherland." 
And if I indeed destroyed this system, it means I was moving 
with the flow of historic trends... But I cannot accept the 
honor of such credit... 
  The KGB is a rudiment of the past. And in the past there 
were 
completely different rules of the game; first and foremost, 
these rules included control over thought. Now all of this has 
collapsed! Not the KGB, but the system which, I repeat, the KGB 
served. It collapsed not because a villain named Bakatin came on 
the scene--the system, of which the KGB was part, lost the game 
of history. 
  I came, however, with the firm conviction that the special 
service should not be disbanded or shut down like any other 
ministry. We cannot leave ourselves without special services, 
especially at such a turning point in history as we are at now. 
How can a nuclear state exist without a special service? Have we 
already reached a universal treaty on the all-out banning of 
special services' activities? Therefore, I did not intend to rid 
the service of all professionals and hire people from the street 
on the basis of being "democrats" or "bearded..." 
  I saw my task not as destroying the KGB but first and 
foremost reforming it. 
  [Shchekochikhin] What did the word "reform" mean for us 
then, 
after the August putsch? 
  [Bakatin] First and foremost, destroying the KGB monopoly... 
In the United States there are 18 or 20 special services, and 
the functions of many of them are absolutely incomprehensible 
for us: For instance, protection of the U.S. President is 
carried out by the Treasury Department. This means that I had to 
see to dismemberment of the KGB. This is one. Second. At the 
time there was hope that a new Union would be formed; could, for 
instance, Kravchuk allow Moscow to have special services in 
Kiev? Therefore it was necessary to set up an interrepublic 
service that would carry out the functions the republics 
themselves would want it to: special equipment, cadre training, 
information support... Both were fairly easy to accomplish. I 
remember how on my only second day Leonid Shebarshin came to me 
with a proposal to separate the First Chief Directorate--that 
is, foreign intelligence--from the KGB, and this was quite 
logical. In the entire world, intelligence and 
counterintelligence are antipodes, competitors... 
  [Shchekochikhin] Just recently the same Leonid Shebarshin 
said in an interview that you were reorganizing the KGB with 
methods typical of a party obkom [oblast committee] secretary... 
  [Bakatin] But I am in fact the product of that system, 
although I am happy that it did not break me. Perhaps because 
before entering party work I worked for 13 years in 
construction... But of course, I have since my obkom days 
retained an intolerance for the viewpoint of others, a lack of 
listening skills. As to rudeness--this is a legacy of working at 
a construction site. So perhaps Shebarshin is right in some 
respects... Although I do not know what it was he did not like. 
He was one of the few people I relied on during my early days in 
the KGB. He was the most democratic of all those I 
encountered... He is probably holding a grudge because when it 
was necessary to make personnel changes in intelligence I 
appointed one of the deputies against his wishes. This was 
actually the pretext for his resignation... 
  [Shchekochikhin] Vadim Viktorovich, despite the fact that 
current FCS [Federal Counterintelligence Service] officers are 
not particularly fond of you, even they say that the food in the 
Lubyanka cafeteria improved perceptibly during your time, 
because you ate your meals there instead of in a special 
executive room... 
  [Bakatin] I do not know... Do not remember... I did drop in 
there, and scolded them for poor service... But I did not even 
have enough time to become familiar with all the Lubyanka 
corridors... I only remember that people complained about the 
cold, the worn out linoleum... But this is something the head of 
any agency hears. 
  As to people not being fond of me, it is not at all because 
I 
fired some or other person; no! For some, I was first and 
foremost an ideological enemy! I said from the very first day: 
"We have to get rid of the chekist attitude just like we are 
getting rid of Bolshevism. Let us turn an ideologized special 
service serving one party into a nonpartisan special service." 
This is what many did not like. 
  I want to repeat that I was not destroying the KGB as a 
special service. Do you know who was truly destroying it? 
Russian extremists, who after August 1991 strived to pull 
everything under Russia but in reality, while leaving everything 
as it had been, simply replace the sign "USSR KGB" with "RSFSR 
KGB." I can guarantee that this would have been the entire 
extent of the reform. This is what I was not about to allow to 
happen; by the way, Ivanenko supported me. And Boris Yeltsin, 
too... At least in the beginning. 
  Yes, I was working in an environment of confrontation with 
the Russian KGB. It was there--not at Ivanenko's level but at 
the level of his deputies--that our cadres were continuously 
enticed into coming over to them. Naturally, such artificial 
antagonism demoralized the cadres. 
  Still, the most difficult part then was something 
else--changing the internal content of special services' work. 
  When I came to the KGB I saw different people there. Some 
were too smart to sincerely believe in the idea that had died 
before we came on the scene. They simply pretended to believe in 
it. But there also were those who even now are still for 
Marxism-Leninism and are ready to hang those portraits on the 
wall again. By the way, they are still hanging in some offices... 
  [Shchekochikhin] Vadim Viktorovich, when you came to the KGB 
did you see that the thrust toward political surveillance was 
much stronger than that toward national security? 
  [Bakatin] The very concept of security was defined by two 
mottoes. In the external sphere--"struggle for peace," while we 
were building up our military might; in the domestic 
sphere--"purity of ranks," that is, protection of the party 
oligarchy. Gorbachev liquidated the system with one single 
action: by uttering the word "pluralism." It was enough to say 
that one could think differently from Marx and Lenin--and 
everything collapsed. It turned out that the very idea was 
stillborn. 
  For the KGB, security meant first and foremost suppression 
of 
dissent, and therefore of course, political surveillance was the 
predominant area of its work. 
  [Shchekochikhin] But you are accused of liquidating not only 
the Fifth--ideological--Directorate, but also during your time 
professionals who had never been involved in ideology also began 
to leave: specialists on combating crime, smuggling, espionage... 
  [Bakatin] Well, regarding departures... There was 
Stepashin's 
commission, our own internal commission, which was engaged in 
sorting out who did what during the putsch... And I have to say 
that I fired considerably fewer people than the chekists 
themselves advised me to. For instance, Border Troops Commander 
in Chief Kalinichenko: It was suggested to me that I fire him 
just because he gave an order during the days of the putsch to 
put the border troops on heightened alert... I did not even fire 
many generals, although some I probably should have... 
  As to the middle, let alone the lower, level, I did not 
touch 
it at all. On my second day on the job I issued an address to 
all personnel, which said that "there will be no hunt for 
scapegoats..." 
  Because no matter what, the KGB had good specialists. It is 
not accidental that they are now in such demand--look at any 
bank or major company... 
  [Shchekochikhin] And what about those dealing directly with 
suppression of crime? Did they stay? 
  [Bakatin] The way the KGB was combating crime was often a 
mere duplication of militia efforts. Remember how under 
Kryuchkov KGB personnel were put into the so-called suppression 
of economic sabotage, which placed its personnel in the position 
of counting jars in stores? They themselves laughed at it and 
asked one another when they would be issued militia whistles. 
The business of a special service is to combat international 
terrorism, drugs... 
  When I was minister of internal affairs I wrote a memorandum 
containing a proposal to take the entire crime-combating line 
out of the KGB and create an replica of the FBI; that is, I 
wanted to liquidate the duplication between the KGB and the MVD 
[Ministry of Internal Affairs]. In his edict of December 1991 
Boris Yeltsin merged the MVD and the KGB (this was after 
Barannikov's appointment)... An edict which he signed at the 
airport (as he was departing for Rome) and he repealed several 
days later. 
  [Shchekochikhin] I remember that we put a lot of effort then 
into finding out where this edict came from, and never did find 
out... We took a tough stance then against creating such a 
monster... 
  [Bakatin] And you were wrong... You were looking at the KGB 
from the old, Soviet perspective... In those, Soviet conditions 
this could not be permitted under any circumstances... But when 
a society enters a period of democracy, this would have both 
strengthened security and liquidated the KGB as the KGB. When 
the KGB was stripped of its main task--suppression of 
dissent--they started looking for things to keep it busy... 
Kryuchkov came up with sabotage. Bakatin came and said: Let us 
tackle organized crime... That is, we were cutting one sphere 
and strengthening another so that we had at least something to 
do. Otherwise, who needs you? Had this merge taken place, it 
would be like this: counterintelligence--Stepashin; 
intelligence--Primakov; and Yerin, who is responsible for 
combating crime. 
  [Shchekochikhin] But in the same United States there is a 
good dozen organizations combating crime; this is done first and 
foremost in order to reduce corruption inside the special 
services... As to our environment, I want to repeat that 
concentrating all mafia-combating efforts under the same roof 
will do no good. Not to mention the fact that the concentration 
of enforcement structures under one command is asking for 
trouble. 
  [Bakatin] It is only dangerous when there is no law, no 
control... When there is a power vacuum; when one can blast 
apart the parliament... When chaos reigns... 
  [Shchekochikhin] But we are talking about one and the same 
thing! 
  [Bakatin] I do not know now how the FCS and the MVD will 
divide the business of combating organized crime... 
  [Shchekochikhin] It also amazed me in the past, too, that 
MVD 
and KGB reports presented the same facts of suppression of 
crime, and it was not clear who in fact had conducted the 
operations... 
  [Bakatin] But this is precisely how it was! Routinely! I 
remember, when I was the minister of internal affairs indignant 
subordinates used to come in, waving the newspaper: "See, the 
KGB has again taken credit for our operation... But it only 
helped us at the last stage...". 
  [Shchekochikhin] When you came to the KGB, did you see that 
the crime-combating capability there was weaker than in the MVD? 
  [Bakatin] Not weaker... It is just that they had fewer 
people 
by two orders of magnitude than the MVD... But while you have 
more militia, you also have more corruption... Although, of 
course, the KGB is a privileged system which in principle was 
not particularly involved in combating organized crime... But 
the KGB's technical services are undoubtedly much stronger. It 
is like day and night as compared to the militia. 
  [Shchekochikhin] Vadim Viktorovich, there are persistent 
rumors that before your appointment, the KGB archives were being 
destroyed on a massive scale... 
  [Bakatin] The KGB archives were nevertheless in good shape. 
Yes, one can destroy materials in the archive, but some trail 
nevertheless remains. At the very least a protocol of 
incineration... Take for instance the Sakharov file... Kryuchkov 
destroyed the Sakharov file--which consisted of many 
volumes--but a trail remained nevertheless... The documents 
associated with the putsch, however--coded cables, directives, 
orders that had been kept in desks or personal safes--there was 
an attempt to destroy these documents, and some were destroyed 
in order to cover tracks. I knew it, and my first directive 
was... Also erroneous, by the way... 
  [Shchekochikhin] What was it? 
  [Bakatin] I forbade the release of anything whatsoever from 
the archives. 
  [Shchekochikhin] I asked M.S. Gorbachev, when he was still 
president, whether he was afraid of the KGB... He replied that 
he knew its might all too well... When you were a big party 
bureaucrat, were you afraid of the KGB? 
  [Bakatin] And what kind of might did the KGB have? Had it 
been strong enough at least to ensure the security of the system 
it served, nothing would have happened... After all, the KGB has 
not been able to save the system--so what might is this?.. 
  [Shchekochikhin] So you were not afraid of the KGB? 
  [Bakatin] No... I had many friends who worked there, for 
instance, in Kemerovo... 
  [Shchekochikhin] But when I asked M.S. Gorbachev whether 
they 
were listening on him here, in the Kremlin, he replied: "Who in 
hell knows?.." That was the president of a huge country... 
  [Bakatin] Maybe they were in fact listening... 
  [Shchekochikhin] What about you--were you not afraid when 
you 
worked in the obkom that somebody was listening? 
  [Bakatin] I was not, and I am not now. Even if they are 
listening right now, as we sit and talk here at LITERATURNAYA 
GAZETA. I do not give a damn... I know that those who should be 
afraid are those who are conceiving something bad... That I am 
critical of this system, I never hid and am not hiding now... 
  [Shchekochikhin] What surprised you in the KGB? Something 
you 
never suspected they were doing? 
  [Bakatin] I have to admit that I came there as an 
outsider... 
And, of course, I did not know many things... Naturally, people 
took advantage of this... 
  [Shchekochikhin] How did you figure that out? 
  [Bakatin] I ask: Bring me the Sakharov file. I am told: "We 
have never had a file on Sakharov," that is, a man is lying 
through his teeth. I tell him: "You are lying!," and he tells 
me: "I am too old to lie..." So I had to replace the chief of 
archives, and only then not only did the act of the archive 
destruction surface but also some bits and pieces of the file 
itself... 
  [Shchekochikhin] That is, if they wanted to hide something 
from you, they could? 
  [Bakatin] Naturally. I repeat: I was an outsider coming into 
a tightly knit corporation... Speaking of what surprised me, 
though, it was this. I had thought in the past that the KGB at 
least was efficient and well-organized in terms of information 
collection. It turned out that this was a myth. In the past it 
always surprised me that for any session or meeting, papers were 
brought to Kryuchkov by suitcase, and he sat and did something 
with them... When I myself saw these papers, I discovered to my 
surprise that almost all these papers were flak--that is, they 
contained things any normal person could learn the day before 
from the newspapers. Of everything I was given to look at, only 
one-hundredth was of interest. This part came mainly from 
electronic intercepts. Therefore, the surprise was that this 
huge system was doing nothing of consequence. I remember, 
Aleksandr Nikolayevich Yakovlev told me how, when he was an 
ambassador, he helped one chekist earn an order--he gave him a 
telephone book... 
  [Shchekochikhin] I was amazed at the trifles KGB agents were 
engaged in... I cannot forget how one secret informer told me 
that he received his 30 rubles (literally 30!) for reporting on 
his coworker--that the latter was reading "Lolita..." Did you 
discover that this system, on which the KGB rested, also was 
wasting effort? 
  [Bakatin] I agree, except that the number of KGB agents also 
is being exaggerated... 
  [Shchekochikhin] You are probably tired of this question... 
But still... The main accusation against you was that you 
revealed the entire system of surveillance in the American 
Embassy building... 
  [Bakatin] You of all people should know that this entire 
system was uncovered by the Americans at the beginning of the 
1980's, and as early as 1982 at a Politburo meeting the decision 
was made to scrap this system as completely blown. This building 
was standing there like a monument to the cold war! Especially 
considering that this surveillance system was created in 1976 
and has long become obsolete. 
  [Shchekochikhin] But I recently read myself in a newspaper 
that by doing this you blew our agent network in Finland, since 
this is where these bugs were being put into concrete blocks! 
  [Bakatin] This was done not in Finland but in Russia... I 
even know where... But I will not tell... What we declassified 
then had long been no secret for the Americans. All right, they 
outwitted us then, so what? The best thing was to openly admit 
it... The clamor began afterwards... When I had left the KGB... 
It is our tradition--a kick from behind as one leaves... 
  [Shchekochikhin] Vadim Viktorovich, in your opinion, did the 
KGB have something to do with the creation of Zhirinovskiy's 
image? 
  [Bakatin] Well, let us look at it this way... There was only 
one CPSU--and it had one special service... The time of 
pluralism came, and it had to ensure that this pluralism would 
not run wild... Therefore, theoretically the KGB could have 
something to do with it in order to somehow counterbalance the 
emerging democratic movement... I have no definite knowledge of 
this, however. 

