Language: <F P=105> Romanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Romanian Government issued a communique today 
in connection with the strike of the brown coal miners belonging 
to the Lignitul Mining Trade Union Federation. The communique 
points out the fact that at the beginning of February the 
confederation of mining trade unions, which is coordinated by 
Miron Cosma, presented a number of claims principally referring 
to the elimination of the financial blockage, the correction of 
certain stipulations of the collective labor contract [words 
indistinct], the improvement of labor conditions at certain 
brown coal mining units, and the replacement of certain leaders 
of the Brown Coal Mining Public Corporation. All those issues 
have been examined by the government together with the Ministry 
of Industry and representatives of the trade union 
confederation, and deadlines and responsibilities were also 
established. 
  Despite all this, the communique stresses, beginning 14 
February, the Lignitul Mining Trade Union Federation, which is 
affiliated to the union confederation coordinated by Miron 
Cosma, triggered a conflict situation, invoking further demands: 
A bonus amounting to 100,000 for each person -- besides the 
bonus of 50-55,000 lei for each person promised for the 
Christmas holidays -- as well as the replacement of the Gorj 
County prefect. Regarding these further demands, the communique 
says, the government considers that the main point in it, namely 
the 100,000-lei additional bonus, represents a wish suggested by 
Miron Cosma to the trade union in question, with the intent of 
extending his personal sphere of influence over Gorj County. 
That demand does not comply with the stipulations of the 
collective labor contract and cannot be endorsed owing to the 
current financial situation. The demand requesting the ousting 
of the Brown Coal Mining Public Corporation's leadership and 
that of the county prefect do not belong among the attributions 
of trade union bodies. 
  The way in which the members of the Lignitul Mining Trade 
Union Federations manifested themselves over the past period has 
nothing in common with the way union members claim their rights. 
Their moves, which culminated in assaulting the representatives 
of the [public corporation] administration and public order 
bodies, as well as their breaking into the headquarters of the 
public corporation and the illegal occupation of that building, 
has generated and is still generating disorder that causes 
economic losses worth many millions of lei. 
  On 15 February the whole personnel of the operative 
leadership of the public corporation had to be moved to the 
headquarters of the Rovinari branch. 
  From among the 75,000 employees of the public corporation 
over 70,000 are working normally, delivering 80-85,000 tonnes of 
brown coal daily to the thermal power plants and the population, 
thus fully satisfying current demands. 
  The government is compelled to take appropriate measures to 
recover all material losses and to punish the persons who caused 
them. The maintenance of the current state of disorder, the 
continuation of assaults, and the violation of the laws of the 
country will aggravate the deeds for which the persons in 
question will be held responsible. 
  Under such circumstances, the government will take the 
necessary steps to take to account, according to law, Miron 
Cosma, the leader of the Mining Trade Union Confederation, for 
having instigated to public disorder and having led the 
destabilizing actions over the past days in the municipality of 
Targu Jiu and in the entire region. The population, as well as 
the real representatives of the mining trade unions, have 
disapproved and condemned the situation thus created. 
  We address an appeal to the miners who have participated in 
the aforementioned actions which violate current laws, to stop 
letting themselves dragged by Miron Cosma into such acts, which 
are provoked by him for personal purposes, while ignoring their 
economic and social consequences. 
  The government considers that there are proper conditions 
and 
a proper atmosphere for work to be resumed in all mining units 
and for the examining of the claims under civilized 
circumstances and not under the pressure of street disorder that 
contradicts norms law and order, concludes the communique 
released by the press office of the executive. 

