Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Patrice De Beer report: "Lao Foreign Minister `Delighted' </F>
With His Visit To France"] 
  [Text] In office for just one year, Somsavad Lengsavath 
concluded -- on Monday, 28 February -- the first official visit 
to France by a Lao foreign minister since the "kingdom of the 
million elephants" was overthrown by the Communist Pathet Lao on 
2 December 1975. Received by the president of the republic and 
Alain Juppe's lunch guest on Monday, he left "delighted" with 
the reception given in his honor. Nevertheless, France attaches 
much more importance to the other "Indochinese" countries: 
Cambodia and Vietnam. The planned budget for cooperation with 
Laos in 1994 is 70 million French francs. 
  "My visit did not lead to the signing of any agreements, but 
it was crucially important, since Messrs. Mitterrand and Juppe 
reaffirmed their interest in strengthening the friendship and 
cooperation with Laos," Mr. Somsavad said to LE MONDE. There 
were also discussions about the dam on the Nam Theune, the water 
supply to the province of Vientiane, and telecommunications 
(Alcatel). While human rights -- a matter on which Roland Dumas 
had asked Laos to "make an effort" during his 1991 visit -- were 
mentioned only briefly, the same was not true regarding the 
country's French- speaking status. 
  In response to Mr. Juppe, who feels that "Laos, Cambodia, 
and 
Vietnam all belong to the French-speaking family," and that "the 
development of friendship and cooperation with this country can 
be a staging post for France's ambitions, values, and specific 
characteristics in Asia," Mr. Somsavad told us: "French is 
still an important language used at the United Nations and in 
international relations. In Laos, it still has an important 
role." Nevertheless, the prime minister had forgotten the French 
he learned at school 30 years ago. 
  He also mentioned Laos' relations with its neighbors. He 
sees his country as the crossroads of Burma, China, Thailand, 
and Vietnam. The bridge crossing the Mekong near Vientiane, 
which is to be opened in April in the presence of King Bhumibol 
of Thailand, should reinforce relations with Bangkok, which 
still has problems with a border dispute, the asylum granted to 
"certain bad elements who use Thai territory to undertake 
activities harmful to us," and massive smuggling. 
  Mr. Somsavad attempted to play down links with Vietnam -- 
the 
"big brother" and political example of one of the last Communist 
countries. "We have shared the same destiny in the past, and we 
have fought together against oppression and foreign invasion. 
Over these years, we have built a very strong friendship, links 
which are completely normal and legitimate. (...) We have 
heard a great many stories about the influence Vietnam would 
enjoy in Laos. All that is unfounded." He also said: "The 
leading investor in Laos is Thailand, and nobody can claim that 
Vietnam could have dominant importance in our country if it is 
not the leading investor." 

