Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
fileworthy reports on economic developments in Cuba carried on 
Havana radio and television in Spanish between 8 and 12 March. 
  Radio Reloj at 2030 GMT on 8 March reports that the Efrain 
Alfonso Brigade from Villa Clara has reached 2 million arrobas 
of cane, cut during the current harvest. This brigade has thus 
been granted the Giron Victory Flag for this achievement. This 
is the second brigade to reach 2 million arrobas. The national 
secretariat of the Cuban Workers Federation has sent a 
congratulatory note to this organization, which is committed to 
cutting 3 million arrobas of sugarcane during the current 
harvest. 
  Tele Rebelde and Cuba Vision Networks at 0100 GMT on 9 March 
reports that approximately 60 sources are being developed in 
Holguin to obtain energy. Great progress has been achieved in 
using nonconventional energy sources in this province, following 
national guidelines for energy production, one of the two most 
important programs in the country. In Holguin there are 
currently 458 windmills, 48 biogas plants, 21 minihydroelectric 
dams, and three hydraulic dams, while in 1989 there were only 
five energy sources. 
  Radio Rebelde at 1000 GMT on 9 March reports that the 
Ministry of Construction is at present doing remodeling and 
expansion work at eight airports with a view to contributing to 
developing Cuba's tourism infrastructure, and hopes to finish 
the work in 1994. The work is being done at the Jose Marti, 
Varadero, Ciego de Avila, Camaguey, Holguin, Manzanillo, 
Santiago de Cuba, and Cienfuegos airports. Work is also being 
done on landing strips used by tourists in Cayo Coco, Santa 
Lucia, and Mayajigua. More than 14 million pesos will be 
invested in these construction works. 
  In the same newscast, Radio Rebelde reports the members of 
the Eliseo Camano Agricultural-Livestock Cooperative located in 
Piloto, Consolacion del Sur Municipality, Pinar del Rio 
Province, have finished the tobacco planting in 18 of the 20 
caballerias planned for the current campaign. The coop's 
president said the coop expects to harvest a record 5,000 
quintals during the current harvest. The tobacco campaign is 
going extremely well in general in the province. 
  Radio Rebelde also reports that a new therapy room with a 
12-person capacity has been inaugurated at the general hospital 
in Baire, on the Isle of Youth. The installation has the latest 
technology and qualified, experienced personnel. An emergency 
intensive-care room and a cardiovascular-care room with 
sophisticated equipment and specialists of great professional 
prestige also became operative. 
  Radio Reloj at 1500 GMT on 10 March reports that sugarcane 
planting is increasing in Las Tunas province. Spring sugarcane 
was already planted on 140 caballerias, while 70 more 
caballerias are ready for planting. At the provincial level, 
some 940 caballerias are already in production, while the 
objective is to reach some 1,800 caballerias. 
  Cuba Vision Network at 2320 GMT on 11 March reports that the 
brigade of voluntary canecutters who work at the Orlando 
Gonzalez sugar complex in Ciego de Avila has sent a letter of 
response to Army General Raul Castro Ruz who congratulated them 
for reaching the first million arrobas of cane cut. Raul Castro 
praises the workers and urges them to increase production. 
  Radio Rebelde at 0000 GMT on 12 March reports that the 
Steelworking Industry, the Sime, plans to build some 200 
train-buses [trenbus] in 1994. Jose Aranaburo, vice minister of 
the Steelworking Industry, said that in 1993 the country had no 
financial resources to build these train-buses, but that Sime 
managed to build 10 with its own resources. This year, however, 
this company intends to build some 200 train-buses to be used in 
Havana. 

