Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] At the third meeting held today by the Heilongjiang 
delegation attending the Second Session of the Eighth National 
People's Congress, Premier Li Peng said with full confidence: 
Heilongjiang's economy has great hopes. As long as the higher 
and the lower levels are of one heart and jointly overcome the 
present difficulties, Heilongjiang will regain its vitality. 
  Premier Li Peng said: Heilongjiang Province is an old 
industrial base and a major raw materials producing province of 
the state. Many industries, such as heavy industry, agriculture, 
and energy, are the important aspects of the national economy. 
During the transition from the planned economy to the market 
economy, your province will meet some prominent difficulties 
which are much more prominent than Liaoning and Jilin. The 
central authorities have also realized this. In the course of 
price reform, we will gradually decontrol the prices. Our 
national condition cannot tolerate the strain of doing without 
such major raw materials as petroleum, grain, timber, and 
energy. If the price of diesel oil is raised, peasants will be 
unable to stand it. The price readjustment of raw materials can 
only be gradually decontrolled. Linking with the international 
market is also one of the major reasons for China's success in 
reform. 
  In referring to agriculture, Premier Li Peng said: Since 
China has a vast territory and dense population, the foundation 
status of agriculture is very important. We must never slacken 
our efforts in this aspect at any time. On the issue of grain 
storage, Heilongjiang has made great contributions. It is very 
unrealistic not to store grain. For example, the grain prices 
rose in south China last year. Many unlawful businessmen forced 
up the commodity prices and the people could not stand this. 
The central authorities allocated 5 billion tonnes of grain to 
the market to keep the prices down. 
  Premier Li Peng continued: We all know the difficulties of 
old coal mines. The most difficult mining area of Heilongjiang 
is Jixi. In addition, there are also problems concerning large 
and medium- sized enterprises and war industrial enterprises. 
These enterprises have heavy burdens and outdated equipment. 
The primary reason for this does not lie in Heilongjiang. 
However, development and structural readjustment need a process 
and the common efforts of the higher and the lower levels. The 
key to achieve this still lies in yourselves. 
  Premier Li Peng said with full confidence: Heilongjiang has 
many advantages and tremendous potentials, including industrial 
foundation, personnel quality, commodity grain bases, and border 
trade. You should not forget the northern part of China, and 
should have full confidence in it. If we give play to these 
potentials, Heilongjiang's economy will surely be pushed to a 
new height. 

