BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aldo Renato Soares] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia, 22 Jun (AE) -- The PFL [Liberal Front 
Party] leader in the Senate, Senator Marco Maciel (PE) 
[Pernambuco], will present an alternative draft bill to the 
industrial property bill approved by the Chamber of Deputies 
last April. Maciel decided to present an alternative proposal 
because there are strong differences of opinion between the two 
Senate rapporteurs, Senator Jose Richa, (PSDB-PR) [Brazilian 
Social Democracy Party, Parana], from the Economic Affairs 
Committee, and Senator Antonio Mariz (PMDB-PB) [Brazilian 
Democratic Movement Party, Paraiba] from the Constitution and 
Justice Committee. "If we have two different opinions, the 
approval of the definite bill will be more difficult," Maciel 
said. 
  The two Senate committees today discussed the bill for more 
than four hours with several civilian institution 
representatives. Francisco Teixeira, executive vice president of 
the Brazilian Pharmaceutical Industry Association (Interfarma), 
which gathers together all foreign laboratories, required 
several changes to be made to the patents bill already approved 
by the lower house. Abifarma [Brazilian Pharmaceutical 
Industries Association] supports the patenting of genetically 
modified microorganisms, and rejects the requirement that 
patented products should be produced domestically. The 
laboratories also want imports to be authorized by the patent 
holder abroad, or by his licensed dealers. 
  Representatives from the Brazilian Agriculture and Livestock 
Research Enterprise (Embrapa) and national laboratories are 
against the changes suggested by Interfarma. Senator Jose Richa 
wants to make the bill more flexible. Senator Antonio Mariz, on 
the contrary, wants to maintain the basic points approved by the 
Chamber of Deputies. Senator Marco Maciel, who today 
participated in the discussions as a member of the Economic 
Affairs Committee, said that if the two recommendations are sent 
to a vote in the plenary hall the bill will not be approved this 
year. He believes that an alternative project will facilitate 
an agreement and the approval of the bill by the Senate after 
the elections. 

