CSO 

<F P=106> [Draft of 15 March 1994: "Agreement Between the Russian </F>
Federation and the Latvian Republic on the Legal Status of the 
Skrunda Radar Station During the Period of Its Temporary 
Functioning and Dismantling"] 
  [Text] The Russian Federation and the Latvian Republic, 
hereinafter referred to as the Parties, have agreed to the 
following: 
<H5>  Article 1 </H5>
  The present Agreement shall be an inseparable part of the 
Agreement between the Russian Federation and the Latvian 
Republic on the conditions, deadlines, and procedure for 
complete withdrawal from the territory of the Latvian Republic 
of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation and their legal 
position during the period of withdrawal from 
" \ " 1994. 
<H5>  Article 2 </H5>
  1. The Skrunda Radar Station, hereinafter referred to as the 
Facility, is a Russian military institution under civilian 
control. Nothing in the present Agreement shall be regarded as 
giving this Facility the status of a military base. 
  2. The Facility includes structures, equipment, and 
individual components listed in Appendix No. 1 to the present 
Agreement. 
  3. During the period of its temporary functioning the 
Facility shall provide for radar observation of space. 
  4. Additional installation or replacement of equipment and 
components or construction work, as a result of which the 
Facility is modernized or its functions or technical 
specifications are changed, shall not be allowed. 
  5. During the period of temporary functioning of the 
Facility 
the Latvian Party shall retain the Facility's radio 
communications frequencies and also communications channels 
which it uses as of the moment of the signing of the present 
Agreement. The Parties shall be obligated not to allow 
interference in the operation of the Facility and communications 
network or radio broadcasting and television of the Latvian 
Republic. In the event of the appearance of interference, the 
Parties shall take immediate measures to eliminate it. 
<H5>  Article 3 </H5>
  1. The Latvian Party shall turn over to the Russian Party 
for 
temporary use a plot of land with an area of 164.5 hectares 
designated on the topographical map which is an inalienable part 
of the present Agreement (Appendix No. 2) on which the Facility 
is located. 
  2. The Russian Party shall pay rent for the land granted for 
temporary use in the amount of U.S. dollars per year. 
  3. The sum indicated in point 2 of the present Article shall 
be transferred in two payments each half year: before 30 
June--50 percent of the annual sum, before 31 December--the 
remainder of the annual sum. In the event of default of payments 
the Russian side shall pay a penalty in the amount of 0.05 
percent for each day of default. 
  4. Any construction work on the territory of the Facility 
shall be allowed only during the period of its functioning after 
acquiring permission from the Latvian Party in keeping with the 
provisions of the present Agreement. This work may be done by 
the service personnel of the Facility or outside construction 
organizations of the Latvian Republic. 
<H5>  Article 4 </H5>
  1. Neither of the Parties shall use state symbols on the 
outside of the Facility. 
  2. All inscriptions outside the Facility must be in the 
Latvian language. 
  3. All inscriptions on the territory of the Facility shall 
be 
in the Latvian, Russian, and English languages. 
<H5>  Article 5 </H5>
  1. The Russian Party shall appoint its authorized 
representative (hereinafter--Manager of the Facility) and also 
individuals to act as manager if for any reason he cannot 
perform his duties himself. 
  2. The Manager of the Facility shall provide for management 
of the Facility and supervision of its activity, be responsible 
for the safety of the Facility, and regularly, no less 
frequently than once a month, report on work on the Facility and 
the execution of the present Agreement by the Combined 
Commission envisioned by Article 14 of the present Agreement. 
  3. The Latvian Party shall appoint its authorized 
representative (hereinafter--Representative of Latvia) and also 
individuals to perform his duties if for any reason he cannot 
perform them himself. The Representative of Latvia shall provide 
for external protection of the Facility, enforce the execution 
of the present Agreement and work on the Facility, and also, 
regularly, no less frequently than once a month, report to the 
Combined Commission. 
  4. The Manager of the Facility and the Representative of 
Latvia shall cooperate in solving problems related to the 
execution of the present Agreement. 
  5. At the request of the Manager of the Facility or the 
Representative of Latvia, any question may be submitted for 
consideration at the regular meeting of the Combined Commission. 
If one of the Parties thinks that the question requires an 
immediate solution at the level of the Combined Commission, it 
can demand that it convene an extraordinary session. In this 
case the session shall be conducted within three days of the 
receipt of the request. 
  6. The Representative of Latvia may visit the Facility at 
any 
time, informing the Manager of the Facility of this ahead of 
time. 
<H5>  Article 6 </H5>
  The number of personnel directly employed in the functioning 
of the Facility shall not exceed 599 military specialists and 
199 civilian employees. Moreover, the Russian Party during the 
period of temporary functioning and dismantling of the Facility 
shall strive to reduce the number of military specialists by 
replacing them with civilian employees. Personnel who are 
citizens of the Latvian Republic and individuals residing 
permanently on its territory with the appropriate qualifications 
may be hired as civilian employees. 
  The indicated number does not include guards for the 
Facility 
or members of families of personnel, residents, and citizens of 
the Latvian Republic hired by the Manager of the Facility on the 
basis of labor agreements to work in the social sphere (trade, 
municipal services, medical and sociocultural services, 
preschool and school institutions). 
<H5>  Article 7 </H5>
  1. The Latvian Party at the request of the Russian Party 
shall issue temporary residency permits and other necessary 
documents required in connection with the arrival, departure, 
customs formalities, and residence in the Latvian Republic of 
citizens of the Russian Federation who are providing services 
for the Facility and members of their families. The general 
conditions for permits for the Latvian Republic in effect as of 
the time of the signing of the present Agreement shall apply to 
Russian personnel sent to work at the Facility. Individuals with 
work passports shall receive permits free of charge. 
  2. The issues mentioned in point 1 of the present Article 
shall be resolved through diplomatic channels. The corresponding 
documents shall be requested promptly--as a rule, 20 days in 
advance. 
<H5>  Article 8 </H5>
  1. Personnel employed at the Facility shall be under the 
jurisdiction of the Latvian Republic with the exception of those 
specified by points 2 and 4 of the present Article. 
  2. Labor relations among citizens of the Russian Federation 
employed at the Facility, including the examination of labor 
disputes, shall be regulated by legislative acts of the Russian 
Federation. 
  3. On the territory of the Latvian Republic criminal and 
civil cases and also cases of administrative violations 
involving individuals who are personnel at the Facility and 
members of their families, taking into account the provisions of 
points 2 and 4 of the present Article, shall be subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Latvian Republic. 
  Individuals who are personnel of the Facility and are 
citizens of the Russian Federation and also members of their 
families who are citizens of the Russian Federation shall enjoy 
in institutions of the Latvian Republic the same procedural 
rights and responsibilities as citizens of the Latvian Republic. 
  4. The Russian Federation shall exercise jurisdiction with 
respect to individuals who are personnel at the Facility and are 
citizens of the Russian Federation and members of their families 
who are citizens of the Russian Federation in keeping with 
legislation of the Russian Federation in the following cases: 
  a) if they commit crimes or administrative legal violations 
against the Russian Federation and also against individuals who 
are personnel of the Facility and are citizens of the Russian 
Federation and also members of their families who are citizens 
of the Russian Federation; 
  b) if individuals who are personnel of the Facility and are 
citizens of the Russian Federation commit crimes and 
administrative legal violations during the performance of their 
official duties. 
  Authorized organs of the Russian Federation and authorized 
organs of the Latvian Republic may request of one another 
transfer or acceptance of jurisdiction with respect to 
individual cases specified by the present Article. 
  5. In cases where individuals who are not personnel of the 
Facility, are not citizens of the Russian Federation, and are 
not members of families of individuals who are personnel of the 
Facility, and have citizenship of the Russian Federation, commit 
crimes or administrative legal violations against the facility 
and also against individuals who are personnel of the facility 
and members of their families, the guilty parties shall bear 
responsibility according to legislation of the Latvian Republic. 
<H5>  Article 9 </H5>
  1. Individuals who work at the Facility and members of their 
families, in keeping with legislation of the Latvian SSR, shall 
own, use, and dispose of mobile and immobile property legally 
belonging to them with rights of ownership, and in particular 
they may: 
  --sell or in another way transfer the right of ownership to 
the immobile property belonging to them to relatives, citizens, 
or other residents residing in the Latvian Republic; 
  --move, sell, or in other ways dispose of mobile property 
belonging to them with the right of ownership; 
  --move or transfer their monetary funds from the Latvian 
Republic to the Russian Federation. 
  2. Individuals employed at the Facility and members of their 
families shall take advantage of the services of public health 
and postal and banking institutions of the Latvian Republic 
under general conditions. 
  3. A secondary school for teaching children of individuals 
working at the Facility may function on the territory of the 
Facility. 
<H5>  Article 10 </H5>
  1. The Russian Party shall have the right, observing the 
requirements of point 4 of Article 2 of the present Agreement, 
to bring into the territory of the Latvian Republic equipment 
and materials necessary for work at the Facility. 
  2. The freight mentioned in point 1 of the present Article 
shall not be subject to customs duties and fees, with the 
exception of payment for specific services. The freight shall be 
subject to customs inspection. The shipper of the freight or the 
individual accompanying it shall have the right to demand the 
presence during customs inspection of the Manager of the 
Facility or his representative. Freight to which access is 
prohibited out of considerations of secrecy shall not be subject 
to customs inspection if accompanied by documents indicating the 
secret nature of the freight. In exceptional cases when there 
are sufficient grounds, such freight may be inspected with a 
substantiated request from the customs organs of the Latvian 
Republic in the presence of a representative of the Facility. 
  3. The rules specified by points 1 and 2 of the present 
Article shall be applied only if the Manager of the Facility, no 
less than three days before the shipment of the freight to the 
territory of the Latvian Republic, notifies the Representative 
of Latvia of this in writing, communicating information about 
the cargo, its use at the Facility, and also the border crossing 
location. 
  4. Service personnel and members of their families who are 
citizens of the Russian Federation, after obtaining the 
documents indicated in Article 7 of the present Agreement, may 
ship personal effects and household goods into the Latvian 
Republic or out of its territory without paying customs duties 
or fees, except for payment for specific services. With respect 
to the movement of other items, the procedure is determined by 
normative acts of the Latvian Republic shall apply. 
  5. Freight shipped from the territory of the Facility 
outside 
the territory of the Latvian Republic shall not be subject to 
customs duties or fees except payment for specific services. 
Freight shall be subject to customs control according to point 2 
of the present Article. 
  6. Courier and postal communications and transportation of 
work-related documents and postal dispatches shall be organized 
by the Manager of the Facility according to a procedure agreed 
upon with authorized organs of the Latvian Republic. 
  7. Means of transportation belonging to the Facility shall 
be 
registered in the Latvian Republic. Special means of 
transportation shall be allowed to be brought in only with 
permission from the Latvian Party. 
<H5>  Article 11 </H5>
  1. During the period of temporary functioning and 
dismantling 
of the Facility the Russian Party and the Manager of the 
Facility shall provide for observance of the requirements of 
normative acts of the Latvian Republic for protection of the 
environment. 
  2. Upon completion of the dismantling work envisioned by the 
present Agreement, an expert ecological appraisal of the 
territory of the Facility and its environs shall be conducted 
with the involvement of international specialists on the 
initiative of one of the Parties. All costs related to the 
expert appraisal shall be borne by the Party that initiates it. 
  3. In the event that during the period of temporary 
functioning and dismantling of the Facility people, animals, or 
plants are infected with dangerous diseases which could spread 
beyond the territory of the Facility, the Manager of the 
Facility shall immediately inform the Representative of Latvia 
of this and take the necessary measures to prevent further 
spreading of the disease. 
  4. With the participation of international specialists, on 
the initiative of one of the Parties, there may be an expert 
appraisal of the impact of the activity of the Facility on the 
environment. All costs involved in this expert appraisal shall 
be borne by the Party that initiates it. 
  5. If it is established that the activity of the Facility 
causes harm to the environment or the population, or the 
ecological expert appraisal deems that such harm has been 
caused, the Russian Party must make reimbursement for this harm 
and also take measures to eliminate its causes. 
  6. The Russian Party shall take measures to minimize the 
inconvenience caused to the local population because of the 
activity of the Facility. 
<H5>  Article 12 </H5>
  1. External guarding of the Facility shall be provided by 
personnel appointed by the Latvian Party and be under the 
jurisdiction of the Representative of Latvia. The external guard 
shall not impede the transfer of freight onto the territory of 
the Facility, the removal of freight from the territory of the 
Facility, or the movement of personnel and members of families 
of personnel. 
  2. The internal guarding of the Facility shall be provided 
by 
the Russian Party in keeping with existing normative acts of the 
Russian Federation. The number of military specialists 
functioning in the internal guard of the Facility may not exceed 
89. In order to perform their functions the internal guard on 
the territory of the Facility shall have the right to bear light 
weapons. Information about the quantity and serial numbers of 
these weapons shall be submitted to the Representative of Latvia. 
  3. Access and entry security procedures shall be established 
for access to the territory of the Facility. The form of access 
and the security procedure shall be established by agreement 
between the Manager of the Facility and the Representative of 
Latvia. 
<H5>  Article 13 </H5>
  1. The Latvian Party shall provide for supplying the 
Facility 
with electric energy (transferring it from the Russian 
Federation) and water. The Russian Party shall be obliged to 
promptly make payment for transit of electric energy through the 
networks of the Latvian Republic according to the procedure and 
at the rates established by agreement with the Latvian Party. 
The Russian Party shall be obligated to promptly make payment 
for supply of water indicated in the present Article to the 
Facility according to the procedure and at the rates accepted in 
the Latvian Republic. Interruptions in the supply of electric 
energy or water that have arisen for reasons beyond the control 
of the Latvian Party and its services [(words indistinct]) shall 
not be regarded as a violation of the obligations of the Latvian 
Party. 
  2. Other services and deliveries shall be provided through 
the conclusion by the Manager of the Facility of the 
corresponding agreements with individuals and legal entities of 
the Latvian Republic. Disputes related to the fulfillment of 
these agreements shall be resolved according to the procedure 
determined by legislation of the Latvian Republic. 
<H5>  Article 14 </H5>
  1. For supervision and coordination of the execution of the 
present Agreement, a Combined Commission shall be created which 
shall consist of an equal number of representatives of both 
Parties and a representative or representatives of one of the 
international organizations to which both Parties belong. The 
Parties shall be obligated to reach agreement on the 
organization to be invited and invite its representative or 
representatives before the present Agreement goes into effect. 
If the agreement is not reached before 31 August 1994, this 
representative or these representatives shall be appointed by 
the UN secretary general or the chairman of the Council on 
Security and Cooperation in Europe. 
  The Combined Commission, on the initiative of the Parties, 
or 
a representative of the aforementioned international 
organization, on the initiative of the Manager of the Facility 
or the Representative of Latvia, and also on its own initiative 
shall consider and resolve on the basis of a consensus any issue 
related to the execution of the present Agreement. Decisions of 
the Combined Commission shall be binding for the Manager of the 
Facility and the Representative of Latvia. If the Combined 
Commission cannot find a solution that satisfies the Parties 
within a month's time or comes to the conclusion that the 
question must be resolved at the governmental level, the 
question is turned over for the consideration of the governments 
of both Parties, which, if necessary, may agree to transfer the 
dispute for the consideration of the international court of the 
United Nations. 
  2. The Latvian Party shall provide members of the Combined 
Commission with the necessary documents for entering and 
remaining in the Latvian Republic. Members of the Combined 
Commission shall enjoy the same rights to visit the Facility as 
is enjoyed by the Representative of Latvia. 
  3. Sessions of the Combined Commission shall be conducted as 
necessary. Protocols of the sessions of the Combined Commission 
shall be submitted to the governments of both Parties. If a 
special session of the Combined Commission is convened at the 
request of the Manager of the Facility or the Representative of 
Latvia, the session of the Combined Commission shall be 
conducted within three days of the receipt of the request. 
<H5>  Article 15 </H5>
  1. In order to monitor the implementation of the present 
Agreement, inspection teams of the Conference on Security and 
Cooperation in Europe shall be invited periodically. The 
schedule for these inspections during the course of the year 
shall be determined at the first session of the Combined 
Commission for the corresponding year. 
  2. Special inspection teams shall be invited on the 
initiative of the Latvian Party. All costs involved with these 
inspections shall be borne by the Party that initiates the 
invitation. 
  The premises of the Facility that are classified as 
indicated 
in Appendix No. 3 shall not be subject to inspection. The 
aforementioned shall also be observed upon application of point 
6 of Article 5 of the present Agreement. 
  3. No more than two periodic and two special inspections 
shall be conducted each year. 
  4. If a special inspection team is invited, the Latvian 
Party 
within 48 hours before its arrival shall notify the Combined 
Commission and the Manager of the Facility, providing a list of 
the inspectors. 
  5. The inspectors, whose number must not exceed three, shall 
enjoy the same rights to visit the Facility as are enjoyed by 
the Representative of Latvia. The Representative of Latvia and 
the Manager of the Facility shall accompany the inspectors while 
they are on the territory of the Facility. The duration of one 
inspection must not exceed three days. Conclusions of the 
inspection team shall be turned over for familiarization to the 
Combined Commission, the Manager of the Facility, and the 
Representative of Latvia. 
  6. In addition to inspections included in the schedule drawn 
up by the Combined Commission, periodic inspections shall be 
conducted within three days after the termination of the 
temporary functioning of the Facility and also on the day of the 
expiration of the present Agreement. 
<H5>  Article 16 </H5>
  1. The period of temporary functioning of the Facility shall 
end on 31 August 1998. 
  2. The dismantling of the existing radar station shall begin 
on 1 September 1998 and end no later than 29 February 2000. 
  If before the end of the period of temporary functioning of 
the Facility a station to place it is put into operation outside 
the Latvian Republic, the Russian Party shall immediately notify 
the Latvian Party of this. And within 30 days after the 
replacement structure goes into operation, the dismantling of 
the Facility shall begin. 
  During the period of dismantling the structures indicated in 
Appendix No. 4 that are located on the territory of the Facility 
shall be removed and, if necessary, the land shall be 
recultivated. 
  During the period of dismantling the equipment shall be 
shipped or sold on the spot. 
  Dismantling work at the existing radar station envisioned by 
the present Agreement shall be conducted at the expense of the 
Russian Party. The dismantling may be carried out both by 
personnel working at the Facility and by individuals hired by 
the Russian Party especially for performing this task. When 
recruiting personnel for dismantling, preference shall be given 
to residents of the Latvian Republic. 
  3. If necessary the number of personnel employed in the 
dismantling work who are citizens of the Russian Federation may 
be increased by mutual consent of the Parties. 
  4. The Russian Party shall take measures to provide for the 
proper financing of the dismantling work. 
  5. The Latvian Party shall at its own expense disassemble 
the 
incomplete station or transform it into a facility for civilian 
purposes. After the signing of the present Agreement the section 
servicing the building of the station shall be turned over to 
the Latvian Party. The list of structures of the incomplete 
station and the boundaries of the section of area turned over 
for servicing the building of the incomplete station shall be 
given in Appendix No. 5 to the present Agreement. The Latvian 
Party shall not impede the dismantling conducted by the Russian 
Party or the shipment of equipment and components from the 
incomplete station or the section serving it. 
  The work for disassembling the incomplete station or 
transforming it into a facility for civilian purposes should not 
impede the functioning of the existing station. The Latvian 
Party shall bear responsibility, including material, if as a 
result of the aforementioned work harm is caused to the life and 
property of personnel servicing the Facility or members of their 
families, the station that is in operation, and also facilities 
related to it. 
  6. After the signing of the present Agreement the railside 
base for loading equipment and servicing its section of land in 
the village of Skrunda shall be turned over to the Latvian 
Party. The Latvian Party shall not impede free use, when the 
Russian Party requires it, of railroad sidings and the rail side 
base for loading equipment when shipping property and equipment 
of the Russian Party during the period of temporary functioning 
and dismantling. 
<H5>  Article 17 </H5>
  Calculations for rental payment and also payments related to 
the temporary functioning of the Facility and financing 
dismantling work shall be carried out in currency of the Latvian 
Republic through the correspondent subaccount of the institution 
of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation opened in one of 
the Latvian commercial banks according to the choice of the 
Russian Party. 
  Funds in the correspondent subaccount of the institution of 
the Central Bank of the Russian Federation shall be formed 
through transfer by the Russian Party of foreign currency to 
maintain the Facility and through other revenues. 
  Foreign currency from the Russian Party in the Latvian 
commercial bank shall be converted into Latvian lats and 
transferred at the expense of the institution of the Central 
Bank of the Russian Federation in this bank according to the 
agreed-upon exchange rate that is oriented to the currency 
market of Latvia. 
<H5>  Article 18 </H5>
  1. Nothing in the present Agreement may be used to commit 
actions aimed against the sovereignty or interests of the 
security of the Latvian Republic. 
  2. The Russian Party shall be obligated not to conclude any 
agreements regarding the Facility with third countries without 
the consent of the Latvian side. This does not pertain to the 
right of the Russian Party to dispose of information obtained by 
the Facility. 
  3. The Russian Party shall be obligated before the present 
Agreement takes effect to submit to the Security Council of the 
United Nations a document confirming the guarantees from the 
Russian Federation that the present Agreement will not be used 
to commit actions directed against the sovereignty and interests 
of the security of the Latvian Republic. 
  4. Any attempt to resolve disputes or disagreements related 
to the present Agreement using the threat of force or the 
application of it shall be regarded as a threat to peace and 
international security which shall be subject to consideration 
in the Security Council of the United Nations in keeping with 
Article 39 of its Charter. 
<H5>  Article 19 </H5>
  The Parties shall not make any changes or additions to the 
present Agreement, shall not extend the period of effect of the 
Agreement, and shall not renew it. 
<H5>  Article 20 </H5>
  The present Agreement shall take force on 1 September 1994 
under the condition that the Agreement between the Russian 
Federation and the Latvian Republic on conditions, time periods, 
and procedure for complete withdrawal from the territory of the 
Latvian Republic of armed forces of the Russian Federation and 
their legal position during the period of withdrawal has taken 
effect and armed forces of the Russian Federation have been 
completely withdrawn from the territory of the Latvian Republic. 
It shall remain in effect until the completion of the 
fulfillment of all of its provisions. 
<H5>  Article 21 </H5>
  The present Agreement shall be subject to registration in 
the 
Secretariat of the United Nations in keeping with Article 102 of 
the UN Charter. 
  Done in the city of 1994 in two copies, in the Russian and 
Latvian languages, each text having equal force. 

