BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 1 Jun (PL) -- As was announced last year, an 
increase in the prices of cigarettes, alcoholic beverages, and 
air and maritime transportation fees went into effect today in 
the first stage of a series of increases aimed at reducing the 
large amount of currency in circulation. 
  The proposed increase in gasoline prices, which also should 
have gone into effect, was postponed until the next delivery of 
the ration quota assigned to private car owners. 
  An agreement published by the Council of Ministers Executive 
Committee on 23 May established that beginning on 1 June 
cigarette prices would be increased at all three pricing levels. 
  Ration quota prices will increase to 2.00 and 2.50 pesos 
(equal to $2 and $2.50 at Cuba's official exchange rate), 
depending on whether the cigarettes are made from fine or 
regular tobacco. Additional distribution cigarettes will be sold 
at 6.00 and 6.50 pesos, while those sold freely on the market 
will sell for 10.00 and 10.50 pesos. 
  Until yesterday, cigarettes from the basic ration had the 
same price as 30 years ago -- 20 cents for cigarettes made from 
regular tobacco and 30 cents for fine tobacco. The price on the 
so-called additional distribution had been set at 1.60 pesos for 
more than 10 years, while free sales have been gone for more 
than a year because of a lack of supply. 
  The increase represents a tenfold increase for rationed 
cigarettes and a fourfold increase for those whose distribution 
is restricted outside the quota. 
  Beer, whose price will double, will cost 1.20 pesos per 
350-milliliter [ml] bottle, while the price of rum and spirits 
will fluctuate between 20 and 40 pesos per 750-ml bottle. 
  The price of rationed fuel for the approximately 172,000 
privately-owned vehicles nationwide will increase four times and 
will be sold at 1.20 pesos per liter of special gasoline (which 
used to cost 32 cents), at 1 peso per liter of regular gasoline, 
and at 0.75 per liter of oil gasoline or diesel fuel. 
  Other increases in air and maritime fees for transportation 
to and from the Isle of Youth also went into effect today, while 
new bus and railroad fares will go into effect on 1 September. 
  In its efforts to reduce state subsidies, including 100 
million pesos spent annually on labor kitchens, the Council of 
Ministers decided that as of 1 July these expenses will be 
disbursed by the management of the centers in which these 
facilities are located. 
  The new electricity rates, which do not include fines for 
consuming more than 300 kilowatt-hours per month, will begin to 
be implemented in the October billing period. 
  Price and Finance Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez said price 
and 
tax increases are the most effective method to cleanse public 
finances in the short-term. 
  According to the most recent figures released by the Price 
and Finance Ministry, excess cash reportedly reached $12 billion 
on 31 May, while the budget deficit amounted to $4.2 billion on 
31 December 1993. 
  In subsidizing those basic commodities whose prices are not 
increasing at this time, the Cuban state currently spends $365 
million annually. Meanwhile, consumers currently spend 22-23 
pesos per person per month on rationed products. 
  This restricted family basket, along with rent, electricity 
fees, and other fees for public services currently equal 40 
percent of the minimum wage, which is 100 pesos in Cuba. 

