Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] 
  COCHABAMBA ENERGY PRODUCTION--The Bolivian Government Oil 
Deposits, YPFB, inaugurated the first gas reinjection plant in 
Cochabamba's Carrasco oilfield. The $2.5-million plant will 
prevent the burning of 20 million cubic feet per day, thus 
saving $22,000 daily. In addition, the installation of a 
thermoelectric plant in Carrasco by February or March will make 
Cochabamba the country's largest producer of energy. The plant, 
with an initial 40-megawatt gas turbine, will be financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank, the National Electricity 
Enterprise (ENDE), and the Nordic Fund, which will disburse $10 
million for equipment. [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 10, 11 Dec 93] 
  CHUQUISACA PETROLEUM, GAS PRODUCTION--According to the YPFB, 
Chuquisaca Department, which until recently ranked second in 
petroleum production, now occupies last place. The change 
occurred after August 1993 when all other departments increased 
production at a faster rate than Chuquisaca. Nevertheless, 
Chuquisaca continues to be number two in gas production behind 
Santa Cruz, and is the origin of 45 percent of natural gas 
exported to Argentina. It is estimated that in 1994 three oil 
wells will be drilled: the Isipote X-1, by the YPFB, with an 
investment of $3 million; Cuevo X-I, by Chevron, with an 
investment of $6 million; and Esmeralda, Algarrobal, or 
Mandeyapecua, by Occidental, with an investment of $5 million 
[La Paz PRESENCIA DEL PAIS 19 Dec 93] 
  DONORS' PLEDGES FOR HEALTH, EDUCATION, TOURISM, 
ENVIRONMENT--Following the World Bank-sponsored donors 
Consultative Group meeting in Washington, D.C. on 9 December, 
the International Development Association (IDA)--a World Bank 
affiliate--granted a $40-million loan to assist Bolivia's Social 
Investment Fund (FIS) in health, education, and potable water 
programs in depressed rural areas. In addition, a $50.7 million 
credit line was granted to assist the Integrated Children's 
Development Project in major cities, and another $137 million 
for the FIS will be disbursed in 1994-97. During the 
Consultative Group meeting, it was also decided to finance two 
tourism promotion projects on the order of $27 million. They 
include the establishment of a foundation to promote tourism and 
investments and the formation of a fund to develop the existing 
tourism infrastructure. In addition, Guillermo Justiniano, 
minister of sustainable development and environment, announced 
that projects worth $160 million were presented for his sector. 
The projects include evaluation of various aspects of the 
country's ecosystem such as forests and river basins, as well as 
reforestation projects, especially in the valleys and the 
altiplano. The minister also suggested Bolivia host a conference 
on sustainable development to be attended by heads of state of 
OAS member countries. [La Paz PRESENCIA 9, 24 Dec; EL DIARIO 17 
Dec 93] 
  JAPAN COOPERATION TO COMBAT DROUGHT--The Japanese 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA) will donate $10 million 
to the Chuquisaca Regional Development Corporation (CORDECH) to 
launch the Underground Water Master Plan, which aims at 
eliminating the persistent annual drought in the Chaco area. The 
project involves drilling wells deep enough to capture water in 
sufficient amounts for agriculture, cattle raising, and human 
consumption. Another JICA team visited Santa Cruz Department and 
promised a donation of $8 million to combat drought in 
Cordilleras and Chiquitos provinces. [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 4 Dec 
93; La Paz PRESENCIA DE PAIS 8 Dec 93] 
  AGREEMENTS WITH JAPANESE AGENCY--JICA is recommending a 
credit line of $40 million to assist the Bolivian National 
Railway Enterprise in the acquisition of rolling stock. Japan 
will also donate $8 million worth of heavy equipment to La Paz 
Municipality under an agreement signed with JICA representatives 
and the Bolivian Ministry of Human Development. The equipment is 
to be used for infrastructure projects around the city. [La Paz 
EL DIARIO 10 Dec 93; Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 28 Dec 93] 
  ISRAELI DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE SOUGHT--Jaime Aparicio Otero, 
the under secretary for international political affairs in the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, announced that Bolivia is seeking 
investment and assistance from Israel for various development 
projects. Cooperation is sought in the areas of biotechnology, 
solar energy, educational reform, and the exploitation of water 
resources in the Chaco. Israeli experts and companies are 
already involved in projects to prevent water pollution, recycle 
water, improve seed stocks, and produce chemicals for the mining 
industry. [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 9 Dec 93] 
  SWISS SUPPORT FOR EXPORTS, ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION--Under 
an 
agreement signed between Minister of Foreign Affairs Antonio 
Aranibar and Swiss Commercial Attache Max Inhelder, Switzerland 
has pledged $4.36 million to support projects promoting 
agricultural exports and environmental protection. [Cochabamba 
LOS TIEMPOS 17 Dec 93] 
  BELGIUM PROMOTES HEALTH PROGRAMS--The Belgian Government 
will 
allocate $3 million under an agreement signed with the Bolivian 
Government to promote the development of the Local Health 
Networks (SILOS) in Santa Cruz Department. The four-year program 
will provide training for medical personnel and equipment for 
health centers. Belgian aid to the country for 1993-95 is 
expected to be about $18 million. [Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS 30 Nov 
93] 
  ALTERNATIVE CROPS INCREASING IN THE CHAPARE--According to 
the 
Regional Alternative Development Program (PDAR), the cultivation 
of alternative crops in the Chapare has increased 964.5 percent 
in the last seven years from 254 hectares in 1986 to 2,608 
hectares. Principal crops under cultivation include citrus 
fruits, pineapples, bananas, palmetto, black peppers, and 
passion fruit. The area dedicated to grazing has also increased. 
The farmers, while admitting that the change from coca was 
difficult at first, have now increased the quantity and quality 
of their products and expect to export them on the regional and 
international markets. The establishment of processing plants is 
also envisaged. A German firm is studying the possiblity of 
investing $7 million in a plant to process passion fruit juice 
for export to Europe. [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 22 Dec 93] 
  ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENT IN COCHABAMBA--The National 
Alternative Development Fund (FONADAL) announced that it has 
financed some $300 million worth of projects and programs aimed 
at eliminating illegal coca cultivation in the Cochabamba 
tropics. One of the principal projects envisaged for 1994, for 
which $100 million is sought from international donors, is a 
training program for 50,000 coca farmers in the Chapare 
province. Other projects include the establishment of processing 
plants for cooking oil, syrups, vinegar, and fruit in Chimore, 
and a milk-processing plant in the Ibergarzama region. The 
Regional Alternative Development Program (PDAR) will invest $15 
million in various projects in the Cochabamba tropics, 
especially the Chapare. Priority will be given to roads, 
bridges, ditches, and sewerage systems, which will require 
financing of approximately $8 million. Overall, the PDAR will 
receive $120 million up to 1997 under agreements signed with the 
United States. [Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS 7, Dec 93; Santa Cruz EL 
MUNDO 23 Dec 93] 
  CAMELIDAE CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT--Bolivia will become the 
principal center of a regional cooperation program for the 
management and conservation of South American camelidae 
(alpacas, llamas, vicunas, and guanacos). The project will 
receive support from the Inter-American Institute of 
Agricultural Livestock Cooperation and will receive $800,000 
from the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
and $500,000 (Canadian) from the Canadian Agency for 
International Development. The program aims at improving the 
lives of 4,800 families in Bolivia, Argentina, Chile, and Peru 
who depend on camelidae-raising and occupations deriving from 
it. [Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS 29 Nov 93] 
  MORTALITY, CHILD LABOR, UNEMPLOYMENT STATISTICS--In a 
commentary entitled "Burning Realities," commentator Dante Pino 
Archondo, cites figures from the Ministry of Human Development's 
statistical analysis unit, UDAPSO, to demonstrate the depth of 
Bolivian poverty and condemn the government's indifference to 
it. He also said that in a democracy, social statistics should 
be "available to all" and not just to a "technocratic elite" 
that "stresses only what is convenient" and suppresses anything 
that "threatens its interests." 

  -  70 percent of Bolivians are poor. 
  -  Of the 2,725,946 
Bolivians who live in rural areas, 95.14 percent are poor. 
  -  As of 
1991, 73.8 percent of the 2,488,800 Bolivians living in major 
cities were of working age. Of this total 36 percent were 
employed, the others were unemployed, or "inactive." 
  -  Mortality 
rates have decreased--75 per thousand in 1992 from 151 per 
thousand in 1976. 
  -  Fertility rates have also gone down--5 births 
per woman in 1992 from 6.5 in 1976. The commentator laments 
Bolivia's status as a "subworld of the Third World." "We extend 
our hands to receive charity from other countries calling it 
donations or nonreimbursable aid because we are unable to pay 
anything back. That is what we have been reduced to. Bolivia 
survives." [Cochabamba LOS TIEMPOS 6 Dec 93] The same concerns 
are further addressed in reports by the Pastoral and Social 
Episcopal Commission's Department of Research and Analysis and 
the Ministry of Human Development. 
  -  Infant mortality remains at 
126/1000, mainly in rural areas. 
  -  Over half of Bolivian children 
are malnourished, especially those between six and 24 months of 
age. 
  -  30.6 percent of Bolivia's work force are children between 
the ages of seven and 19. 
  -  Approximately 40,000 children enter 
the work force each year, according to the 1992 Population and 
Housing Census. The reports conclude that the main challenges 
facing the government in its fight against poverty are increases 
in child and peasant woman labor, and in malnutrition and infant 
mortality. [La Paz PRESENCIA 7, 24 Dec 93] 
  SANTA CRUZ GROWTH PATTERNS--The National Population and 
Housing Census reports that Santa Cruz Department's 4.4 percent 
population growth rate is the highest in the country and that 
the population has reached 1.359 million. Unlike other Bolivian 
departments, the population--living in the province where the 
departmental capital of Santa Cruz de la Sierra is situated--is 
mostly urban (71.9 percent). Other data reveal that the average 
age of a resident of Santa Cruz is 22 years, infant mortality 
has been reduced from 120 per thousand in 1976 to 57 in 1992, 
and illiteracy has been reduced to 11.1 percent. Jorge 
Mirtenbaum, who is responsible for drawing up Santa Cruz City's 
Urban Development Plan, said that the departmental capital has 
700,000 inhabitants and is growing at a rate of 6.42 percent per 
year. Most immigrants to Santa Cruz come from Cochabamba, 
Chuquisaca, and Beni, as well as from other provinces within the 
department. Mirtenbaum added that the informal sector (street 
vendors, bootblacks, etc.) represents the city's largest 
job-producing sector, generating 42.8 percent of its gross 
domestic product. [Santa Cruz EL MUNDO 19 Dec 93; La Paz 
PRESENCIA 19 Dec 93] 
  EL ALTO DEVELOPMENT--The La Paz Regional Development 
Corporation (CORDEPAZ) will invest $25 million in various 
projects for El Alto, a satellite city outside La Paz considered 
the third largest city in Bolivia, with a population of 405,000 
and a 9.2 percent population growth rate. El Alto's bishop Msgr. 
Jesus Juarez pointed out that the city is experiencing 
"uncontrolled" demographic growth, and that the central 
government cannot continue to ignore basic needs such as potable 
water, electricity, sewerage, and employment. He urged the 
central government and El Alto authorities to seek a 
"progressive and coordinated solution to prevent the outbreak of 
crime and violence." [La Paz PRESENCIA 14, 21 Dec 93] 

