Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Central People's Broadcasting Station reporter Liu </F>
Zhenying (0491 2182 5391) and XINHUA reporter Xu Yaozhong (1776 
5069 0022)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 7 Mar (XINHUA) -- A four-day national forum 
on foreign investment ended here today. The forum, held by the 
State Council, was intended to comprehensively sum up the 
experience in the use of foreign capital during the 15 years of 
reform and opening up, study future guidelines and policies in 
the use of foreign capital, and promote sustained, rapid, and 
healthy progress of the work of using foreign capital. While 
the forum was in progress, Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the 
CPC Central Committee and president of the state, met with all 
the participants. Li Peng, State Council premier, attended the 
forum, heard the speeches by some of the participants, and gave 
a speech at the meeting. 
  China's success in the use of foreign capital during the 15 
years of reform and opening up to the outside world has 
attracted worldwide attention. Progress in the past two years 
has been especially fast. The country's approved contracted 
foreign investment volume in 1992 equaled the total for the 
preceding 13 years while 1993's volume was twice as much as that 
of 1992. The amount of foreign capital actually invested in 
China in 1993 accounted for a considerable portion of the 
country's total investment in fixed assets, and the volume of 
import and export resulting from foreign investment also 
represented a sizable proportion of China's total import and 
export volume. These facts show that the use of foreign capital 
has played an increasingly greater role in promoting China's 
economic development and accelerating the transition to a market 
and internationalized economy. 
  The forum was held under a new situation in which China, 
having achieved remarkable successes in using foreign capital, 
faces new opportunities and challenges. The party Central 
Committee and the State Council attached great importance to the 
forum. 
  Jiang Zemin, CPC Central Committee general secretary and 
state president, met with all the participants on 7 March. 
During the meeting, Jiang Zemin fully affirmed the 
accomplishments made in using foreign capital during the last 15 
years. He pointed out that the use of foreign capital has 
played a positive role in China's economic development. He 
urged everyone to earnestly sum up the experience, study ways to 
resolve new developments and problems that have emerged in the 
new situation, and to do an even better job of using foreign 
capital. 
  Premier Li Peng attended the forum on 4 March. After 
listening to the speeches by responsible persons from Shanghai, 
Tianjin, Fujian, Guangdong, Chongqing, and other provinces and 
cities, he emphatically pointed out: Using foreign capital is 
an important aspect of China's economic work. Under the current 
favorable situation of reform and opening up, we must study ways 
to do the work even better. 
  In his speech, Premier Li Peng first analyzed and explained 
in general why it was essential for China to further increase 
the use of foreign capital, the possibility of doing so, and the 
new situation and environment at home and abroad in this regard. 
He then focused his discussion on the several issues that 
needed to be studied and addressed to further carry out the work 
of using foreign capital. 
  On how to maintain and develop the strong momentum in using 
foreign capital, Li Peng said: We must seize the current 
favorable opportunity to use more foreign capital in a more 
efficient way to promote China's economic development. To 
attract more foreign investment, it is extremely important for 
us to further improve the investment environment, establish a 
comprehensive legal system, perfect the market mechanism, 
improve the work efficiency of the government, and enhance the 
professional quality of the personnel. In attracting foreign 
capital, China has such advantages as a fairly cheap labor force 
and a galaxy of fairly outstanding technical personnel. The 
biggest advantage, however, is its vast market. From now on, we 
must rely on these advantages to attract foreign investment, 
which will also enable foreign investors to obtain legitimate 
profits in the Chinese market. However, China will not attract 
foreign investment at the expense of its socialist spiritual 
civilization. We must not go for pornographic, vulgar, or 
things of bad-taste, which are incompatible with our socialist 
spiritual civilization. Our next step is to attract more 
international financial consortiums and multinational 
corporations that have strong resources to invest in China and 
to engage in economic cooperation with us. 
  Speaking on ways to realize mutual benefits in using 
foreign capital, Li Peng pointed out: A basic requirement for 
using foreign capital is to ensure mutual benefits under the 
conditions of a market economy. We should protect foreign 
investors' legitimate rights and interests on the one hand while 
guaranteeing our own interests on the other. We should 
strengthen management of foreign- funded enterprises according 
to law which transfer their profits illegally. We should make a 
great effort to attract foreign capital and, at the same time, 
earnestly strengthen management. We should carefully compare 
the terms of foreign investments and select the most favorable 
ones. 
  On how to guide foreign investment in the right direction, 
Li 
Peng stressed: We must formulate sound industrial policies to 
guide the distribution of foreign investment. In addition to a 
national industrial policy, we must also formulate development 
strategies and specific policies for each trade. While 
providing guidance to foreign-funded projects in general, we 
must make overall planning for major foreign-funded projects to 
avoid blind or redundant investments. 
  Speaking on the question of using foreign capital to 
transform old enterprises, Li Peng said: Appropriately using 
foreign capital to transform old enterprises will help 
ameliorate fund shortages among enterprises, bring in advanced 
technologies and managerial expertise, and transform enterprise 
management mechanism. However, we must strengthen property 
assessment to avoid under-evaluation of state-owned properties 
and losses of state assets. Chinese and foreign investors 
should share the risk and undertake joint development. The 
burden on old enterprises in using foreign investment to 
transform them should be rationally distributed. The state 
should maintain controlling shares of key industries and 
backbone enterprises which are vital to the national economy and 
the people's livelihood. 
  On the question of China's ability to pay foreign debts, Li 
Peng pointed out: The size of China's foreign debts is no 
longer small. Therefore, it is necessary to monitor and control 
the size and structure of foreign debts and the efficiency in 
the use of foreign capital to ensure our ability to repay the 
principal and interest. Economic efficiency is the key to 
repaying foreign debts. As long as foreign investment produces 
higher economic efficiency, there should be no problem in 
repayment. We should also consider the overall balance of 
foreign exchange reserves when we use foreign capital. 
  Speaking on protecting the legitimate rights and interests 
of 
Chinese workers at foreign-funded enterprises, Li Peng said: 
Several serious safety incidents happened at foreign-funded 
enterprises. This demonstrated the poor labor safety conditions 
in some foreign-funded enterprises. Some of them have even 
encroached on the workers' rights and interests. Protecting the 
legitimate rights and interests of workers at foreign-funded 
enterprises should be placed on the agenda of governments and 
trade unions at different levels. 
  Leading comrades who attended the forum with Comrade Li Peng 
were Zou Jiahua, Li Lanqing, Li Tieying, Li Guixian, Ismail 
Amat, and Peng Peiyun. 
  Vice Premier Li Lanqing and State Councillor Luo Gan 
addressed the forum separately when it opened on 4 March. Vice 
Premier Li Lanqing summed up the forum on 7 March. 
  Wu Yi, foreign economic relations and trade minister, gave a 
speech during the meeting, providing a systematic introduction 
to China's accomplishments in using foreign capital, the new 
developments and problems it is encountering, and the strategic 
policy decisions and major policy measures in using foreign 
capital. 
  Responsible persons in charge of foreign investment from 
departments under the State Council, provinces, autonomous 
regions, and municipalities attended the forum. 

