Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ljubodrag Stojadinovic: "Tuzla More Dangerous </F>
Than Sarajevo"] 
  [Text] "Good night, Sarajevo, good morning, Tuzla." This 
is the title of a large article published in a newspaper of a 
Western country that is known for its efforts to end the war in 
Bosnia with "legitimate violence." This title is reminiscent of 
the Sarajevo Olympics slogan ("It was nice in Sarajevo, see you 
in Calgary!"). The message of this headline is a symbolic 
transposition of a successful model since everybody is convinced 
now that the Sarajevo model is the achievement of his life. All 
the participants in the Sarajevo action think that they scored 
diplomatic and other victories, which is a very sincere opinion. 
  The atmosphere created by the feelings of victory is to a 
certain extent a logical consequence of the high tension caused 
by the threat of a general war, which would have been a defeat 
for most of the participants and observers of the Sarajevo 
tragedy. All this contributed to the unfolding of events in a 
way that was inconceivable only 10 days ago. The winners are 
the Serbs, the Muslims, NATO, Russia, the tortured inhabitants 
of Sarajevo, the prophets who predicted the end of modern 
coalition monsters, and the cautious. The euphoria was 
expressed in different ways. The most influential were the most 
successful in convincing world audiences that the solution to 
the Sarajevo drama was a historic victory of the suspicious 
institution of ultimatum. After the euphoria had died down, it 
was seen that the story about "the Sarajevo model" was a 
complicated matter, and that this model is applicable only if 
the stones are put very carefully together, and this only once. 
The transfer of experiences is possible, but the transfer of 
the whole operation is, however, impossible. It must be 
realized that there is no universality in a recipe that may have 
been successful in one case. 
  It does not seem that the West is quite convinced that 
everything functioned according to the law of cruel war 
blackmail. In spite of this, the Alliance wants to try out its 
concept -- which consists of threatening force and of creating 
good reasons to avoid its use in the end -- on other Bosnian 
towns. The phenomenon of revenge against one warring faction 
dominated in Sarajevo, but the aim in Tuzla is quite different, 
although it might also include revenge. It is claimed that Tuzla 
airport is the key to the control of events in the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia, but this may be only partially true. 
Closer to the truth might be the formula that there is a 
combination of direct interests and exertion of pressure through 
escalation, a combination in which every move follows from the 
previous one. Apart from the ultimatum (which is in a certain 
sense already set), in the case of Tuzla there is also the 
element of real provocation directed toward Serbia and the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This has not been confirmed in 
public (yet), but nor has it been denied. 
  Tuzla airport is more important closed than open. If it is 
open, there is no great and dangerous theatrical performance 
around it -- which must have the dimensions of a exciting war 
story in order to be of interest to the audiences and to result 
in expected reactions. If the Serbs do not yield to the 
blackmail, the airport will be opened by force. Many analysts 
think that such a move (legitimate violence) would have 
considerably more serious consequences than the hypothetical 
chase after Serbian guns around Sarajevo. The deadline set by 
NATO for the opening of Tuzla airport is 7 March. This is proof 
that there is a difference in the procedure between Sarajevo and 
Tuzla. In case of Sarajevo Butrus-Ghali asked NATO to prepare a 
bombing action. In case of Tuzla, however, NATO asked 
Butrus-Ghali to act and took on the privilege for itself to 
support the action from the air. Basically, NATO dictated the 
rules of the game in both cases, though without having two basic 
pieces of information. First of all, whether its dictate was at 
all accepted, and second, how it would behave if its offer to 
support the action from the air was flatly refused. The 
Sarajevo action was explained with a series of humanitarian 
reasons and with the destiny of approximately 200,000 people, 
while the "Tuzla operation" on the other hand is explained with 
the necessity of having an airport, without mentioning that 
there are people in Tuzla, too -- just as in Sarajevo. In this 
case predominantly Serbs. 
  Careful observers of the events in Bosnia are afraid of the 
future, of the announced spring offensives and of the 
restoration of the unnatural love between the Croats and the 
Muslims. The announced NATO violence against the Serbs in 
eastern Bosnia, supplies of weapons to the Muslims, and the 
increased presence of the West on the Drina River would have 
give a unique sense of threat to all Serbs. For this reason 
Tuzla is a critical point for the war caravan in the Balkans. 
Will everything be stopped at the last minute? Is it enough to 
rely on energetic diplomatic help from Russia? An ultimatum is 
not allowed as a means of exerting pressure, but it is 
convincingly dangerous because it functions in this way, since 
it is always possible to use force in the end. 
  Not only the Serbs, but the whole world will some day be 
confronted with the dilemma as to what point agreements cannot 
be made any more, and when methods of humiliation should be 
used. Sarajevo became history a long time ago. Tuzla might be 
the town of the biggest drama, and it is important that 
everybody knows what he has to do until the climax is reached. 
[sentence as published] The night between 20 and 21 February was 
declared the night of general victory, and this may be the best 
sign that no new deadlines should be set, because there is 
always enough time for defeats. There have been a few wars that 
ended through an ultimatum, but some of the biggest started 
exactly in this way. 

