Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by "special correspondent" Jose Maria Mayrink in </F>
Havana] 
  [Text] Brazilian citizens Rodolfo Andriani and Leonardo 
Fares, who were in Havana in late January to negotiate an energy 
deal with the Cuban Government, were satisfied with the first 
contacts made. The businessmen commented: "Judging from the 
development of the negotiations, it is quite likely we will 
establish a joint venture [preceding word in English] in the 
next two or three months." 
  Andriani is general director of Inepar Trading, a Parana 
State company trying to enter the Cuban market with Audiolab 
Electronic Systems, from Belo Horizonte, of which Fares is 
president. The idea is to refurbish thermoelectric plants and, 
eventually, participate in the nuclear project. 
  "The Cubans accept any deal," said the Brazilian businessmen 
after observing the speed with which the representatives of the 
socialist public enterprises close deals with foreign 
capitalists. 
  In Brazil's case, some previous agreements at the government 
level have expedited the negotiations. Brazilian Ambassador 
Jose Nogueira Filho, who has been in Cuba for about one year, 
commented: "In the transportation field, for example, the Cubana 
de Aviacion airline already has one flight a week between Havana 
and Sao Paulo, and soon we will have a Brazilian airline 
covering this route." 
  Moreover, a Cypriot shipping company has a regular service 
between the Cuban ports and Belem, in Para State, where it 
unloads cement and loads timber. The trade balance currently 
tilts in Cuba's favor. Last year Cuba exported goods worth $21 
million and imported goods worth $9 million. The volume this 
year will be even larger. 
  Prospects are also good in the tourism field, where the 
Cuban 
Government has focused its investments. The first deals already 
have been made, and Spaniards are Cuba's main partners in this 
field. In 1993 the hotel business made $600 million. This 
year, with an income of more than $1 billion, the hotel business 
should surpass sugar production. Canadians and Venezuelans also 
are interested in this sector. 
  Foreign capitalists have even greater interest. Chilean and 
Israeli businessmen have engaged in fruit production while the 
French, Canadians, and Swedish are interested in oil 
prospecting. A South American diplomat tells business people 
inquiring about the prospects in Cuba: "The only risk of 
investing in Cuba is that the United States might lift the 
embargo because, if so, then they will crush the competitors." 

