Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bridgetown, Barbados, 12 Jan, CANA -- The benefits 
to be derived and the implications for Caribbean Community 
(Caricom) countries if they obtain equal treatment under the 
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) will be high on the 
agenda of an international meeting here later this month. 
  In an interview with CANA, Mary Mahabir, a member of the 
conference's organising committee, said the January 24-25 
conference will "explore the issues, options, legal aspects, and 
implications of obtaining parity for Barbados and the other 
Caricom countries". 
  "Because of the emerging trends in international trading, 
Caricom and the wider Caribbean will have to align itself with 
some trading bloc, whether it be NAFTA, or the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) arrangement," Mahabir told CANA. 
  "If Caricom countries are granted parity under NAFTA, 
essentially what this means is that they will be opening up 
their markets and entering in new trading arrangements.... We 
therefore want to look at the implications of this on Caribbean 
economies, our manufacturing sectors, our labour relations and 
so on," she said. 
  "Therefore the issue of parity for Caribbean states will be 
assessed ... so we can look and see whether the disadvantages 
in gaining this NAFTA parity will seriously outweigh the 
advantages to be derived and vice versa," the attorney-at-law 
remarked. 
  Caricom countries are lobbying to secure a parity 
arrangement under NAFTA, in order to gain better access to North 
American markets for their goods, especially garments and 
textiles. 
  Mahabir said the conference was also created to "better 
educate" the region's people about the issue. 
  "Most people are aware of the broad concept of NAFTA ... 
that it is a free trade agreement ... but they are not 
familiar with or aware of the intricacies or the legal aspects 
of it. 
  "So we are hoping to publish a book on the papers that will 
be presented ... and then circulate it to make people more 
aware of what NAFTA and the parity arrangement will be all 
about," Mahabir said. 
  Representatives from the United States, Canada, and the 
Caricom grouping are expected to attend the conference. 
  They will present papers on topics including "The Overview 
of NAFTA and Its Implications for the Hemisphere and the World 
Trading System," and "Market Access: Tariffs, Customs 
Procedures, and Drawbacks". 
  The meeting is being sponsored by the International Fiscal 
Institute (IFA). The institute is headquartered in Rotterdam, 
Holland, and has several branches worldwide. 
  The IFA has a mandate to host seminars and conferences to 
explore issues of international importance, especially 
financing, trading and tax-related matters. 

