BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aissa G. Garcia] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 21 Apr (PL) -- The U.S. immigration policy, 
which has given Cubans favored [diferenciado] treatment since 
1960, is held hostage by ultraright-wing U.S. immigration 
sectors and is the center of criticism by other, less favored 
nations, experts have asserted. 
  Milagros Martinez, director of the Policy Alternatives 
Studies Center (CEAP), told PRENSA LATINA that the emigrants 
conservative sector utilizes its financial power to degrade any 
congressional program that attempts to modify the current 
policy, which does not benefit most of those groups. 
  Issues, such as family reunification and the immigration 
process, were widely discussed at a meeting between Cuban 
authorities and the Cuban community abroad which was held in 
1978. Such issues could return to the agenda in the second 
meeting of this type, which will be held here this weekend. 
  Referring to this possibility, Martinez stressed that Cuba 
had made its emigration policy more flexible and that "more 
people do not go to Miami because the United States does not 
want them." 
  In recent years, there has been a decrease in legal 
emigrations and an increase in illegal ones, CEAP specialist 
Antonio Aja told PRENSA LATINA. The specialist considered the 
U.S. immigration policy to be contradictory. 
  In reality, he stated, investigators have indicated that 
they 
do not know if the immigration treatment given to Cubans is part 
of the established policy or if it is a package of 
circumstantial measures that originated in the general framework 
of the Cold War. 
  Aja opines that those contradictory elements, which have 
repercussions on civilian society and even at government levels, 
such as the Immigration and Naturalization Services (SIN), 
contribute to making many Cubans decide to emigrate. 
  As an example, he mentioned the 1966 adjustment law for 
Cubans that ensures automatic asylum and the right to residence 
(a year and a day after arrival) to Cubans who emigrate 
illegally and who consider themselves to be political refugees 
regardless of whether they are such or not. 
  In his opinion, this explains the great immigration 
advantages Cubans have in relation to other minorities, against 
whom the United States has currently imposed stronger measures 
to reduce the flow of foreigners to their country. 
  Another point of contradiction, Aja says, is marked in the 
exodus program that gives Cubans the possibility of using the 
embassies of third countries as a springboard to request asylum 
and later travel to the United States. 
  He cautioned, however, that since the beginning of the 
current year, this program has been stopped because of the 
negative repercussion it had in Mexico and the Dominican 
Republic, among other countries. These countries do not want to 
confront this type of problem because it does not relate to them 
and stems from migration confrontations between Cuba and the 
United States. 
  That is not the only channel, however, used to motivate the 
illegal exodus, the specialist commented. He added that another 
channel is accepting that temporary visitors decide to settle in 
the country, a request generally rejected if it is processed on 
the island. 
  Why is a Cuban not classified when he presents his request 
to 
travel to or permanently reside in the United States at the 
Washington Interests Office in Havana. Why is he well received 
if he risks his life at sea to enter the United States through 
the Florida coast, Aja asked. 
  In his opinion, the U.S. immigration policy, due to its own 
inconsistencies, requires reform that should include the 
depoliticization of the issue and an attempt to regularize the 
migration ties between Havana and Washington. He said Cuba must 
also redesign its emigration policy, despite the fact that it 
was made more flexible in 1978. 
  Asked about the 1984 migration agreements, Aja asserted that 
Cuba had allowed the departure of citizens who had been 
convicted for going against state security, accompanied by their 
families. 
  With regard to the return to the island of the so-called 
excludables (2,700 Cubans with criminal records who left the 
country through Mariel port in 1980), he said this has not been 
possible, among other things, because those citizens have 
worsened their legal situation in U.S. jails to impede their 
extradition. He asserted that Havana has always been willing to 
receive those people and has made its position known, so now 
Washington has to take a stand and offer a solution to this 
issue. 
  On the concession of granting up to 20,000 visas a year to 
Cubans who want to visit or live in the United States, the 
specialist observed that the U.S. Administration has not kept 
this agreement, which also forms part of the U.S. immigration 
law. 
  As in the past 30 years and different to the treatment given 
to other communities, Cubans continue to have open doors to the 
United States, especially if they come through the route that is 
more hazardous, the illegal one, he said. 

