Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Cheng Weigao, secretary of the Hebei Provincial </F>
CPC Committee, at the provincial forum of personages of various 
circles on marking Comrade Mao Zedong's 100th birthday sponsored 
by the provincial party committee at the Xibaipo Memorial Hall 
Square on 25 December] 
  [Text] The provincial party committee held a forum of 
personages of various circles to ceremoniously mark Comrade Mao 
Zedong's 100th birthday. In their speeches, comrades, with deep 
feelings, extolled Comrade Mao's outstanding contributions, 
spoke highly of the party's experiences in inheriting and 
developing Chairman Mao's great causes gained since the third 
plenary session of the 11th party Central Committee, and looked 
forward to the Chinese nation's bright future in the 21st 
century. So, I profoundly experienced their deep love and 
esteem of Chairman Mao. I think that anyone who is growing up 
from old China understands that the motherland turned itself 
gradually from a state of being enslaved and devastated to a 
rich and powerful country, and recalls the great leader 
pioneering the cause of revolution and construction. 
  There are only seven years remaining until the end of the 
20th century. As far as the Chinese nation is concerned, the 
20th century was not only a gravely disastrous century, but also 
one in which to create brilliance again. In the first half of 
the century before 1949, China overthrew the rule of 
imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucrat-capitalism and created 
the fighting history of new China. In the latter half of the 
century, the Chinese people worked arduously to pioneer 
undertakings and explored ways to build, consolidate, and 
develop the history of socialism. We cannot divorce ourselves 
from the name of Mao Zedong when reviewing these two arduous and 
brilliant sections of history. 
  China was confronted with two historical tasks in modern 
times: One was national independence and the liberation of the 
people. The other was to make the country powerful. Comrade 
Mao Zedong struggled all his lifetime to fulfill these two 
tasks. This embodied his historical contributions. We can say 
that Comrade Mao Zedong did two great deeds during his lifetime. 
The first great deed was that he led the party and the people 
to overthrow the rule of imperialism, feudalism, and 
bureaucrat-capitalism and accomplished the tasks of democratic 
revolution. Proceeding from Chinese history and the specific 
situation of society and on the basis of summing up the 
experiences of the Chinese revolutionary struggle, Comrade Mao 
Zedong created the theory on new democratic revolution and 
discovered the revolutionary road of encircling the cities from 
the rural areas. Comrade Mao Zedong, with gigantic theoretical 
courage, resolutely proceeded from reality, resolutely resisted 
the influence of both domestic and foreign dogmatism, gained 
experiences from setbacks and failures, and discovered the 
accurate revolutionary roads suitable to the Chinese national 
situation. As a result, China won a victory in revolution. 
This was the first great matter task by Comrade Mao Zedong 
during his lifetime. The second great task was that he made 
efforts to explore ways to build China's socialism after 
accomplishing the transformation of socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. Comrade Mao Zedong was one to make such 
explorations. He was the first person to acutely discover the 
malpractice and weak points of the socialist pattern of the 
Soviet Union and definitely advocated that China should have its 
own way of building socialism. To this end, he guided the 
Chinese people to arduously explore and took extremely tortuous 
roads. He left many brilliant ideas through these exploration 
courses, and these ideas are still of important guiding 
significance. 
  We may say that Comrade Mao Zedong left us with an 
unaccomplished will of making the country strong and the people 
rich. He failed to see with his own eyes the fruitful results 
of his undertakings of exploration and creation. The 
undertakings left unaccomplished are being realized with the 
efforts of CPC members, with Comrade Deng Xiaoping as their 
representative. On the basis of summing up, according to the 
principle of seeking truth from facts, both positive and 
negative experiences and lessons gained since the founding of 
the PRC and in line with the new practical experiences, Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping, with gigantic theoretical courage, defined that 
our country's socialist system is still in the "initial stage," 
set forth a series of policies and principles for reform, and 
summarized these policies and principles into the theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the basic 
line of "one center and two basic points," and finally found the 
road of building socialism with Chinese characteristics that Mao 
Zedong failed to find at that time. This is the only way for 
developing socialist China and the way for China to seek 
prosperity and stand among various nations in the world. 
Through the arduous efforts of the people of the whole country 
in the past 15 years, our country's gross national product has 
doubled and the people are striding toward the target of being 
fairly well-off. With full confidence, we can tell Comrade Mao 
Zedong that his aspiration of catching up with and surpassing 
the developed countries in the world is being realized. 
  To recall Chairman Mao's fruitful achievements, we should 
emulate Mao Zedong; inherit and develop Mao Zedong Thought; use 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics to guide the work in various aspects; 
accelerate the progress of reform, opening up, and 
modernization; and ensure long-term peace, stability, and 
prosperity of the country. 
  To emulate Mao Zedong, we should conscientiously study his 
thinking and work style of seeking truth from facts, proceeding 
from reality, and linking theory with practice. Comrade Mao 
Zedong had a good command of Marxism and the Chinese traditional 
culture. Foreign conventions or ancient conventions restricted 
him from exploring ways for the Chinese revolution. He always 
opposed the practice of studying theories not according to the 
Chinese socialism and the reality of the Chinese revolution. 
Early in 1930, he opposed book worship and stressed that 
without investigations there would be no right to speak. The 
greatest reality we are confronted with now is to promote the 
large-scale development of socialist productive forces through 
the setup of the socialist market economic system. As far as 
our province is concerned, we should grasp favorable 
opportunities, intensify reform, expand the scale of opening up, 
speed up the pace of development, and strive to build the 
province into an economically powerful province. As a large 
province near Beijing, Hebei will be unworthy of not only its 63 
million people, but also Comrade Mao Zedong's cordial concern 
with and earnest aspirations for Hebei during his lifetime, if 
we are unable to make a faster development or continue to widen 
the gaps with advanced provinces and municipalities. So, we 
should go deep to the forefront of reform and development, exert 
efforts to study the new situation, and use the new ideas and 
methods that are suitable to the requirements of the market 
economy to solve various kinds of complicated problems relating 
to deep-layered reform work. We should thoroughly change the 
mental state of sticking to old conventions, remaining undecided 
or adopting a wait-and-see attitude when faced with favorable 
opportunities, and being blindly self- satisfied in the course 
of development. The broad masses of cadres in the province 
should actually form a brand-new outlook of seeking truth from 
facts and emancipating the mind. 
  To emulate Mao Zedong, we should conscientiously study Mao 
Zedong's thinking of sharing woe and weal with the people and 
serving the people wholeheartedly. Mao Zedong often exhorted 
that the whole party was the vanguard of the proletariat, 
existed and fought for the interests of the people, and was 
always a small part of the people; and that once the party was 
divorced from the people, it would fail to realize its ideals 
and its struggles would become meaningless. On the eve of the 
victory in democratic revolution, Mao Zedong predicted that 
there would be dangers of being divorced from the masses within 
the party. We should firmly remember Chairman Mao's exhortation 
to the whole party when he was in Xibaipo and continue to 
maintain the style of being modest and prudent and guarding 
against arrogance and rashness. 
  We should continue to maintain the style of arduous 
struggle, 
always take root among the masses, always persist in the purpose 
of serving the people wholeheartedly, and make unswerving 
efforts to fundamentally improve party style and social practice. 
  To emulate Mao Zedong, we should conscientiously study the 
spirit of bravely exploring and arduously doing pioneering work 
as advocated and practiced by Mao Zedong. Mao Zedong constantly 
regarded the world as an endless development course and took his 
own undertakings as a course of continuous exploration and 
pursuit. He was never satisfied with existing achievements and 
constantly regarded existing achievements as a starting point 
for his new explorations and pioneering work. We can say that 
Mao Zedong made ceaseless efforts to make explorations and do 
pioneering work during his lifetime. Some of his explorations 
became brilliant historical contributions; and some became 
precious ideological heritage in the form of experiences and 
lessons and also guided us to make wider and deeper explorations 
and do pioneering work today. The Volume 3 of the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping is just the result 
and fruit of the explorations in the past 10 years or so. Our 
purpose to study the Volume 3 of the Selected Works of 
Deng Xiaoping is to make better new explorations and do 
new pioneering work. The year 1994 will arrive soon. Next year 
will be a key year to comprehensively reform the economic system 
and speed up the setup of the socialist market economic system, 
as well as to satisfactorily fulfill the Eighth Five-Year Plan 
and quadruple the gross national product ahead of schedule. So, 
we should grasp the new favorable opportunity of reform and 
development and adopt a fighting attitude to devote ourselves to 
the great exploration and pioneering undertaking. 
  Comrades: Let us inherit and develop the undertakings 
pioneered by Mao Zedong, persistently take Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as guidance, ceaselessly keep forging ahead, and 
capture a new victory in reform, opening up, and socialist 
modernization. 

