BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Franjo Tudjman to the 100th session of </F>
the Croatian Government in Zagreb -- live] 
  [Text] Ladies and gentlemen: Allow me to add to what I 
said in my introductory address and to what the prime minister 
has just said. When I paid tribute to the government and its 
head, Nikica Valentic, I had in mind its overall successes 
during -- as Nikica said -- the ongoing war situation. It is 
not just a war situation but also an exceptional period. We 
must bear in mind that all countries in the former socialist 
bloc are going through a deep crisis even without the war that 
we have had to endure. The collapse of the socialist system and 
artificial multinational states have caused a turmoil both of 
political, administrative, and economic nature. We must look at 
ourselves with pride when we say that not a single one of the 
countries that has not had to endure war has succeeded in the 
transitional period of setting up a free and democratic system, 
a free market, or in achieving better results than Croatia 
despite all our difficulties brought about by the war in Croatia 
and in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Only the Czech Republic is slightly 
ahead of us. All others are far, far behind Croatia in all 
aspects, in the political and economic sphere. 
  In other words, these results have been achieved due to 
Croatia's policy as a whole and to its government and, as Prime 
Minister Valentic has just said, they provide us with the basis 
to remain consistent in pursuing our policy. Like me, you have 
probably heard more than one foreign diplomat or economic expert 
say that we have succeeded because we knew exactly what we 
wanted, because we had the leadership, because we had support 
for our policies in both the parliament and among the people. 
This experience speaks for itself. 
  Of course, the government and all of us were faced with 
enormous tasks in setting up new state administration, in 
getting rid of the old, communist, self-management system both 
from institutions and people's minds. This was not easy and the 
task is still there if we are to create an effective and 
efficient state administration. However, even under normal 
conditions, it would take years to complete such tasks. What 
this means is that despite our situation even in this sphere we 
have succeeded in achieving a great deal. 
  I must remind you that we had to set up an army, to arm this 
army despite the adverse international situation. We had to arm 
200,000 men. You know what it means for such a small country as 
Croatia. 
  We had to create a new diplomatic service. We are still 
faced with the same task and this is a big problem in view of 
the lack of experience of personnel. In other words, we had to 
reorganize our state administration to get rid of the communes 
that we inherited, etc. So, what we have so far achieved in 
reorganizing and introducing the new system of administrative 
divisions, i.e. municipalities, counties -- this is yet to be 
completed -- nevertheless our state administration is 
functioning; well, the prime minister cited as the most 
exemplary case the fact that our taxes, the amount collected in 
taxes, had doubled up compared to what it was a year ago. 
Despite all problems and difficulties our state administration 
is becoming increasingly effective and efficient. 
  Another task facing us is to set up the rule of law in all 
its aspects. However, the type of the rule of law we wanted was 
not possible with the country at war, with one third of the 
Croatian territory under occupation -- later only one quarter 
remained under occupation after we liberated parts of the 
territory -- with 300,000 refugees who brought to Croatia their 
pain and suffering and hatred of those who caused their pain and 
suffering, with the bombing of our towns, and for as long as 
Croatian people were killed and expelled even from the Croatian 
territories under UN protection, i.e. from the territories under 
Serb occupation. In such a situation, while there were still 
remnants of the Yugo-communist army on our territory -- even 
today, the other day at a location the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs discovered dozens of kilograms of explosive that was to 
be used to destroy both the Croatian authorities and Croatian 
buildings, etc. -- well, it is clear that under such 
circumstances, when the new Croatian state, new Croatian 
democratic authorities, and the Croatian people were faced with 
the need to fight for survival, that despite all our efforts to 
introduce the rule of law we could not achieve the results we 
could have done. But, even in this sphere we have, in fact, 
achieved considerable results. 
  One should have a look at what the situation is like in this 
respect in all these countries -- in all other wars. I was the 
first to advocate the granting of civil and human rights to the 
Serbs in Croatia. I am still for it, and it is our duty. But 
some people keep forgetting that the Serb population was 
deceived and dragged into the war against the new Croatian 
authorities. Despite that we managed to maintain our attitude 
toward the Serbs in Croatia -- we still had Serbs in the 
government, in the parliament, we had them in the supreme 
judicial bodies. 
  Should we recall that when America was at war with Japan all 
members of the Japanese people were put into camps and their 
property confiscated. These are simply certain patterns in war 
show-downs. What was England's behavior like in the Falklands 
and so on and so on. If we are not completely satisfied with 
the results that we achieved in the area of the law-governed 
state and democracy, and we are not completely satisfied, we can 
say likewise that in many respects we have done things beyond 
our expectations. We managed to streamline our state system into 
the direction of strengthening democracy, strengthening the 
law-governed state, and there is no reason not to face the truth 
and continue on this basis. 
  As regards other results, I think that it is clear that 
this government has achieved great results in the ownership 
transformation in a way that secured, even under war conditions, 
the continuation of economic trends and avoidance of poverty and 
privation. For objective reasons a drop in production was 
recorded, but it was not the same as in other former socialist 
countries where production and the living standard dropped far 
more than in Croatia. 
  Even though we have to speed up the problem of economic 
recovery, we can nevertheless be pleased particularly with what 
the government in cooperation with the National Bank has managed 
to do as regards the program of stabilization and in curbing 
inflation. This is a Croatian miracle -- there are miracles in 
the political sphere and this is a miracle in the economic 
sphere -- and the people abroad, including the most eminent 
experts, are surprised and admit... [pauses] and which also 
contributed to the fact that, alongside with the overall policy 
that we have pursued, because we coordinated our national state 
interests with the main European and world players, such a 
policy is a success for the government in the economic sphere, 
in the stabilization. This represents a recognition of this 
government led by Nikica Valentic and of the National Bank led 
by Pero Jurkovic. This trend should continue and we ought to 
have a new Croatian hard currency before our deadline, for which 
absolutely favorable conditions are being created in the changed 
international circumstances. 
  Please permit me to say this: It is not a mere phrase but is 
a historic truth that the international circumstances were not 
favorable for the creation of an independent and sovereign 
Croatian state. They wanted to preserve the former Yugoslavia 
for many reasons, or return us, and so on. 
  By the policy that we pursued, by our democratic order 
within 
the country, by our successes -- about which I spoke earlier -- 
and by our foreign policy we brought Croatia to such an 
international position that we now really have favorable 
conditions in every respect. Today we have the main world 
power, the United States, as our ally, as our partner. It is 
ready for cooperation in all areas. It is ready to lend us 
support for the resolution of our main problem -- peaceful 
reintegration of Croatian areas under UN protection, i.e. under 
Serb occupation -- into the constitutional and legal system of 
the Republic of Croatia. 
  We have a friendship agreement with China, the country with 
the largest world population. We have good and friendly 
relations with the majority of European countries including the 
main ones. Pursuing our policy we established good relations 
with Islamic countries; we are on the road to establishing good 
relations with Israel. Therefore, Croatia's international 
position is such that it is almost impossible to imagine a 
better one. 
  But of course, we must not bring it into question with some 
stupidities of our own. But, if we were capable of creating 
Croatia, of bringing it up to here both in the internal and 
international spheres, then we have enough experience, 
intelligence, knowledge, and strength to continue following the 
same course. 
  It is now up to you, the government, to be ready to take 
advantage of these favorable circumstances. Before we were 
blocked in the international arena, even though we were 
diplomatically recognized. We were blocked because the world 
players still procrastinated and did not know what to do with 
the crisis in the former Yugoslavia, particularly in Bosnia and 
so on. When they saw for themselves, they opened up their doors 
to us and now it is up to us to offer concrete programs to 
certain countries -- the USA, the EC and certain countries, to 
international financial institutions. In this respect I would 
ask the prime minister -- and I believe that because the 
government has been ready and able to come to grips with this 
task so far -- that we take advantage of this for our further 
economic recovery, for Croatia to become a country of prosperity 
in every respect. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, it is clear that the creation of the 
Croat-Bosnian federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
confederation of the federal Bosnia-Herzegovina with Croatia 
represents a new development for us, new obligations, new 
possibilities, but also challenges to which we have to be ready 
to respond. 
  The policy that we pursued brought about the federation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, which means that the Croat nation in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina is really becoming an equal constituent 
nation in every respect, regardless of the fact that it is 
smaller in number. 
  As you saw at the constituent assembly, the Croatian banner 
was hoisted next to the Bosnian Muslim one. Therefore, this is 
only a formal way of looking at it. 
  Our people there must learn to take part in administering 
the 
entire Bosnia-Herzegovina, even more so as it is in the interest 
of the world that the federal Bosnia-Herzegovina, through 
Croatia, be linked to Western democracy. Our government, for 
its part, has to be ready to take an effective part in the 
confederal relations so that effective economic, cultural, and 
other links with Croatia can be established. It is in the 
interest of the Croat people there, in the interest of the 
Bosnian people there, and in the strategic interest of the 
Croatian state. 
  This imposes obligations and challenges, but also creates 
favorable circumstances because such a federal 
Bosnia-Herzegovina will be granted credits and be favorably 
treated by a large number of Islamic countries that will be 
ready to offer aid both for the reconstruction and the future 
economic life of Bosnia-Herzegovina. This is something that 
should be well thought about both by the complete government and 
by some of its departments. In a word, we must equip ourselves 
for such a task so that the federal relations there and our 
confederal relations are such as to be useful for the Croatian 
people, the Croatian state, and of course for the nations living 
in that federation there; to be in the interest of the political 
and economic stability; and be in our interest but also Europe 
and the Western world. 
  Gentlemen, all this indicates that we shall nevertheless 
manage to reintegrate these Croatian areas under UN protection, 
i.e. under Serb occupation, into our constitutional and legal 
order in a peaceful way. This is now a different situation. 
  The agreement that was signed does not provide for any 
demarcation of borders but only provides for the separation of 
armed formations in order to prevent conflicts -- conflicts that 
have inflicted human losses on us. There have been situations 
whereby it was difficult to contain the anger of our people in 
those border areas and the anger of the armed formations of the 
Croatian Army. Some people lost their nerve and were taken in by 
provocations and by their actions sometimes did damage to the 
Croatian state policy. At the beginning of this month I had to 
adopt a decision on the replacement of a colonel who 
unnecessarily carried out an offensive action that inflicted 
political damage on us and caused casualties on our side -- 12 
killed and 44 wounded. This is one example -- we have had 
several -- where one should have thought whether it was only 
carelessness, justified anger, or it was even a provocation, 
even an intentional sabotage by remnants of the secret service. 
Let us not deceive ourselves that we have managed to remove 
them from everywhere and from every position in the light of all 
that has happened. 
  Therefore, with this cease-fire agreement we have created 
conditions to begin the normalization for which those in 
Belgrade who are responsible for the occupation have voiced 
their support -- which the two great powers are also urging: the 
main world superpower, the United States; Russia, which has also 
been cooperating with the United States; and Europe, which has 
proved to be unsuccessful in the resolution of that crisis in 
Bosnia and in UN protected areas, is following them. This gives 
us reasons to count on that, but on our part, we have to be 
likewise effective in the implementation. We are seeking the 
restoration of trust, but one should bear on mind that the Serb 
extremists in those areas between Knin and Baranja were 
instigated by Belgrade expansionists who wanted a Greater Serbia 
and that those and suchlike managed to deceive a considerable 
number of Serb population in those areas that danger was looming 
from the democratic Croatia. 
  For our part, we must show that we are truly willing and 
that 
we want to ensure all civilian and ethnic rights to the Serbs. 
What we want to achieve is also in the interest of the Serbian 
people. We shall now take up....[pauses] The previous 
agreement on the normalization of relations, the opening of 
offices -- ours in Belgrade and the Belgrade one in Zagreb -- is 
based on the same principle. We shall work on the gradual 
opening of communications: roads, railways, oil pipelines, and 
long-distance power lines. In this way trust will gradually be 
established and efforts will be made to secure the return of our 
refugees. My particular request to the government is to begin 
the reconstruction of those villages that were liberated in the 
Maslenica operation, [names of villages indistinct]. I must 
admit I was surprised the other day when I saw that very little 
has been done in this respect. Wherever reconstruction is 
possible or wherever the return of refugees is possible, which 
must be our priority, we must start this process. 
  You can see for yourselves that refugees have rightly been 
dissatisfied with the way their return has been stalled. I 
think that for our part we must take steps to ensure that they 
start to return gradually. On the other side we must give 
support to their demands so that the world can see that their 
demands for return are justified. However, such a procedure, 
i.e. gradual normalization, should lead to the integration of 
these areas into Croatia, with the help of major international 
factors. For our part, we must be prepared to abide by the 
constitutional law regarding these two districts, Glina and 
Knin, where Serbs were a majority before the war, and we must 
ensure that they have elections for local self-rule. In 
general, we must tackle this problem in the political way in 
order to resolve it as quickly as possible without new victims. 
  As far as the government's other task is concerned, I would 
like them to take into account that we will be able to reduce 
considerable Army expenses now that war dangers are on the 
decrease. We must also work on cutting down on bureaucracy 
wherever possible, introduce austerity measures -- as discussed 
by Mr. Valentic -- in order to secure more funds for those areas 
that have been neglected, such as culture and sciences. 
  In this context of transformation and denationalization I 
would ask you to examine whether we could, and I think we can, 
begin with the transformation of former socialist collective 
farms and agricultural enterprises and donate part of this land 
to refugees, especially volunteers, for political and economic 
reasons. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, since time immemorial those who 
carried 
the burden of war, who gave most in wars to defend their 
homelands, have been rewarded in this way. We should consider 
whether it is possible to do it for a period of 10 years and 
with what kind of compensation and so on, but such a step would 
pay our debt to those people and perhaps create conditions for 
the speedier resolution of the problems we are facing at the 
moment. 
  Of course, the permanent task of debureaucratization 
remains, 
the permanent task of modernizing our state administration. To 
do that we will probably need more international expertise and, 
so to say, training or schooling of our people, because the 
layers of the past when the authorities were not in the service 
of the nation, of man, of people, but in the service of the 
ruling party, those layers are still here. We must fight them 
with resolution in order for the Croatian man to feel that he 
now has the Croatian authorities that serve him but which in 
return he has to treat as his authorities and his state. This 
is a mutual process that needs to be enriched in the right 
sense, in a legal sense, in the work of the state administration 
and also in the educational sense. 
  Let me give an example -- a banal example -- in education. 
I watched a French-German tennis match on TV. The stands were 
full, and there were a lot of Austrian [as heard] flags. One 
day I went to the Cibona sports hall. The hall was empty and 
there was not a single Croatian flag. There were a dozen 
Yugoslav (?flags), they won several championships and so on. I 
asked myself where the Zagreb of tennis was, where the national 
Zagreb was. That is something that needs to be looked into. 
That is how the civic, sport, and national spirit is developed. 
From Switzerland to America school lessons and sport 
manifestations begin with national anthems and state flags. 
  A good part of our people -- especially in the media where 
there are a lot of holdovers from the old times -- have not 
become used to the fact that we have our own state, that people 
should be brought up accordingly, and that we should behave 
accordingly everywhere -- from sport and culture to economy and 
so on. This is a banal example, but it speaks clearly for 
itself. 
  Excuse me for resorting to such a (?petty) example, but it 
seems to me that it is characteristic precisely because in other 
areas too it meets with a huge lack of understanding. 
  Once again, Prime Minister Nikica Valentic, let me express 
full recognition and gratitude for the work of the government. 
I fully agree that it has been possible to achieve these 
results only because you presented a united front, because the 
government as a whole was united, and because every minister, 
every member of government, was responsible for his or her 
ministry and further progress should be made along the same 
lines. 
  You were completely independent in the work of the 
government 
as a whole and in individual ministries. We should continue in 
the same way. But, gentlemen, speaking about that, the 
government as a whole and every government member -- as well as 
every civil servant, every clerk in the government -- must 
implement the state policy. There cannot be several policies. 
This government has done this, but in certain places at the 
level of clerks there are people who think that they can pass 
decisions according to their own judgment. Yes, everyone should 
be independent, but independent in the purposeful, useful work 
of implementing the overall state policy. 
  At my latest news conference I was asked whether there will 
be any changes in the government and what kind of changes. I 
said what the prime minister has just said. There will be no 
changes in the government. The government has won the majority 
support in the parliament, the trust of the people, and it also 
has my trust -- and it will have it because it works well and in 
the interest of Croatia. In my talks with Prime Minister Nikica 
Valentic we discussed no other problem than Croatia's interests. 
The interests of the Croatian people and the Croatian state are 
our priority. They are above all party interests, all 
particular, group, and other interests. So, rest assured that 
we will continue pursuing the policy that has achieved the 
results -- both in the internal and foreign spheres -- of which 
we can all be satisfied and proud. Thank you. 

