BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Aviva Shabi and Tzvi Singer: ``The Mentors''] </F>
  [Excerpts] In the meeting of the National Religious Party 
[NRP] Knesset faction, held last week in the shadow of the 
detentions of Kakh and Kahana Hay activists, Hanan Porat spoke 
of the need to establish a spiritual leadership, a sort of 
council of Torah scholars for the Zionist-religious movement. 
[passage omitted] 
  Two of the names mentioned in this context were Rabbi 
Yisra'el Ari'el, of the Temple Institute [makhon hamiqdash] in 
Jerusalem, formerly the rabbi of Yamit; and Rabbi Dov Li'or, the 
Qiryat Arba' rabbi and the head of the high school-yeshiva in 
town. 
  It was no accident that the two, Ari'el and Li'or, led the 
funeral of the murderer-doctor, and even eulogized him. Ari'el 
compared Goldstein to Judas Maccabaeus and Samson, who killed 30 
men with the jawbone of an ass, and called him a martyr. 
  In his eulogy at the Qiryat Arba' yeshiva, addressing 
hundreds including the yeshiva students, Rabbi Li'or described 
the deceased as a man full of love for his fellow men ``who 
could no longer take the humiliation and the disgrace. 
Everything he did was in honor of Israel and for the glory of 
God.'' [passage omitted] 
  Rabbis such as Li'or and Ari'el disturb the NRP heads for 
good reason. First, they make all of the Judaea, Samaria, and 
Gaza rabbis look like extremists. Second, they inspire 
followers such as Goldstein. Those spiritual mentors do not 
openly identify with Kahana's movement, but their world view is 
pretty close. Things they do not explicitly say, often remain 
open for personal interpretations. Things are quite often said 
behind closed doors -- during yeshiva classes on Jewish 
philosophy and ethics -- under the assumption that they will not 
reach the ears of the secular public. When they leak, they cause 
major storms. 
  Four years ago, Rabbi Neriya, head of the Bney 'Aqiva 
yeshivas, was at the center of such storm when a letter he wrote 
was read out in a conference of rabbis in Jerusalem. The 
conference was held to protest the conviction of Rabbi Levinger 
of causing the death of a Hebron shoe trader. Neriya, who won 
an Israel Award for education and is admired by tens of 
thousands, wrote for the occasion about the type of distress in 
which Levinger found himself. He said that ``this is not a time 
to think; it is time to shoot left and right, and do everything 
required to chase away murderers who rise to break your skull, 
stab you through the heart, or break your bones....'' 
  Neriya explained that he was speaking of acts of 
self-defense 
when under a death threat. He did not even think of condemning 
the rabbi who, according to the judges' ruling, shot 
indiscriminately and endangered the lives of innocent people. 
  This argument surprised no one, considering the enormous 
importance of rabbinical decrees for the religious public. Upon 
his detention in 1984, Menahem Livni, head of the Jewish 
underground, wrote about the support of ``Qiryat Arba' rabbis'' 
for ``acts of mass terrorism'' staged to deter the Arab 
population. 
  The names mentioned in that document were Rabbi Li'or, Rabbi 
Waldman, Rabbi Levinger, and Rabbi Yo'ezer Ari'el. Equipped 
with the rabbis' support, the members of the Jewish underground 
went to assassinate Arab mayors. This support, however, did not 
help them when they were arrested. The rabbis were questioned 
by the police, but came out unharmed by the whole affair. 
  Rabbi Li'or is no eccentric, nor does he belong to the 
maniacal fringes; he is the flesh and bone of the 
religious-Zionism. He is a graduate of the Merkaz Harav Yeshiva 
in Jerusalem, and an assiduous follower of late Rabbi Tzvi 
Hakohen Kook. Therefore, any attempt to dismiss him is very 
difficult. Li'or is considered a superb halakic ruler and 
diligent scholar; he was Chief Rabbi Shapira's candidate for the 
post of judge at the Rabbinical High Court in Jerusalem. The 
state attorney ruled out his candidacy due to his racist remarks. 
  His opinions were expressed, among other places, in a letter 
Li'or sent several years ago to a military physician who asked 
for his opinion about practicing giving intravenous injections 
on detained Arab terrorists in the framework of a military 
drill. ``If it is possible to conduct experiments on worthless 
persons, who deserve to die in a country ruled by law, and if 
this is being suggested by a soldier, and if it could be done, 
it should,'' the rabbi wrote in his reply. Another remark 
attributed to Li'or was made in a conference of rabbis: 
``Several Arabs should be sent to heaven for each Jewish 
fatality.'' Several people who attended talks and classes with 
Li'or have claimed that these remarks are among the most 
moderate he has ever made regarding the Arabs. 
  Rabbi Ari'el is also a graduate of Merkaz Harav. He served 
as the Northern Command chaplain; as a paratrooper, he took part 
in the battle for Jerusalem and the taking of the Western Wall 
in the Six-Day War; and headed the high school-yeshiva of Yamit 
with his brother, Rabbi Ya'aqov Ari'el, today the chief rabbi of 
Ramat Gan. Another Ari'el brother is Yo'ezer who teaches in 
Li'or's yeshiva in Qiryat Arba'. The fourth brother, Yig'al, is 
the rabbi of the Golan settlement of Nov. Yig'al Ari'el was one 
of the rabbis who strictly condemned the massacre. 
  Yisra'el is considered the most extreme brother. He is 
remembered from the evacuation of Yamit as the one who called on 
IDF [Israel Defense Forces] soldiers to refuse orders. After 
the evacuation, he used his compensation money to buy a luxury 
apartment in the Jewish Quarter in Jerusalem, and established 
the Temple Institute. In the 1981 elections he was No. 2 on 
Kahana's list of candidates for the Knesset. In 1983 he was 
arrested along with Kakh activist Barukh Marzel during a 
security forces operation to foil an attempt by extremists to 
take over the Temple Mount. Incidentally, Rabbi Li'or is an 
ardent supporter of redeeming the Temple Mount. He even urged 
putting up a fence around the al-Aqsa mosque, preventing alien 
access to it, and setting up a Jewish house of prayer next to it. 
  Another outstanding representative of the extremist craze is 
Rabbi Yitzhaq Ginsburg, the rabbi of the 'Od Yosef Hay Yeshiva. 
He is highly thought of by the settlers who used to be secular. 
He is of American origin, and belongs to Habad. His 
association with Gush Emunim and the Merkaz Harav school of 
thought was made possible through the students of the yeshiva he 
heads. Some say he was adopted by them to provide them with 
ideological legitimacy. His influence on the national religious 
public is insignificant. 
  Ginsburg's Kahanist views were first revealed when he 
defended one of his students who opened fire at Arab workers on 
the Geha road. After five of his students were arrested on 
suspicion of killing an Arab girl in the village of Kifl Harith, 
he declared that ``Jewish blood and Arab blood are not equal.'' 
He remained firm even after a complaint was filed against him 
with the police for racist incitement, and after NRP Secretary 
General Sha'ul Yahalom demanded that he be ousted from his role 
as yeshiva head. 
  In an interview with HA'ARETZ's Ya'ir Sheleg, Ginsburg 
confirmed that he supports some of Kahana's ideas. He clarified 
his stands by saying that ``there is a great difference in the 
punishment becoming a person who hurts a Jew and a person who 
hurts a gentile... the life of a Jew is worth much more than the 
lives of many gentiles.'' [passage omitted] 
  ``At the same time,'' Prof. Ehud Sprinzak of the Hebrew 
University in Jerusalem says, ``if ever a new Jewish underground 
is set up in Israel, the people who found it will first ask 
those three to legitimize their acts.'' Sprinzak specializes in 
studying radical right-wing movements. Among others, he studied 
the Jewish underground. 
  ``There has been no act by the Jewish underground which did 
not have a rabbinical backing,'' Sprinzak said. ``Even the 
plans that were not carried out, such as blowing up the Temple 
Mount mosques, were canceled because the rabbis did not approve 
of them. Hence, there is a chance that the most radical 
elements of Gush Emunim will seek extremist rabbis' support if 
they ever decide to establish a new underground. The three 
rabbis mentioned here are certainly potential addresses should 
matters deteriorate, and I am afraid they will.'' The three 
rabbis, incidentally, refused to be interviewed for this article. 
  After the underground was uncovered in the summer of 1984, 
Rabbi Ari'el set up a small group called Tzfiyya [observation]. 
Rabbi Li'or was also part of this ideological group. According 
to Prof. Sprinzak, ``this was the only group of the entire 
national-religious camp which provided the Jewish underground 
with absolute halakic backing after it was uncovered.'' 
  In a lengthy article Rabbi Ari'el published in the TZFIYYA 
booklet, he determined, among other things, that the commandment 
``you shall not kill'' does not apply to Arabs; according to his 
interpretation, the ban only applies to Jews. Rabbi Ari'el 
found halakic support for his claim that when Jews murder Jews 
they should be tried in courts on earth, but anyone who murders 
an Arab will only be tried in heaven. [passage omitted] 
  The teachings of Rabbi Kahana are, therefore, the obvious 
and 
hidden thread connecting the three rabbis. A thorough 
examination of the stands reveals a surprising similarity 
between their stands and the Hamas [Islamic Resistance Movement] 
concepts on cardinal issues: Both share a vision of a religious 
state between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea; and 
xenophobia which refers to aliens or the secular (``infidels'' 
as the fundamentalist Muslims call it; Hellenizers, as Kahana 
called it); they both demand that all aliens be removed from the 
entire holy land; both perceive the conflict as an East-West 
cultural clash; and they both reject the Western culture, the 
source of all evil that came upon the nation. 
  ``We should know what the reality is,'' Rabbi Li'or wrote. 
``The Torah is very explicit: But if you do not drive out the 
inhabitants of the land from before you, then those of them whom 
you let remain shall be as pricks in your eyes and thorns in 
your sides, and they shall trouble you in the land where you 
dwell.'' He further wrote in favor of the notion of transfer: 
``Removing the Arab residents of Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza is a 
state task.'' [passage omitted] 
  It is no coincidence that Li'or agreed with the definition 
of 
the intifadah as a war: in an interview to IDF Radio he said 
that ``in a state of war the prohibition against hurting 
innocent people does not apply and collective punishment is 
permissible.'' [passage omitted] 
  Prof. Sprinzak emphasizes that Ari'el, who suffered greatly 
as a result of his activity in Yamit and in Kakh, is no longer 
active in the militant groups. He ``came out of the closet'' 
while delivering his obituary to Goldstein. However, one of the 
settlements' rabbis, who asked to remain unnamed, related the 
following story: 
  ``Several years ago -- after one of the mass terror attacks 
-- a student rose up during one of my lessons and said he wanted 
to retaliate. He quoted Rabbi Ari'el as an authority for this 
sort of action. Since I could not dissuade him, I suggested 
that we both call Ari'el and ask for his opinion. Ari'el's 
answer: I do not recommend to do so, but I also cannot say that 
I oppose it.'' [passage omitted] 

