BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Rudolf Scharping, SPD chairman and minister </F>
president of Rhineland-Palatinate; and Joschka Fischer, Greens 
deputy and environmental minister of Hesse, by Thomas Hanke and 
Fritz Vorholz; date and place not given: "You Have To Say What 
Is Important"] 
  [Text] DIE ZEIT: Mr. Scharping, have we 
understood you correctly? You said you want to struggle for 
"ecologically honest prices" and an "economic and ecological 
reorientation of the tax system," and you have also said that 
"the costs of mobility must reflect the costs of environmental 
damage." 
  Scharping: Yes. Then there will be no constant 
development without ecological progress. 
  DIE ZEIT: We are basing our question on 
quotations from the CDU [Christian Democratic Union] basic 
program. 
  Scharping: That does not matter. The CDU makes 
unscrupulous use of definitions. If one wants to understand CDU 
policies, one must pay attention to results, and ignore the 
practice of playing about with definitions. 
  DIE ZEIT: I take it that if you become chancellor 
you will combine the combating of unemployment with the 
ecological revival of the economy? 
  Scharping: That is correct. It will include a 
modernization of the state's social spheres. 
  DIE ZEIT: You, Mr. Fischer, have described the SPD 
[Social Democratic Party of Germany] program as "Green 
cosmetics." Why? 
  Scharping: If the SPD wants an ecological 
restructuring, that is certainly praiseworthy and good. But we 
will have to see whether the government assumes responsibility 
for this. That is the problem. 
  DIE ZEIT: But before we indulge in a political 
dispute, I would like to say what this country really needs, and 
I simply cannot imagine how one can create the required number 
of jobs without investing major funds in an expansion of the 
transportation system or energy supply. These funds will have to 
be consumed, and society will have to be told about this. 
  Scharping: There is a major difference between the 
SPD and the Greens. We say that the level of taxation to be 
reached in 1995 must not go any higher. 
  Fischer: I agree. We are united on that issue. 
  Scharping: In that case you have to explain how, 
apart from the 10 percent supplementary tax, you intend to 
include the investment aid levy, labor market levy, increase in 
capital transfer tax, property tax, capital gains tax, crude oil 
tax, living space tax, speculation tax, tax on increased 
property value, and packaging levy in your concept. The Greens 
are saying virtually nothing about the SPD's wish to balance out 
these expenses. 
  Fischer: Wrong. When we talk about additional tax 
burdens, we must examine shifts in the tax balance, not 
additional quantities of taxes. The tax we want to impose on 
raw material and energy consumption must of course be gradually 
balanced out in the form of improved services, or by a reduction 
in income-related taxes. 
  Scharping: The SPD program is extraordinarily 
specific concerning ecological measures and concerning ways of 
relieving incomes of the tax burden and easing the tax burden of 
enterprises that are undertaking investments. Examples are tax 
exemption on the lowest incomes, a uniform child benefit of 250 
marks per month and per child, and an abolition of Kohl's 
solidarity tax supplement, instead of which an extra tax could 
be imposed on the first 20 percent of one's income. That would 
increase and strengthen growth. We want to create jobs and 
reduce wage-related costs, in this way making a serious effort 
at relieving the burden on employment and increasing the burden 
on raw materials and energy consumption. On the other hand, the 
Greens program is doing nothing except causing a new ecological 
debate. 
  Fischer: I admit our party congress did not 
discuss a specific adaptation to the finance concept. We did 
not intend to discuss it in any case. But the SPD also seems 
not to have examined this topic comprehensively. It seems to 
have given it merely a cursory examination. The situation will 
look quite different when an onslaught on the state's coffers is 
finally made and the financial realities are spelled out in Bonn. 
  But it is quite wrong to believe that we have not said 
anything on the subject of tax relief. For instance, we want to 
balance out the capital gains tax by means of adjustments to 
other taxes. In this point I think we are more honest. 
  Scharping: But the Constitutional Court must 
provide a guideline before then. Our program states that we 
cannot impose a bigger tax burden on used assets and on 
pensions. Neither can we increase tax on owner-occupied 
accommodation. 
  But the main point of economic and ecological development is 
the need to release the forces of growth in Germany. That can 
only succeed if enterprises have clear conditions that they can 
rely on, conditions that are not bureaucratic and do not inhibit 
a product-oriented environmental protection. But that will not 
work if we keep getting new signals for new tax burdens. 
  Fischer: I see no reason to object. These new 
signals, primarily signals for investments, must be 
green-oriented, so that new environmentally-friendly jobs can be 
created. Then I too will be ready to help abolish the 
bureaucracy surrounding environmental legislation. 
  DIE ZEIT: Mr. Scharping, basically the SPD also 
wants to change the price traffic lights to green. But your 
program conceals real intention behind the statement 
"appropriate measures." That is very vague. 
  Scharping: On the contrary. We have said very 
clearly that the consumption of energy and raw materials must be 
made more expensive. But since the Maastricht treaty, we no 
longer have the possibility of implementing our own energy 
taxation. This now has to be decided on a European level. 
  DIE ZEIT: Our research has provided us with a 
different answer. There is no real ban on implementing our own 
tax. 
  Scharping: Yes there is. In any case, the German 
economy's international bearing is stronger than that of the 
other major economies, and one cannot support Europe politically 
while retaining an economy that is only geared internally. 
  Fischer: Rudolf, the European Union does not stop 
you taking the lead, and that does not mean one is a 
nationalist. You seem to be hiding behind Europe, just like the 
present Federal Government. 
  Scharping: On the contrary. 
  Fischer: And I do not think we can seriously 
restructure the environment after energy prices have become more 
expensive. European electricity prices are moving in a sort of 
channel. I think we should travel along the top of this channel 
in order to create pressure leading to a greater efficiency of 
new technologies. That is also the idea behind establishing the 
price of gasoline to five marks per liter. No one among us has 
said that we want to raise gasoline prices to this level 
immediately. 
  Scharping: In the first year, a liter of gasoline 
should go up by 50 pfennigs, and in subsequent years 30 pfennigs 
annually. 
  Fischer: We gradually want to raise crude oil 
taxes, in order to finance the development of an energy-saving 
automobile. That is the main objective. At the same time, we 
want to use these funds to develop local transportation systems. 
On the other hand, I consider your views half-hearted. You know 
very well that if you are serious about your slogan of "work, 
work, work," you have to proceed in this direction. But you 
obviously do not have the courage to say so right now. 
  Scharping: You are not going to make this idea any 
more correct by constantly repeating it. As far as energy 
prices are concerned, we are quite near the top of the European 
table. A global market can no longer be financed out of German 
state resources alone. I consider it naive and dangerous to 
think that it can. 
  Ecological modernization is the human-friendly way to the 
future. It is a political and technological challenge, and not a 
bureaucratic straitjacket. At the same time, this is one of the 
growth markets of the future. One must convince others about 
this. 
  DIE ZEIT: When will you convince the European 
partners? 
  Scharping: There are enough objectives we can 
implement independently. In the construction sphere, we want to 
draw attention to ecological aspects. Electricity can be 
generated from recycled energy sources, and thus relieved of 
tax. We want to improve storage facilities for this type of 
electricity, and we want to encourage the use of solar energy in 
our "100,000 Roofs Program." In this sphere of environmental 
progress alone, the SPD has come out with over 30 very specific 
suggestions that I fail to see among the Greens. This is 
national policy that only we can implement. It is 
scientifically future-oriented and environmentally wise, and it 
will create jobs. 
  Fischer: The main problem is the prices of energy. 
Even the "100,000 Roofs Program" will not help much unless 
recyclable energy sources are economically viable. What I miss 
in the entire debate is a determination to proceed with a 
thorough renewal, for example a decision to solve traffic 
problems in conurbations in the course of 20 years, or turn 
Germany into a leading nation in the use of solar energy. If 
there were a second railroad revolution or a breakthrough in 
energy economization, you would certainly get your new jobs. 
But you must have the courage to set the financial points in 
such a way that the train travels in the right direction. 
  DIE ZEIT: Until now, Germany has performed quite 
well with its leading cost-effective environmental policy. 
  Scharping: Careful. It is true that we are 
number one in the world concerning industrial smoke filtering, 
water filtering, and removal of waste. But I fear we are 
threatened with a delay in development because until now we have 
concentrated almost exclusively on the environment. In Japan, 
on the other hand, the government, industry, and science are all 
involved in what is known as "ecolution," that is a combination 
of ecology and evolution. In the United States there are 
similar initiatives -- not just in the sphere of "information 
highways," but also in the "clear car" concept. With the 
government acting as anchorman, the experiences of science, 
industry, and research are brought together in order, for 
example, to produce cars that consume less fuel. Therefore in 
Germany, too, we must redirect our steps so as not to miss this 
opportunity. 
  DIE ZEIT: For this purpose, the SPD has suggested 
a "Forum of Future-Oriented Products." Mr. Fischer obviously 
has grater trust in price signals. 
  Fischer: So does Rudolf Scharping. If he pauses 
to examine the consequences of what he is saying, he will go 
further than the mere idea of producing a fuel-efficient car. 
The price of gasoline is presently 1.50 German marks per liter, 
about the same as at the end of the 1950's and the beginning of 
the 1960's when one ignores inflation. In any case, I am quite 
prepared to talk to him about the speed with which the price of 
gasoline should increase. I do not understand why the SPD is so 
afraid to discuss this. 
  Scharping: You are underplaying people's 
acceptance of an ecological reform policy. You will never gain 
support for a policy aimed at increasing the price of gasoline 
by 50 pfennigs next year, just as you will never make people 
believe that nuclear energy can be given up in one or two years. 
That is utter nonsense. 
  Fischer: Your idea about reducing the speed limit 
is just as nonsensical. To bring speed limits in line with the 
rest of Europe... 
  Scharping: We have not done that. We have said: 
A reduction in the speed limit to 130 kmh on 90 percent of 
German freeways, in keeping with EU recommendations... 
  Fischer: But Germany is the only country without 
a general speed limit. This makes as much sense as the 
statement of ours that you keep on quoting. 
  DIE ZEIT: Mr. Scharping, is it possible that you 
do not trust the voters? 
  Scharping: The voters are much wiser than some 
propagandists think. But in Germany there is a shortage of at 
least five million competitive jobs, two million people are 
looking for affordable accommodation, and 1 million children are 
being brought up with social security benefits. No progress can 
be achieved in Germany if one pursues the slogan "More Tax and 
More Bureaucracy." Therefore we must open the road to growth, 
or else there will be no boom, no permanent jobs, and no stable 
state finances. I also wish to win majority support for a 
triple reform idea -- a socially strong, socially just, and an 
ecologically modern Germany. 
  Fischer: We will see what happens about majority 
support. But as far as the diagnosis is concerned, I see nothing 
wrong. However, the mass unemployment, the enormous costs of 
unification, the missing kindergarten places, the necessary 
educational expenses, and the costs of the environmental 
restructuring have brought us to a point where we just tell the 
people: The high level of consumption of the 1980's cannot be 
maintained because of the drastically rising state debts under 
the Kohl/Waigel government, and because we need additional funds 
to safeguard the future. Therefore I think it is a good idea to 
say before the elections what is the most important thing. 
  Scharping: You must say what is important. You 
are talking not of restructuring, but of increases. Let me tell 
you this. If the Greens suggest a tax on the size of 
accommodation, and raise the tax on property and crude oil and 
introduce an additional tax... 
  Fischer: I had better keep quiet after the public 
row you have caused. 
  Scharping: That is why I am asking. When you 
carry out all your plans and work out how much they cost, you 
will realize that a typical family with two children in a 
Frankfurt suburb will never be able to make ends meet. You 
Greens can never reimburse with benefits what you demand in the 
form of levies. 
  Fischer: That is childish. I would not want to see 
a worker's family with two children earning a mere 3,500 marks 
per month. But one cannot avoid considering a fairer 
distribution of burdens. He who can afford more should pay 
more, for I am convinced that a greater burden has to be borne 
in order to combat unemployment. 
  Scharping: Joschka, your idea of a new "social 
contract" between "ecologically conscious better wage earners," 
as the Greens describe them, and the "socially disadvantaged" is 
too short- sighted. This is not a reform coalition. Qualified 
workers, engineers, and self-employed persons belong to it. 
  Fischer: Exactly. And these are the people who 
have to be told the truth. 
  DIE ZEIT: According to the SPD program, the social 
security system and tax system are supposed to be implemented 
together. 
  Scharping: Right. State benefits that serve to 
bridge the social gap must not increase in line with incomes. 
That is why we insist on fixed amounts of money for child 
benefit and housing construction, and the abolition of tax on 
these benefits. This will release many people from the tax 
burden, and render many bureaucratic procedures superfluous. 
  DIE ZEIT: I wonder how long we can continue making 
certain benefits also available to better wage earners. 
  Scharping: That is something which the tax system 
must control, not the social security system. Otherwise there 
will be overview, and no majority support. 
  Fischer: We will see. 
  Scharping: I overlook the fact that some of your 
views are quite unfeasible. Even in environmental policy, you 
are not doing the things you should have and could have done. 
Saarland has gone further than any other land as far as solar 
energy is concerned, Hamburg has achieved the greatest progress 
concerning water conservation. The pollution map shows only two 
rivers marked in dark red -- the Emscher, and the Ried in Hesse. 
I could give more examples. 
  Fischer: Your examples are inaccurate. You omit 
to mention our 105 million mark expenditure on water 
conservation measures, our law on energy conservation, our 
program for improving the safety of chemical installations, and 
a lot of other things. But let us stick to nuclear energy. The 
Greens have resolved -- against my wishes -- that the abandoning 
of nuclear energy within the space of two years is technically 
and legally possible. There is nothing wrong with that. But 
who is to pay for it? 
  Scharping: It would cost 200 billion marks. 
  Fischer: It is possible to reach a consensus 
whereby the abandoning of nuclear energy can only be seriously 
possible when there is a reform coalition. But I do not know 
how long that would last. What I do know is that the oldest 
nuclear plants, such as Biblis A, will be out of service. One 
can immediately say no to the processing of nuclear fuel abroad. 
  Scharping: I agree. 
  Fischer: Wonderful. Therefore the processing 
facility in Sellafeld will also be expendable. All this can be 
achieved. The remaining operating periods for individual 
reactors will be agreed upon, and the disposal of strict limits 
of nuclear waste will have to be arranged. 
  DIE ZEIT: Mr. Scharping, if you become 
chancellor, how long will it be before the last nuclear plant is 
switched off? 
  Scharping: Not very long. Stade can be closed 
down, and Biblis A as well. Closing down the rest depends on an 
energy consensus that must lead to the abandoning of nuclear 
energy. 
  DIE ZEIT: What about the option of reverting to 
nuclear energy if there turns out to be a safe reactor? 
  Scharping: No, there would be no return to 
nuclear energy. 

