Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arto Astikainen: "Relative Strengths Reversed </F>
Again: Proponents of EU Membership More Than Opponents"] 
  [Text] The relative strengths of proponents and opponents 
regarding EU (European Union) membership in Finland have again 
swung in the opposite direction. While in November the opponents 
of EU membership appeared to be for the first time slightly 
greater in number than opponents, at the end of December 
supporters have climbed back with a narrow lead. 
  According to a poll conducted in December by Suomen Gallup 
Oy, 42 percent of Finnish voters supported EU membership and 35 
percent opposed it. Twenty-three percent refused to state a 
position. In November, supporters were 36 percent and opponents 
41 percent. 
  The Suomen Gallup poll, which was commissioned by Helsinki 
ILTA SANOMAT, was conducted through telephone interviews between 
Christmas and New Year's Day. The number responding was around 
2,000. 
  They were asked whether Finland should become a member or 
remain outside of the EU. 
  Those who did not express a stand were asked to still try 
and 
consider what position they favored. In this manner, the 
proportion of those with no opinion dropped from 23 percent to 
14 percent. At the same time, the percentage of supporters rose 
to 46 percent and opponents to 40 percent. 
  If the percentages are calculated using only the for or 
against responses, 53 percent of respondents supported 
membership in the EU and 47 percent opposed it. 
  At the time of the November poll, a lively debate was taking 
place in Finland regarding the EU Commission's stand on 
Finland's goals for its agriculture. The Commission was regarded 
as acting negatively to Finland's wishes. During the time the 
December survey was being conducted, this discussion of 
agriculture issues had already died down. Coming to the fore 
then were such events as the strong showing of Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy in the Russian elections. 

