CSO 

<F P=106> [Article under the rubric ``The Portrait of a Problem'': </F>
``Science Under the Dropper''--first paragraph is POISK 
introduction] 
  [Text] A meeting of the collegium, which was devoted to the 
tallying of the results of the work in 1993 and the 
specification of the tasks on the formulation and implementation 
of state scientific and technical policy during the year that 
has begun, was held in the Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy of the Russian Federation. Let us acquaint the readers of 
POISK with the heads of the report of Minister Boris Saltykov 
and the conclusions, to which the collegium came after 
discussing the report. 
  The main goal of state policy in the sphere of science and 
technology is the preservation of the scientific and technical 
potential of Russia and its adaptation to the conditions of the 
market economy. 
  However, the achievement of this goal has been complicated 
by 
the real economic situation in the country, by the high 
inflation rate, by the budget deficit, by the aggravated 
political situation, and by the sweeping decrease of the demand 
for innovations, which has led to the intensification of the 
crises in the scientific and technical sphere. 
  The volume of direct contracts of enterprises with 
scientific 
organizations has decreased sharply, the share of exploratory 
research on the development of the necessary scientific and 
technical reserve in the total volume of work has declined. In 
particular, at scientific research institutes and design bureaus 
of machine building it decreased from 26 percent in 1991 to 0.8 
percent in 1993. The quantity of completed research and 
development and produced prototypes of new equipment in machine 
building has decreased in the past three years by a factor of 
11, about 60 percent of the scientific research institutes do 
not have an experimental base. 
  The building of science facilities, which were begun in 
previous years, has actually been halted. Pilot works and pilot 
plants, including unique ones that do not have analogs, are 
falling into disrepair due to the lack of assets for their 
maintenance. 
  The prestige of scientific labor has declined sharply, 
particularly due to the low wage, which in 1991 was 6.8 percent 
less and in November 1993, 38 percent less than the average for 
the national economy. The number of personnel of science and 
scientific service in 11 months of 1993 decreased by 350,000, or 
13 percent. 
  Not only the personnel potential of Russian science, but 
also 
the possibilities of its reproduction are decreasing, since the 
share of graduates of higher educational institutions, who are 
linking their career with scientific work, is decreasing. 
  As before the problem of the ``brain drain'' remains urgent. 
The representatives of the intellectual elite make up, according 
to the estimates of experts, only 5-10 percent of the number of 
specialists of the highest and intermediate skill. However, the 
loss of even one representative of the scientific and 
technological elite can be of importance for the development of 
the country and can do substantial harm. 
  The breaking of the established scientific and technical 
ties 
between the organizations and enterprises located on the 
territory of the former USSR is doing appreciable harm to the 
development of science and technology. 
  Due to the lack of currency the scale of international 
scientific cooperation has decreased noticeably. There is no 
opportunity to purchase abroad instruments, equipment, licenses, 
and scientific and technical publications. 
  The volumes of the publication of scientific and technical 
literature have declined significantly and the numbers of copies 
of it have decreased substantially due to the sharp increase of 
prices for paper and printing services. Given the overall sharp 
increase of the rates for electric and thermal power at a number 
of power-consuming institutes more than 60 percent of the budget 
assets, which are being allotted for scientific research, are 
being used to pay for energy resources. The situation with 
regard to communications services is similar. 
  The situation with the financing of research and 
development, 
the amounts of which (in comparable prices) have been decreasing 
annually, turned out to be particularly tense. Here it was 
carried out extremely unevenly and according to the remainder 
principle. In 1993 for the financing of science only 72.9 
percent of the planned assets were allocated from the assets of 
the republic budget. The debt to science in 1993 reached 300 
billion rubles [R]. The monthly principle of financing did not 
make it possible in 1993 to carry out full-fledged scientific 
activity and to conclude contracts with coperformers. 
  In spite of the difficult situation in the country, the 
scientific and technical potential of Russia remains very 
mighty. Much domestic research and development not only are 
competitive with respect to ``western'' research and 
development, but also lead the world level. Russia retains 
leadership, in particular, in the sphere of the ultra long-range 
transmission of AC and DC electric power of ultra-high voltage 
and in the development of individual types of ecologically clean 
power plants of large, intermediate, and small capacity. 
  However, the existing achievements are being assimilated 
slowly. For example, up to 30-40 percent of the developments of 
scientific organizations of the agricultural type are not 
finding use at all in production, while the genetic potential of 
strains and hybrids of agricultural crops and of breeds and 
lines of animals is being used at a level of not more than 60 
percent. 
  In 1993 a number of steps of an economic organizational 
nature, which were aimed at moderating the effect of the crises 
on the scientific and technical sphere, were taken. 
  Among the most important of them are the steps on the 
concentration of a significant portion of the scientific 
potential and financial resources on priority directions of the 
development of science and technology. 
  The practical implementation of steps on the establishment 
of 
a network of state science centers of the Russian Federation was 
also begun. The financing of the scientific and technical 
programs of 42 centers, which are performing work in priority 
directions of science and technology, including in the area of 
theoretical and experimental physics, chemistry, biology and 
biotechnology, aeronautics, astronautics, shipbuilding, optics 
and electronics, medicine and individual sectors of machine 
building, was carried out. 
  In 1993, 41 state scientific and technical programs were 
implemented, of them the Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy of Russia was the state client for 38. These programs 
included 250 directions, which envisage the development of new 
technologies, equipment and materials for the agroindustrial 
complex, medicine and health care, power engineering and 
transportation, mining and metallurgy and chemistry, 
construction and other sectors, as well as the development of 
research in promising directions. For the purposes of increasing 
the concentration of resources on the most effective and 
promising research and development work was begun on the review 
of the composition and list of projects of the programs on the 
basis of their independent examination. 
  The competitive selection of priority technologies and new 
types of products, which are ready for use starting in 
1994-1995, was carried out. Their list was turned over to the 
Ministry of the Economy for implementation within the framework 
of state structural policy. 
  In 1993 the privatization of the scientific and technical 
sphere continued. However, the methods of privatization that are 
being used take insufficiently into account the specific nature 
of scientific and technical activity, which led at times to the 
disintegration of formed capable scientific complexes. In 
connection with this the drawing up of the draft of a decree of 
the government on privatization in the scientific and technical 
sphere, which takes its peculiarities into account, is being 
completed. For the successful implementation of scientific and 
technical policy a new system of financing, at the basis of 
which is the principle of the special-purpose financing of 
priority projects and programs with the systematic expansion of 
the practice of competitive financing, was proposed. 
  Attention should be directed to the fact that in recent 
times 
a number of important decisions on the stimulation of scientific 
and technical activity have been made. In particular, by the 
edict of the president of the Russian Federation of 22 December 
1933 goods and technological equipment, which are imported to 
the Russian Federation within the framework of free technical 
aid that is given for the conducting of joint scientific work, 
were exempt from the value-added tax [VAT]. The government 
approved lists of scientific research organizations, which are 
exempt from the fee for land and the property tax (846 
scientific institutions were exempt from the property tax in the 
tax amount of R3.47 billion, 285 scientific institutions were 
submitted for exemption from the fee for land in the amount of 
R851.5 million). 
  For the purpose of increasing the social protection of 
scientists in 1993 the concept of the establishment of a 
nonstate pension fund for the personnel of science was 
formulated and its practical testing was carried out, a statute 
on pay for the academic degree of doctor and candidate of 
sciences was prepared and approved by the Ministry of Labor, and 
the draft of a decree on pay for the academic titles of 
corresponding members and academicians of sectorial academies of 
sciences, as well as proposals on common principles of the 
establishment of longer annual leaves for scientific personnel 
who have academic degrees were sent to the government. 
  Particular attention in 1993 was devoted to questions of 
cooperation with the regions. The Ministry of Science and 
Technical Policy of Russia formulated the concept of regional 
scientific and technical policy. Financing for the support of 70 
regional scientific and technical programs and 47 projects was 
allotted on a matching basis from the republic budget. Assets 
from local sources were enlisted in the financing of these 
efforts. Interregional scientific and technical programs, of 
which the Siberia, Chernozem Zone, and Ural programs are the 
most prominent, were also implemented. The bulk of the programs 
and projects underwent examination through the Interdepartmental 
Council of the Ministry of Science and Technical Policy of 
Russia and the presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences for 
regional scientific and technical policy and cooperation with 
the higher school. 
  In 1993 the work connected with the enlistment of foreign 
firms in the implementation of state scientific and technical 
programs was coordinated. Financial support was given to Russian 
scientific organizations that are performing work within the 
framework of 514 international scientific and technical projects. 
  A number of agreements on scientific and technical 
cooperation with countries of the CIS, including on the 
conducting of joint work in the area of welding, powder 
metallurgy and new ceramics and on laser technologies, were 
signed. A database on scientific facilities of joint use is 
being developed. 
  An intergovernmental agreement of the countries of the CIS 
on 
the interstate exchange of scientific and technical information, 
which is of great importance for the preservation of the formed 
information ties and the furnishing of collections with 
materials on the achievements of science and technology, was 
concluded. 
  Taking into account that the steps taken in 1993 in the area 
of science and technology do not encompass the entire set of 
accumulated problems and on the basis of the government program 
of the development of reforms and the stabilization of the 
Russian economy, one should regard as the most important tasks 
for 1994: 

  -  the concentration of state resources on the development of 
large science centers and the implementation of state scientific 
and technical programs which ensure the comprehensive solution 
of scientific and technical problems in the directions, in which 
domestic science holds leading positions, and the increase of 
the effectiveness of research and development and the work on 
the assimilation of new science-intensive products and 
technology; 
  -  the development of basic research in the most promising 
directions and state support of the academic sector of science 
and enterprising scientific projects; 
  -  the specification of a National List of Priority Directions 
of 
the Development of Science and Technology, as well as a list of 
state scientific and technical programs and key (critical) 
technologies as the basic guideline when spending assets of the 
federal budget on science; 
  -  the completion of the preparation of proposals for submission 
to the government on the conferring of the status of State 
Science Centers, bearing in mind that the number of these 
centers should be limited; 
  -  the specification of unique scientific facilities, which are 
liable to priority state support, as well as the making of an 
inspection of the formed network of budget-carried organizations 
of federal subordination for the purpose of determining the 
scientific organizations, which have a negligible scientific 
potential and are operating inefficiently, and settling the 
question of their retention as state scientific organizations; 
  -  the formation and development of the market infrastructure 
and 
innovation activity, the establishment of effective mechanisms 
of the operation of science and technology parks, business and 
innovation centers, incubators of small innovation enterprises 
and other advanced forms of innovation activity; 
  -  the privatization of facilities of the scientific and 
technical 
sphere with allowance for the necessity of ensuring in so doing 
the legal protection of objects of intellectual property; 
  -  the improvement of the financing of science, including the 
establishment of a fixed fraction of allocations, which is 
envisaged in the federal budget for civilian research and 
development, the increase to 5 percent of the fraction of the 
deductions for the Russian Basic Research Fund, and the 
legalization of extrabudgetary research and development funds, 
which should become the basic source of financing of sectorial 
and intersectorial applied research and development; 
  -  the stimulation of scientific and enterprising activity, 
including through the establishment of preferential rates for 
electric and thermal power for scientific institutions, the 
increase of the interest of enterprises in innovations by the 
granting of tax credits; 
  -  the increase of the social protection of personnel of the 
sphere of science and technology; 
  -  the development of cooperation with the regions in the area 
of 
science and technology, including questions of the choice of 
regional scientific and technical priorities, the formulation 
and implementation of regional scientific and technical 
programs, and their support with the use of a multiplicity of 
sources of financing; 
  -  the improvement of international and interstate (with the 
countries of the CIS) cooperation; 
  -  the preparation of legislative and legal acts that regulate 
relations in the scientific and technical sphere. 

    Having discussed the questions at hand, the collegium of the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Science and Technical Policy 
noted the vague delimitation of responsibility and spheres of 
activity in the scientific and technical area among federal 
executive bodies, between federal and regional organs of power, 
as well as their inadequate cooperation. This is one of the 
causes of the unjustified duplication of research and 
development, the inefficient use of financial and material 
resources, the inadequate cooperation and comprehensiveness in 
the solution of scientific and technical problems, and the lack 
in a number of cases of their orientation toward the end 
results. In practice the necessary unity in the formulation and 
pursuit of scientific and technical policy is absent. 
  The collegium considered it expedient to prepare suggestions 
on the improvement of the mechanism of the formulation and 
implementation of state scientific and technical policy, having 
in mind, in particular: 

  -  the increase of the status of the Interdepartmental 
Coordinating Commission for Scientific and Technical Policy and 
its provision with real powers for the coordination and the 
elaboration of coordinated approaches of federal bodies of 
administration in the implementation of the unified state 
scientific and technical policy; 
  -  the delimitation of the functions and spheres of 
responsibility 
of federal executive bodies in the scientific and technical 
area, the specification of their powers in the formulation and 
implementation of scientific and technical policy in the 
assigned area, as well as the delimitation of the functions in 
this sphere between federal and regional executive bodies; 
  -  the assignment of the preparation of summary proposals on the 
pursuit of the unified state scientific and technical policy in 
the civilian sphere to the Ministry of Science and Technical 
Policy of Russia. 

    It was deemed necessary to increase the responsibility of 
deputies ministers, the chiefs of administrations, and 
specialists of the ministry for the timely and high-quality 
fulfillment of the tasks assigned to the Ministry of Science. 

