Language: <F P=105> Georgian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Georgian State Council Chairman Eduard </F>
Shevardnadze at the First Congress of the Union of Georgia's 
Citizens in Tbilisi on 20 March -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] My speech is rather long. Every problem 
requires at least a little attention. I have to speak of things 
that are of significant importance for the Union [of Georgia's 
Citizens] as well as the whole country. If we can, let us 
endure. 
  Citizens -- I do want this word to become customary for 
addressing. The first congress of the Union of Georgia's 
Citizens is a real occasion. A new mass political movement has 
been established, which aims to create a democratic, civic 
society and an independent, sovereign, and lawful state with a 
new market economy, new culture, new internal and foreign policy. 
  The Union of Citizens is, first and foremost, a party of 
cardinal reforms and a movement of reformers. The outlines of 
economic, political, and social reforms of the Union of Citizens 
will be based on the program and regulation principles that we 
have already approved. 
  Our activity will be based not on -isms and speculations on 
the hardships of the people but on real and effective policy. A 
citizen with his family, a free individual with his interests, 
honors, duties, and responsibilities is a cornerstone and a 
concern of the Union, a source of its power and existence. 
[passage omitted]. 
  Documents drafted by the Union of Georgia's Citizens have 
received the approval of the International Monetary Fund, the 
World Bank, the Eurobank, the European Union, and a number of 
other international organizations. [passage omitted] 
  Conflicts supported by outside forces are taking place in 
Georgia at present. The political, economic, financial, social, 
and spiritual crisis is being aggravated further. There are a 
few internal and external factors contributing to the 
aggravation of the crisis, and they require consideration. 
  The old totalitarian system has fallen, but a new democratic 
system has not been built yet. [passage omitted] 
  A transitional period, which began in the 80s and still 
continues, implies the replacement of one social structure with 
another and consequently a complex and contradictory process. 
  A program to help Georgia escape the crisis stipulates that 
the scientifically forecasted first stage of a transitional 
period will last approximately three years and that the second 
stage will last five years, until the year 2000. My forecast 
made during my election campaign at the Academy of Sciences does 
not really conform with this new forecast because the situation 
has changed in the country and some of our plans have been 
ruined. 
  From 1995, political, economic, and social stabilization 
will 
begin. Although an acute critical situation will still be felt 
until 1996. Then, a new steady stage of stabilization will 
come, and this will last until the end of the century. Our 
strategic target is to establish a new Georgian state based on 
law with a new market economy and a new civic society. To 
achieve this target, it is necessary to adopt a new 
constutution, the basic law of the state. 
  Several words about the Constitution. As you know, the 
Constitution of 1921 is currently in force. It was revived in 
February 1992 by the military council. The constitutional law 
on power adopted on 6 November 1992 by parliament was a correct 
decision. 
  It is necessary to make amendments to the 1921 Constitution, 
thus creating a new constitution. To this end, the 
constitutional commission has been set up and is chaired by the 
head of state; the commission is completing work on the draft. 
  What will the realistic revival of the 1921 Constitution and 
its revision give us? First, the authority of Georgia as a 
state having a long constitutional history will grow; second, 
the truly democratic norms and principles of the 1921 
Constitution will be implemented, which will help to overcome 
the crisis, consolidate society, and neutralize those forces 
that are resorting to political speculation over the issues of 
the 1921 Constitution to exacerbate the crisis and destabllize 
society. [passage omitted] 
  The new edition of the constitution must be based on the 
following firm principles of the national constitution and world 
constitutional tradition: 
  1. The source of state power in Georgia lies in the people 
of Georgia; power is wielded by the people for the people. 
People ensure their sovereignty by means of their immediate and 
representative bodies. 
  2. The constitution recognizes the superiority of 
international law. 
  3. The constitution is an executive enactment. 
  4. Strong state power is based on the principle of 
division of power to preclude the sole control of any of its 
constituent circles and the infringement on people's human 
rights. 
  5. A strong state acts within the maximum framework of 
democracy. [passage omitted] 
  These are some guarantees with the help of which the danger 
should not emerge again in Georgia and the plague, as I once 
called it, should not occur. 
  Acknowledgement by the state of basic human rights and the 
possibility of securing them in court [passage indistinct] 
according to which voters give a mandate to the head of state, 
parliament, self-governing bodies, and officials. 
  The referendum -- a general popular voting -- will decide 
the 
country's most crucial issues, including the powerful and 
independent authority of the court, which will have power to 
withstand any kind of violence and injustice, and will resolve 
the issues connected with ethnic minorities, according to 
European and world standards. On the one hand, a man must be 
protected from state pressure by the constitution, law, and 
natural rights; on the other hand, a realistic constitutional 
defense will secure a democratic country from the danger of 
totalitarianizm, dictatorship, anarchy, and [word indistinct]. 
  The constitution must make the historical process of 
establishing democracy irreversible -- such is the stance of the 
Union of Citizens of Georgia. [passage omitted] 
  The new revised version of the 1921 Constitution, in my 
opinion, must consider the following executive bodies: a 
not-too- large parliament with two chambers, the president of 
the republic, the cabinet of ministers, and a constitutional and 
executive court. The Union of Citizens of Georgia believes that 
state power should be divided into legislative, executive, and 
judicial powers based on world experience. 
  The new law-abiding and democratic state must be a 
pluralistic and free state with a new type of democracy, which 
would be a guarantor [words indistinct]. 
  One of the main strategic aims of the activities of the 
Union 
of Citizens of Georgia is representation in parliament and a 
business- like cooperation with parliament. [passage omitted] 
  The legislative situation in Georgia is very complex now. 
The Soviet legislation is in force -- please, pay attention to 
this -- as is the legislation adopted in 1991, decrees and 
resolutions adopted by the military and [word indistinct] 
councils, the legislation adopted since November 1992, and the 
Georgian Constitution of 1921. It is difficult to speak of a 
system when we have to deal with such instances. Proceding from 
the above, we think that the available legislation must be 
looked through thoroughly. We must define which enforceable 
enactment could be used today and which should be immediately 
changed. Along with preparing a new draft constitution, the 
state program envisages adopting new laws. In particular, I 
shall point out some of those laws that are of a fundamental 
importance for our society from the point of view of building a 
law-based state and getting the economy out of the crisis: the 
adoption and discussion of draft laws that have already been 
prepared must be sped up; the draft law on the industrial 
society, bills, lease, and land-ownership -- especially on 
land-ownership. The process of adopting the law on land- 
ownership has been dragging on. In the meantime, a draft law on 
regulating and monitoring foreign currency, as well as on other 
issues must be prepared. It is impossible to imagine the normal 
functioning of the economic and financial credit system without 
having the above-mentioned laws. The packet of laws on tax must 
include taxes on transactions of valuable papers, transport, 
utilization of natural resources, and other normative documents. 
In the meantime, not only must we pass new laws and documents, 
but we must also improve and perfect the previously-adopted 
documents. They already need perfecting, and a number of 
amendments must be made to them. 
  [Excerpts] I would like you to pay attention to the 
following: it is of a particular importance to perfect economic 
legislation to attract foreign capital and establish a favorable 
atmosphere. Mainly, I mean the law on investments and foreign 
investments. The first question we were asked by businessmen 
in the United States was about our legislation concerning 
foreign investments. If this legislation aims to stimulate 
foreign investment, then they will move toward Georgia, as we 
have a unique geographic and geopolitical situation. [passage 
omitted] 
  Winning in the future parliamentary elections must mean 
establishing stability in parliament and the country as a whole. 
The revision of the constitution must secure a high status for 
parliament, the structure of a pliable body, and envisage the 
demands of a modern parliament and its specific features. This 
is how I see it: parliament must have two chambers, the lower 
chamber -- the council of the republic -- and the upper chamber 
-- the council of representatives; it will be discussed in 
detail in the draft constitution. Parliament will have 
legislative and monitoring functions and will have the right to 
pass a vote of no confidence in the government and dismiss it. 
  The new parliament must be able, as is accepted in developed 
countries, to dismiss the republic's president or the comparable 
official. The new parliament must be able to hold new 
presidential elections; the president will have the right to 
dismiss parliament and hold elections to a new parliament. This 
is also important. Anyway, this is our stance. [passage omitted] 
  It would be expedient if parliament is granted the right to 
carry out only executive parliamentary control over the 
government's activities, which would rule out parliament's 
interference into a sphere of purely governmental activity. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia believes that the 
reorganization of parliament and the establishment of a new 
parliament are key to overcoming the crisis and stabilizing the 
political, social, and economic situation. 
  Several words about the executive power. 
  The head of state today is at the same time the chairman of 
parliament. It reflects the peculiarities of a transitional 
historical stage and combining the two jobs was temporary. In 
the opinion of the union -- well, it is my own opinion anyway, 
and probably my organization will share my point of view -- the 
introduction of the presidential post must be envisaged in the 
new constitution as of the year 1995. It is necessary for 
overcoming the crisis of authority and for economic and social 
stability. 
  Georgia must have a strong parliamentary and presidential 
power. It is in Georgia's national interests. The republic's 
president in the future must have wide constitutional rights, as 
is accepted worldwide. The republic's president must be a 
guarantor for the country's independence, territorial integrity, 
and the normal constitutional functioning of the state's 
governing bodies. 
  The president must, of course, be elected by the people. 
  In the opinion of the Union of Citizens of Georgia, 
establishing strong presidential power in Georgia will help 
overcome the political, economic, and social crisis in our 
country. 
  This is how I see the cabinet of ministers. As is known, 
the cabinet of ministers, ministries, departments, corporations, 
and other establishments have been reorganized. The cabinet of 
ministers has worked out a serious anti-crisis program, which we 
shall talk about later. In the meantime, the activities of the 
cabinet of ministers, ministries, and departments deserve 
serious criticism in carrying out reforms and generally 
overcoming the crisis. To reinforce the executive power and 
perfect its activity, it is necessary to make constructive 
amendments to the law on the cabinet of ministers and radically 
reform the structure of the cabinet of ministers, forms of work 
and methods. The cabinet of ministers, ministries and 
departments are failing in carrying out radical reforms. 
  In this connection, I would like to say that I cannot agree 
with those who think that it is necessary to dismiss the cabinet 
of ministers now and create a new government, and so on. I must 
say upfront that it is not difficult to do; we can adopt a 
resolution today on the dismissal of the government, but I have 
no authority to do so and neither is it possible for me to 
present a worthy new cabinet. Specific ministers and ministries 
must be replaced: those who are corrupt. And if we have 
evidence of corruption, then the ministers should leave the 
government and be made accountable. But the nucleus of the 
cabinet of ministers must be retained. We have no choice at 
this stage. When the Union of Citizens completely comes to 
power, then you will see [passage indistinct] [passage omitted] 
  The government will be subordinated to the president, 
parliament, and partially to the constitutional law, which will 
define the terms of operation of government documents and 
[passage indistinct]. Ministries must be, first of all, 
political institutions and not industrial ones, but at the 
moment, they [passage indistinct]. 
  Parliamentarians are right in saying that the 
voter-parliament-parliament structures-government 
inter-responsibility must be put into action. Parliament must 
work out a long-term program for building a law-based state; the 
cabinet of ministers must work out a program for carrying out 
economic and social reforms and overcoming the crisis. I must 
say that parliament has no such program and the program of the 
cabinet of ministers is not effective. [passage omitted] 
These reforms, on the one hand, will facilitate the 
establishment of a new state order, overcome the general crisis, 
and reinforce order, and, on the other hand, they will speed up 
the process of building a democratic state and bringing into 
effect the constitution and laws. This is in brief how the 
Union of Citizens of Georgia sees the reforms in the 
legislative, executive, and juridical bodies; first the highest 
echelons and parliament, amd them the cabinet of ministers, high 
court, and the constitutional court. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia welcomes Georgia's entry 
into the CIS, the ratification by the Georgian parliament of the 
relevant documents on Georgia's joining the CIS, and the 
granting to Georgia of the status of a developing country. 
[passage omitted] 
  Great changes should take place not only in the executive 
bodies of power but in [word indistinct] of autonomous 
formations [pormireba]. Changes should take place in the 
autonomous republic of Abkhazia after the settlement of the 
conflict, and I think that the conflict will be resolved after 
[passage indistinct]. Constitutional rights must be restored. A 
status secured to an autonomous formation by modern world 
standards is guaranteed to Abkhazia. 
  The conflict must be resolved on the basis of the bilateral 
Russo-Georgian, trilateral Russo-Georgian-Abkhazian, and the 
Geneva agreements. The United Nations, the Security Council, 
the CSCE, and other international organizations must help 
resolve the Abkhaz issue. The Abkhaz issue was addressed with 
gravity in the United Nations, the White House, the Congress, 
Washington, and New York during the recent visit there by the 
Georgian delegation. The Union of Citizens of Georgia supports 
and approves of the activities of the Georgian delegation in 
Moscow, Geneva, Washington, and New York and demands that the 
Abkhaz issue be resolved in a political and peaceful manner. 
Such is our will -- resolving the Abkhaz issue by political and 
peaceful means. Another option, that is, another war will be an 
imposition. Let nobody force us to follow this way. Let nobody 
forget that [passage indistinct] 
  More support should be shown to the Abkhaz salvation 
committee, the Abkhaz council of ministers, the relevant 
commissions of the Georgian parliament, the Georgian deputy 
prime minister for Abkhaz issues, ministries, departments, 
radio, television -- I am talking about Abkhazia -- the press. 
More attention, of course, much more attention, care, warmth, 
and love should be shown to the refugees from Abkhazia and 
Samachablo. These people are our flesh and blood, and they must 
feel it everywhere, at every step they take. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that the 
constitutional status of the autonomous republic of Ajara needs 
to be perfected. We must work actively together with the Ajar 
leader to create a perfect model. 
  Ossetians will live in the Tskhinvali zone after the 
conflict 
is resolved. Please, take this into consideration. Like other 
ethnic minorities, a relevant status should be granted to 
Ossetia; this issue will be resolved through negotiations. 
  I am not going to talk about which of our decisions were 
wrong. I do not want to talk about it -- the redeployment of 
troops in Abkhazia, entering Tskhinvali in such a way, and so on 
and so forth. There will come a time when we will talk about 
these issues. Now, we must seek solutions to these issues, 
therefore, my address is less polemic and is mostly directed 
toward finding solutions and practical measures. 
  Corresponding amendments must be made to the new version of 
the constitution. We must comprehend that conflicts in Abkhazia 
and the Tskhinvali zone are not so much of an ethnic but mostly 
of a political and social nature and are the results of 
interference from a third, foreign force. [passage omitted] 
  It is necessary to carry out reforms in the local and 
municipal authorities, and they must be implemented in 1994-95. 
[passage omitted] 
  The service of the regional management has been set up at 
the 
office of the head of state's staff. This service, although it 
needs to be perfected, is still [passage indistinct]. New 
structures of state management have been established -- the 
mayor's offices in Kutaisi, Poti, Rustavi, Tbilisi, and other 
towns. But these changes are not enough. Thorough reforms are 
needed. Municipal elections should be held and local government 
bodies created; central and local authorities should be 
constitutionally separated. 
  We think that a regional administration -- a qualititively 
new institute of government -- must be established. We still 
need to think about the final model for it. It is an issue for 
discussion. The law will separate the functions of local 
government bodies and the regional administration. Dictatorship 
and [word indistinct] are ruled out. In the opinion of the 
Union of Citizens of Georgia, taking into consideration world 
experience, the system of local government must consist of two 
levels. The first level would include self-government of 
villages, populated areas, and town governments under rayon 
subordination; the second level would include self-governing 
bodies of the republic's towns and rayons. The principle of 
kray-arrangement is not ruled out. Let us think about it 
seriously; it has its pros and cons and optimistic prospects. A 
special two-level system of self-government must also be 
established in Tbilisi. The first level would include Tbilisi 
rayon's municipalities, and the second level would include the 
mayor's office of Tbilisi, the council, and so on. [passage 
omitted] 
  If we want to have armed forces, we must cooperate with the 
Russian Army and the Russian servicemen. There is no other way. 
We have been everywhere, visited every place, and have come to 
the conclusion that this is the only solution for speeding up 
this process. 
  We have wonderful relations with our neighbor, Turkey. Mr. 
Demirel says that we are brothers, and we really are, as rel 
brotherly relations are being established; but could this border 
be opened proceeding either from our interests or the interests 
of Turkey? It would be inadmissible. The narcotics business 
alone will sweep Georgia away and bring calamity to the country. 
Therefore, for the time being, we must preserve the existing 
system of guarding the borders and simultaneously, spend several 
years on training our own border troops. I hope it is a serious 
and stately attitude to the issue. [passage omitted] 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that it is necessary 
to analyze the causes of failure of the Georgian army in 
Abkhazia, draw conclusions, and map out a program for action. 
We must work out a plan for utilization of the potential of the 
modern Georgian military and industrial installations. This 
potential, by the way, is huge. [passage omitted] 
  Every military formation and department on the territory of 
the Republic of Georgia must -- in reality not formally -- be 
submitted to the head of the Georgian state, commander-in-chief 
of armed forces. It is necessary not because I need extra 
powers [Shevardnadze is commander-in-chief of Georgian armed 
forces as well as head of state and chairman of parliament], but 
because in every normal, democratic country this system must be 
established and indeed has been established. 
  It is necessary to disband unlawful armed formations, 
prohibit unlawful carrying of firearms, eradicate the instances 
of plunder and marauding the population by some members of the 
armed forces, reinforce the activities of the military 
procurator's office and the judicial bodies, reinforce 
lawfulness, and establish a single armed forces. Such is our 
aim. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia considers it necessary to 
work out a reliable program for the right strategy and tactics 
to resolve ethnic and social conflicts and consensus between 
nations. We must not lose tolerance, which has been our trait 
for centuries and which has become our national feature. 
Georgia and our future generations must not lose this trait. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that priority should 
be given to the political and peaceful settlement of ethnic and 
social issues and not to the military settlement. We have 
gained a bitter experience in this respect. Theory and 
practical measures must be worked out for overcoming social, 
political, and economic conflicts as well as ethnic conflicts, 
and reaching a consensus between nations. Georgia can make its 
contribution in this respect in the world and cooperate with 
many centers worldwide. 
  You know that the Georgian delegation has recently submitted 
a plan for settling the Abkhaz conflict to the UN Security 
Council. I would like to remind you of some of its points. 
This plan envisages, of course, the safe and honorable return 
of the refugees, holding elections under international 
surveillance, and, on this basis, electing new bodies of power, 
establishing the international directorate with the 
participation of [words indistinct], the Russian Federation, the 
group of Georgia's friends, and other member states of the 
United Nations before holding elections. 
  To carry out the functions of the executive power, a joint 
provisional administration of Abkhazia, which will act under the 
supervision of the international directorate, must be 
established. 
  An international body especially set up under the auspices 
of 
the United Nations, with the help of the Russian Federation and 
with the participation of the CSCE, will function. This body 
together with the directorate and the Georgian Government will 
work out and implement a program for Abkhazia's economic revival. 
  There are three options in deploying peacekeeping forces in 
Abkhazia. I shall give you three options and maybe we should 
choose one of them -- maybe it will not be the best one: 
  1. sending in multinational peacekeeping forces to Abkhazia 
under the auspices of the United Nations; in principle, nearly 
every member of the Security Council has agreed on this. 
  2. sending in Russian troops to the zone of conflict 
under the UN banner. Granting a UN banner is a bit problematic 
and not every country may agree on it. 
  3. deployment of Russian troops on the basis of bilateral 
negotiations and under UN supervision. 
  These are the three options. In two or three weeks time, we 
shall see which option we will have to deal with. The choosing 
will be up to the Security Council. [passage omitted] 
  The role of Georgians and Abkhazians in resolving the Abkhaz 
conflict should grow. We must care for the refugees and those 
forcibly displaced and protect their human rights and alleviate 
their hardship. 
  It is necessary to curb the activities of the mercenaries of 
the mountain people of the Transcaucasus. They ae forming an 
alliance with the richest fundamentalists, reactionary 
fundamentalists, [word indistinct] fascism, and others. It is 
necessary to have constructive relations with Russia's new 
parliament. Such relations have started, and the first steps 
have already been taken. It is necessary that we work out 
rational, cautious but effective tactics and strategy for action 
in this direction. 
  Historical lessons on resolving conflicts, Russo-Georgian 
relations against this background, and their positive and 
negative results give us grounds for a serious discussion and 
for seeking a way out of the crisis. 
  I think that the resolution of the Georgian-Ossetian 
conflict 
is entering a new, more advantageous phase, and it is necessary 
to intensify this process. 
  A deep analysis must be made of the situation in the area 
chiefly populated by the Azeris in Georgia's regions. 
  We must not ignore any corner and any nationality or ethnic 
minority. The situation must be critically assessed and 
realistic measures carried out to make up for previous mistakes. 
Very serious mistakes have been made in these regions. Go and 
see, listen and you will realize how barbaric the methods 
carried out by Georgian authorities sometimes used to be. It is 
inadmissible in a normal and civilized country. 
  The situation in the regions of Georgia mainly populated by 
Armenians and Greeks must be studied in detail. Measures must 
be taken for strengthening friendship between peoples. We must 
reinforce the representation of ethnic minorities in the 
authorities. It is necessary. 
  The Georgian state gives a full guarantee to the Russians, 
Ukrainians, Azeris, Armenians, Greeks, Abkhazians, Ossetians, 
Jews, Kurds, Assyrians, and all other nationalities living in 
Georgia that their national interests will be constitutionally 
secured, and it is one of the basic principles and regulations 
of the Union of Citizens of Georgia. 
  Radical changes must be carried out in the activities of 
law- 
enforcement bodies. The constitution and laws must facilitate 
the perfection of the system of law-enforcement bodies. First 
of all, the independence of law-enforcement bodies is necessary. 
They must be subjected only to the constitution and law, and on 
this basis, the legitimate authorities. 
  Radical reforms must take place in the Interior Ministry, 
in the procurator's office, and in court. The battle against 
the political-economic-social mafia, corruption, 
black-marketeering, narcotics, racketeering, bribery, and 
extortion must be stepped up. 
  Investigatory bodies must be separated from all departments 
and a separate investigatory committee subject to the government 
must be established. This will happen at a later stage. 
Reforms must be carried out in the system of serving sentences. 
This is also a serious issue. 
  The role of the Bar should be raised. On the basis of 
reinforcing the public order, an advantageous legal space must 
be created for businesses and investments and for creating a 
free economic zone on the territory of all-Georgia. [passage 
omitted: legal business must be supported; the rule of law is 
necessary for setting up businesses in Georgia; police and 
judicial staff should be trained abroad; the union will actively 
participate in restoring law and order] 
  A few words about the mass media. Reforms in the mass media 
are necessary. Georgia must become integrated in the world 
information and communication network. The law on the press 
must be put into effect even more effectively. The 
professionalism of the press, and of radio and television staff 
must be raised. [passage omitted: freedom of the press is a 
reflection of the level of society's culture; the union thinks 
the state must facilitate development of the press and 
television] 
  As long as the state subsidizes the press, radio, 
television, 
or a news agency, it has the right to demand of them that they 
report objectively on state policy and when commissioning 
programs. Cooperation between the press and the authorities must 
be constructive. We must also facilitate setting up an 
opposition press. We must help that press as well. We must 
embrace this culture. And then we shall overcome the malady of 
slander which we find in some papers which put all of us off 
because they are unqualified and unprofessional. The union of 
citizens of Georgia must take care of the opposition and of the 
opposition press as well. [passage omitted: it is necessary to 
sell competitive information in the world information market; 
defend interests of the Georgian people; the coordinating bureau 
set up at the office of head of state has a serious mission to 
carry out; carrying out economic and social programs are 
important for implementing political programs] 
  Once again, I would like to tell you that the main ideas for 
political, economic, and social reform were voiced in our 
previous electoral platform, in the report which was read out at 
the Academy of Sciences. [passage omitted: Shevardnadze says he 
is often wrongly reprimanded for not having a program and says 
that opponents should read the papers; the ideas of these 
reforms were approved of by people] 
  Some ideas about the reforms in the social and economic 
sphere: 90 percent of the population of Georgia is living below 
the poverty line; the vast majority of the population is 
starving; there have been instances of death through starvation; 
there is a catastrophic disparity between living standards, 
prices, and wages. [passage omitted: inflation is rocketing up; 
the number of forcibly displaced people is growing; the coupon 
is falling; measures taken by the cabinet of ministers have 
yielded no results so far; the union aims to take Georgia out of 
the deep economic crisis and improve the standard of living] 
  An anticrisis program has been submitted to the Georgian 
parliament. Main provisions of the program have been discussed 
by the union of citizens of Georgia at different levels. It will 
be desirable if every member of the union and every citizen of 
Georgia knows what these documents say. These documents must be 
dispatched to rayons and towns. These documents constitute 
quite a serious basis for a constructive dialogue with every 
party and with the population in general. 
  Both main trends in the long-term strategic development and 
immediate measures that need to be taken have been discussed in 
these state and government documents. The Republic of Georgia's 
anticrisis program consists of three main aspects: conceptual, 
forecasting, and regulatory measures for the economy; and about 
100 state programs. In view of the present critical situation, 
the program will be renewed quarterly. 
  In accordance with these two main documents, on the 
instruction of the head of state, and on the basis of a decree 
by the cabinet of minsters, an anticrisis program will be 
prepared by every ministry and administration of every region. 
Please, see that this work is carried out. 
  I will touch only on some of the key issues of the national 
program and the aims of the union of citizens of Georgia. 
  Analysis shows that the current crisis in Georgia is of a 
structural and systematic nature and is embracing every circle 
and part of the economy. The crisis has exacerbated Georgia's 
socio-economic backwardness. The union of citizens of Georgia 
considers that the shortest and the most effective way of 
extricating Georgia from the crisis is to restore and develop 
economic links with the CIS countries. Those who voted against 
Georgia joining the CIS do not comprehend the reality of 
Georgia's present predicament and misunderstand those people 
living in dire poverty, whose feelings they are going to 
manipulate and whom they are trying to force into the streets. 
It will not work. [passage omitted about the importance of 
retaining the CIS market] 
  The main existing funds must be renewed and modernized, 
otherwise they will become physically extinct. We cannot carry 
out renewal and modernization without links with these CIS 
countries. In the immediate four or five years we have no other 
options. 
  It is inadmissible to transfer to a free economy without 
management. It is necessary to manage and regulate the economy 
according to market principles. 
  The main priorities for Georgia's social and economic 
development in the short and medium-term are: to overcome the 
crisis and rebuild the destroyed economy as quickly as possible; 
to speed up the transfer to a market economy; to carry out the 
necessary structural changes by means of speeding up the 
development of medium and big business; to supply vital spheres 
of the economy with power by economizing in consumption and 
increasing domestic power production; [words indistinct]. 
[passage omitted: the program for Georgia's power development 
must be discussed separately by the newly elected council; 
people should know where we stand and what the solutions for 
emerging from this crisis are; the transport system must be 
developed; the export network must grow] 
  We can manufacture products for export if factories start to 
work and people get down to work. Goods for export can be 
produced and foreign currency reserves can be created. 
  A market economy is the first mechanism for overcoming the 
crisis and for the formation of an independent economy. In the 
meantime, we must take into consideration the fact that reforms 
must be carried out systematically and not in segments. 
  By the year 2000 we must go through three stages of 
development. The main aim in the social sphere is to keep the 
population alive and avoid a social explosion. At the second 
stage, we must gradually restore a precrisis standard of 
consumption by the population. At the third stage, we must 
achieve the standard of living of a developed country and 
establish a socially oriented market economy. [passage omitted: 
Shevardnadze thinks a program which envisages the maximum 
development of the economy is best] 
  We will restore the partnership with the CIS countries. I do 
not doubt it. Therefore, we will orientate toward the second 
variant of the program which means that by 1994, that is in the 
current year, there must be a 50 percent growth in the products 
produced inside the country compared with 1993. In 1995 the 
figure must be above 100 percent. These are realistic aims. It 
is not a lot but it will help us get our breath back. 
  I know that I shall be told that Shevardnadze addressed the 
congress of the Union of Citizens of Georgia like a secretary of 
the Communist Party -- like he used to address old congresses. 
I am telling you that no union and party is going to be viable 
without it. The union and a political movement must be wherever 
a man's fate is decided. 
  The expected growth of industry will create advantageous 
circumstances for achieving micro-economic stabilization, but 
the monetary and credit situation still remains complex due to 
the high prices of the imported raw materials. 
  Georgia's foreign debts are growing fast. We have not felt 
it yet, but in two or three years it will become a serious issue 
for Georgia. Now we are rejoicing at the European Union's 
granting us 70 million Ecu [European currency units] in the 
beginning, and then 40 million Ecu, and now it promises to allot 
20 million Ecu and so on -- all this has to be paid back. These 
debts will grow. Many of these debts will be forgiven, 
probably. Some skeptics are saying that the Union will not be 
able to take what we shall not have, but it will stop giving us 
loans as it will have no incentive [passage indistinct]. 
  A major migration of people in search for work abroad is to 
be expected. We must study this process seriously and regulate 
this process, as is done in other countries. [passage omitted: 
Shevardnadze talks about the growth of privatization; he says 
privatization will grow in 1994-95; joint-stock societies and 
investment funds will be established] 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia is proud that among its 
members are industrialists, businessmen, bankers, financiers, 
managers and thousands of representatives of a new social 
strata. The Union of Citizens of Georgia in the meantime is a 
political party and a political movement for representatives of 
big, medium, and small businesses. Establishing the market 
economy is one of its aims. [passage omitted -- Shevardnadze 
says the market economy will help overcome poverty] 
  It is necessary to resolve the issue of legalizing the 
hidden 
privatization wherever possible. We must not pass a vote of no 
confidence in the corps of managers, heads, and specialists, 
provided they can secure high standard of production and improve 
the living conditions of workers. They must participate in the 
process of privatization and become owners. Then, they will 
care more about high standards of production. In the meantime, 
the Union of Citizens of Georgia is also a party and a political 
movement for agrarian reforms. It is good that this issue was 
thoroughly discussed in the commission. The anti-crisis 
program envisions a 50 percent growth in agricultural products 
in 1994; it is problematic but we must achieve it. [passage 
omitted -- Shevardnadze says private sector will grow] 
  As of 1994, major structural changes are to be envisioned in 
agricultural industry through developing the potato, beetroot, 
and cattle industries. Positive moves in agriculture are 
connected with the further development of the food and 
processing industry. This branch has been plundered. In the 
immediate future you shall have a chance to look at figures as 
to what has been smuggled out of Georgia over the last four to 
five years. Anything that could be smuggled from these branches 
has been smuggled, but nothing has been imported in return. This 
is the lawlessness and anarchy that reigned there. We must put 
an end to it and take care of these branches. [passage omitted 
-- those who are making most noise now are the culprits of 
these] It is envisioned that in 1994, the industries of tinned 
food, wine products, tea, mineral waters, meat products, and 
milk will develop quickly; as a result of the privatization and 
floatation of the food industry, enterprises and the private 
sector in this branch will grow up to 30 to 35 percent by 1995. 
  Work is finishing on programs, which are to be called land, 
bread and foodstuffs, in accordance with different branches. 
The Union of Citizens of Georgia unites peasants, farmers, 
members of agriculture and the processing industry, and 
representatives of the agricultural business; therefore, the aim 
of the union is to work out and implement the fundamental 
programs of the agrarian and industrial complex. [passage 
omitted -- Shevardnadze says building organizations must be 
privatized; gives a list of enterprises which have to be 
privatized] The committee for building and architecture has 
worked out programs which in principle meet our demands. 
Despite the acute financial crisis, it has been envisioned 
that the communications network will develop, and first of all, 
those networks that have been damaged as a result of terrorist 
acts or natural forces will be restored. There are good 
prospects in cooperation in this field with foreign countries. 
Siemens is coming to Georgia. An appropriate tender has taken 
place here, and influential businessmen who undertook the 
development of the communications network are coming to Georgia. 
This cooperation will be based on the principle of partnership. 
The development of every kind of transport has been 
envisioned. Especially important are the plans worked out by the 
railway, naval, air, and automobile transport departments. 
Railway transport deserves a particular attention. We must 
restore railways, put it in order; as well as underground and 
other means of communications. 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia pays a great deal of 
attention to the issues of ecology, and the national and world 
movements of the Greens. The Ministry of the Environment has 
created a program for avoiding the ecological catastrophe. 
Please, I appeal to all parties, our colleagues and, of course, 
the Union of Citizens of Georgia, while there still is time, 
while our nature and climate still exists, let us take care of 
it. Forests have been extinguished. However hungry we may be, 
we must take care of the forest and nature, as generations will 
not be able to restore what we shall destroy today. Let us turn 
to these issues. 
  We must also take an active part in carrying out such 
programs as trade and supplies, as well as others. It is 
expected that prices will start to become relatively stable as 
of the second half of 1994; it is expected. A realistic 
demand-supply market mechanism and raising [words indistinct] 
will facilitate it. The Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that 
stepping up of management of economy is of a particularly great 
importance. It means an organic merging of state and market 
mechanisms. The following emergency measures must be carried 
out. 
  Somebody has written me a note, let me see what it says. 
They are the questions. I shall answer them in the end. I 
thought that they wrote to me to stop talking [laughter]. The 
Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that stepping up of managing 
economy is of a particularly great importance today. In this 
connection, here are some principles: 
  -- Carrying out the emergency economic situation on the 
whole 
of the Georgian territory; 
  -- Reaching an agreement between the existing parties. I 
appeal to our partners, other parties, their leaders and members 
to achieve an agreement on a political moratorium. [passage 
omitted -- Shevardnadze says that destabilization must not be 
allowed and that reforms must be carried out under normal 
political and economic conditions] 
  -- Reinforcing the state and executive discipline in all 
spheres of economy; 
  -- Selling the products made in state enterprises at freed 
prices in state trade network. I think that this process about 
which I have talked for a long time must be restored - free 
prices and a simultaneous pay rise. We cannot avoid it. 
Considering the current situation, we cannot come out of the 
crisis; therefore, I am asking relevant departments to study 
this issue in detail. [passage omitted -- union thinks the 
unprotected layers of society must be personally helped] 
  -- Improvement of state subsidies for transport, 
education, health, science and culture. The contractual system 
must become the basis for carrying out a state program involving 
the state and agriculture. The market mechanism which would 
give an incentive to an agriculture worker, must be set up. 
  -- The production of grain, stock-raising and combined 
fodder must become a priority; we must use every means and every 
possibility. The Introduction of barter trade as part of a 
contractual system can be allowed. 
  One of the main aims for the union is to overcome the 
hyperinflation, and the currency must be stabilized. The main 
constituent elements of the state's anti-inflation program are: 
  -- Measures for financial stabilization; 
  -- The maximum cut of the budget deficit; 
  -- Overcoming structural disproportions; 
  -- Supplying the commodities market with the basics; 
  -- Reorganizing the import-export structure and 
establishing order in this field. 
  The most significant issue which the economy is facing is 
the 
issue of the national currency. It is a sensitive issue for 
every family. [passage omitted -- the coupon must prepare 
economic conditions for transition to a monetary unit] 
  Before the economy is revived, strict selection money and 
credit policy must be carried out. The coupon's full-scale 
circulation must be secured. The volume of production must 
grow. The mechanisms of payment by check must be put in action. 
Cash and non- cash payments must develop. [passage omitted -- 
Shevardnadze talks about the measures needed for creation of the 
basis for the Georgian national currency; says everything will 
be done to get credits from abroad which would help strengthen 
the national currency] 
  The Union of Citizens of Georgia thinks that Georgia's entry 
in the ruble zone needs serious studying. Let us not hurry 
about it. It needs serious -- very serious -- studying. 
Conclusions made in haste will be no good to us. We must judge 
taking into consideration our own possibilities and foreign 
relations. A state program -- Georgia's Economy and the Ruble 
and the Dollar Zone -- must be worked out; as well as its 
prospects. Everything must be published and all our population 
must discuss these issues. [passage omitted -- Shevardnadze says 
the state system of regulating the economy must be set up; to 
this end state programs must be used; about 100 programs exist 
and 12 such programs have been tested in the United States and 
were approved there, and as a result partners have appeared] 
  An end must be put to the simplistic attitude towards 
comprehending the market economy. It was a wide-spread belief 
before that the market economy must develop spontaneously. It 
shall never happen. The regulating role of the state in the 
countries with market economies is secured and guaranteed, and 
the state always has whatever it needs for keeping the 
population alive, for its welfare, etcetera. 
  The economic emergency situation means operational and 
perfect implementation of economic measures of regulation, and 
in particular, the head of state and the cabinet of ministers 
must retain the right to adopt decrees without the preliminary 
publication and discussion in parliament of drafts and other 
legislative documents and resolutions. 
  The head of state must be granted the right to temporarily 
stop legislative acts in the economic field -- temporarily. It 
is necessary to save the economy and people from catastrophe, 
and is in accordance with national interests. 
  These measures are necessary for saving democracy and the 
market economy from chaos and anarchy. [passage omitted -- 
economic reforms and privatization must be speeded up] 
  1994 must become the decisive year for our fight against the 
crisis, anarchy, chaos and destabilization. 
  With the aim of overcoming the crisis, temporary emergency 
measures must be carried out operationally in 1994; among them 
are: 
  -- State credits in the first half of 1994 must be given 
only 
for importing foodstuffs, fuel and medicine; 
  -- A strict economic and legislative responsibility must 
be set up for the effective use of means; 
  -- Bread, sugar, and other foodstuffs must be secured for 
the population; 
  -- A centralized and fixed distribution of 
fuel and energy resources to the population must be established. 
[passage omitted -- contracts must be drawn with peasants and 
agricultural enterprises] 
  It is expedient to contract the state capital investments 
only for vitally important commodities -- foodstuffs, power, and 
engineering. Those enterprises which are not competitive and 
produce no raw materials and which cannot be privatized and 
cannot be put on flotation, must be given free to foreign firms 
should they want it. Do not let it frighten us. Georgia will 
not be sold or impoverished by it. [passage omitted -- monetary 
reforms are necessary; the coupon must be reinforced and foreign 
currency temporarily used] 
  It is of a major importance that the Finance Ministry and 
the 
national bank of Georgia in time finish work on programs of the 
bank and finance reforms. We are lagging behind, terribly 
lagging behind, and it is impossible to revive the economy 
without the improved bank and finance systems. [passage omitted 
-- interest on bank deposits must grow; a permanent state 
commission for working out and implementing monetary and credit 
policy must be established] 
  There are arguments here alleging that we were interfering 
with the independence of the national bank. I still think that 
that independence cost us very dear. There must exist a strong 
state formation which would control credits; because it is 
impossible to stop giving credits and stop life from flowing. 
It is impossible for parliament to control each sum given out 
by the national bank. That is why such a commission must be 
established. 
  A state program for reinforcing the coupon and the national 
currency must be established. 
  It is expedient to perfect the mechanisms for the social 
protection of the population living under the conditions of 
growing prices and tariffs, and use granted credits with a 
concrete aim. [passage omitted -- the unemployed, refugees and 
the forcibly removed must be helped; order must be established 
in distributing humanitarian aid; more aid is to come; if 
Western allies see that the aid is going to wrong places, then 
these channels will be blocked off] 
  It is necessary to speed up working out and implementing 
the price model -- which is characteristic for the market 
economy countries -- and creating the agricultural raw materials 
and products in the republic. A scientific center which would 
study prices and the economic situation must be set up. 
  The speed of carrying out the strategic and tactical aims, 
suggested by the economic and social development and their 
scale, will depend on using Georgia's internal potential, as 
well as on the nature of the international political and 
economic situation in which Georgia's economy will have to 
function in the immediate future. There are such possibilities. 
[passage omitted -- Georgia has a potential to produce 
competitive products for the world market; Georgia's 
geo-political situation can help Georgia's economy; Georgia may 
become a crossroad from Europe to Asia; Georgia get a foothold 
into the Russian market; Georgian national products must take 
root in the Russian market before others do and withstand the 
competition; Georgia is rich in waters] 
  Many people say that in five, six, or seven years the 
drinking water may cost more than petrol. We have these water 
resources, let alone mineral water. 
  True, Georgia today has no useful ores, which, according to 
the world market would be especially large, but Georgia can make 
its contribution in economic development for utilization and 
recovery of manganite, arsenic, ferrous metals [words 
indistinct] and other existing deposits using modern technology. 
[passage omitted: Georgia is rich in hydro resources] 
  If we take into consideration how many hydro resources are 
available per square kilometer, Georgia comes first in the 
world. Our country has these resources. We can be talking here 
about big and small hydro-electric stations. In two or three 
years we can achieve great results together with Western firms 
which are showing a big interest in it. 
  Simultaneously, oil deposits must be discovered. Without 
fail, Georgia has oil. I am sure that there is oil and gas in 
Georgia. One of the pieces of advice from James Baker was that 
he gave us names of two more companies besides the ones he was 
here with; we can trust these companies and they will give us a 
guarantee that in the immediate future we may discover oil 
deposits. [passage omitted -- talks about Iceland which exists 
on thermal energy; Georgia also has inexhaustible thermal 
deposits which are not used] 
  The main factor in the development of Georgia's economy are 
working resources and working forces which, more or less, know 
the modern technology of industry and have a knack to learn the 
most complex technological processes. 
  Georgia's gradual political and economic integration with 
the 
democratic world is a factor for Georgia's economic development, 
as well as the humanitarian and economic aid of the developed 
Western countries, and the realization of the programs of the 
IMF, the World Bank, and other international economic 
organizations. 
  As I have said, our meetings in Washington are 
hope-inspiring. Not only did we get the support of the World 
Bank and the IMF, but also the promise of support from those 
countries which have a decisive voice in the world's financial 
organizations, and, in particular, the United States and other 
countries. 
  In order to realize these reserves we must envision general 
tendencies for the social and economic development. 
[transmission interrupted] 

