BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on a joint air pollution test in Seoul conducted by </F>
SISA JOURNAL and the PAEDAL Environmental Union on 24-25 March] 
  [Text] Seoul is the second most polluted city in the world. 
This is a result of the WHO's examination of air pollution in 
the 20 largest cities in the world. The entire domestic press 
was astonished at this unpleasant news reported in December 
1992. However, that was all. This serious fact has been 
forgotten by the government, the press, and the people as a year 
and four months have passed since the news was reported. When 
the phenol incident occurred, and when rotten water was 
collected in the upper waters of the Naktong River, a tap-water 
source, people were concerned about the contamination of the 
"visible" water. They, however, did not worry about the 
contamination of the "invisible" sky. 
  At least in the ROK, air pollution does not attract people's 
attention or the environmental authorities' measures against it, 
compared with water pollution. There is a particular reason why 
the air pollution in metropolitan cities such as Seoul can avoid 
the keen eyes of today's people who are sensitive to health. 
This is because the weather of those cities changes rapidly. 
The air pollution rate of each time zone of a day is different 
due to a big gap between day and night temperatures. Snow or 
rain clears smog in the air no matter how thick it is. 
Contaminating materials do not stay in one place because of the 
ceaselessly blowing wind. In fact, a report says that a 
contaminating material created in Inchon at 0600 arrives on the 
coast of the East Sea at 2200. 
  Paradoxically, however, air pollution is more dangerous and 
fatal than water pollution because of these attributes. 
Scholars say: "Post-measures can be taken for water pollution, 
but not for air pollution because the latter can kill a large 
number of people all of a sudden. The moment when an air 
pollution-related incident occurs is the moment of ruin." If 
various contaminating materials exceeding environmental 
standards drift in the air for a certain period of time one day 
without snow, rain, or wind, a disastrous incident may occur in 
front of us. The 1952 "London Smog" incident, in which more 
than 4,000 people were killed over a few days, thus astonishing 
the world, is a good example. 
  This is why SISA JOURNAL conducted an air pollution test in 
Seoul. The magazine believes the customs like locking the 
stable door only after the horse is stolen that were repeatedly 
confirmed whenever frequent incidents involving water 
contamination took place must not repeated in coping with air 
pollution. The trial-and-error principle is not applicable in 
handling air pollution. We have not heard any report on the 
refreshment of air in Seoul since the city disgracefully ranked 
as the second most polluted in the world. Instead, we only hear 
the uneasy news that contaminating materials of a backward 
country are blowing from China. Therefore, SISA JOURNAL decided 
to examine the actual status of air pollution in Seoul with all 
possible means. 
  Carbon nitrogen and sulfuric acid gas, which are major air 
pollutants, were intensively measured in the recent test. 
Ammonia gas, which is not very harmful to the human body but 
annoys people with its bad smell, was also measured. Currently, 
carbon nitrogen, sulfuric acid gas, ozone, and ammonia can be 
measured with simple meters. Accordingly, all major air 
pollutants that are measurable with simple meters, except zone, 
were measured in the recent test. 
SISA JOURNAL could not make a survey of all contaminating 
materials in the air. Therefore, this survey had to be subject 
to limitations in that civilian organizations had conducted it. 
  The survey team of SISA JOURNAL set the 24-25 March as the 
date for jointly examining the air pollution situation 
throughout Seoul in cooperation with Paedal Environmental Union. 
It had, however, conducted many preparatory surveys to examine 
the air pollution situation in Seoul before 24-25 March. At 
ten o'clock on the evening of 24 March, approximately 100 survey 
team members from the SISA JOURNAL began to set up 400 simple 
measuring instruments on the selected areas throughout Seoul, 
but it took 24 hours to complete them because of snow that fell 
that night. Therefore, it could examine the air pollution 
situation only after the contaminating materials were removed by 
snow. According to a master's thesis released by Kim Chong-ku, 
student of the Graduate School of Environment at Seoul National 
University, in February 1994, the density of carbon nitrogen in 
air can be greatly decreased between 5 ppb [parts per billion] 
and 20 ppb depending on the amount of snow or rain (1 ppb equals 
0.001 ppm [parts per million]). 
  As a result of the survey, it is reaffirmed that the key 
contaminators of air pollution has changed. The amount of 
sulfurous acid gas in air -- which has been so far regarded as a 
key contaminator of air pollution throughout cities, small or 
large -- has been greatly decreased to below the environmental 
standards drift, while carbon nitrogen -- which is produced from 
car exhaust pipes -- has gradually increased. This is the 
current situation throughout the cities. Although the survey was 
conducted in the clear weather of that day, the sulfurous acid 
gas drift (average environmental standards drift is 80 ppb per 
day) given by the survey showed the lowest point was 65.9 ppb, 
while the highest point was 8.2 ppb from a total of 186 
measuring spots. Also, the carbon nitrogen value given by the 
survey showed that the highest point was 83.6 ppb, while the 
average point was 42.9 ppb from a total of 340 measuring points. 
<H5>  Carbon Nitrogen Can Produce Materials Causing Cancer </H5>
  These drifts could be also found in the documents recently 
issued by the Ministry of the Environment, which has examined 
the air pollution situation throughout cities over past several 
years. The houses built for coal briquet [yontan] purposes have 
been changed into ones that can use gas. The number of cars has 
greatly increased every year. Because of these factors, air 
pollution in Seoul has been further aggravated. The model of 
the air pollution condition in Seoul is similar to that of 
developed countries by escaping from the framework of 
underdeveloping countries. However, we cannot express relief 
only because the air pollution situation in Seoul is similar to 
that of developed countries. This is because there is nitrogen 
oxide in the air -- which is similar to carbon nitrogen -- which 
produces photochemical smoke [kwanghwahak sumogu], thus reacting 
to sunlight. 
  Considering carbon nitrogen alone, the air pollution 
situation in Seoul has not reached a point that we need to 
worry. However, the average drift of the carbon nitrogen 
density in Seoul that was examined on 24-25 March reached 42.9 
ppb. This drift is far below the average environmental standard 
drift (80 ppb). The area of Chongyang-ri station in Seoul is 
the only one that exceeded the environmental standards drift of 
carbon nitrogen. 
  However, this result can be greatly different only if we 
apply it to Japan's environmental standards drift. Some 
Japanese local groups have regarded 40 ppb as their average 
environmental standard drift in a day, while regarding 60 ppb as 
their highest value. It is not right to simply compare the air 
pollution situations in Seoul to that of Japan, but it is a 
problem if the environmental standard drift of carbon nitrogen 
in Seoul exceeds that of Japan. Furthermore, considering the 
drift of the survey, which was conducted in clear weather after 
heavy snow fell, we can easily guess how the air in Seoul is 
seriously polluted on a normal day. There is no study that the 
Koreans are stronger than the Japanese in overcoming air 
pollution. 
  One can suffer pain in his throat when one is exposed to 
carbon nitrogen between 200 and 700 ppb for 20 minutes. Except 
those who work in a special working place, ordinary people will 
not suffer pain from the carbon nitrogen of those drifts. 
However, if carbon nitrogen reacts with other chemicals in the 
air, unpredictable and difficult situations may occur. In other 
words, it is possible that nitro-chemicals that cause cancer can 
be produced as a result of the combination of carbon nitrogen -- 
which is produced from car exhaust pipes -- and hydrocarbon, 
such as benzol. It seems that carbon nitrogen has increased the 
rate of cancer growth as a result of such chemical reactions. 
The reason we set the environmental standard drift is due to 
our apprehension over air pollution throughout the country. 
<H5>  Is the Government's Automatic Measuring Network Reliable? </H5>
  In Seoul, there are 10 automatic air pollution measuring 
spots operated by the Ministry of Environment and another 10 by 
the Seoul Municipal Government. Environmental groups have 
persistently raised the issue of the fact that data from these 
automatic measuring networks are the only source for the 
government to study and manage air pollution. The question is 
whether the data from the automatic measuring networks 
accurately reflect the level of air pollution. 
  On the night of 24 March, SISA JOURNAL installed a number of 
simple measuring instruments near 15 of the 20 spots where 
automatic measuring networks are located. (Five of the 20 
measuring spots are constantly not operating because of regular 
checks.) This was to check whether the results from the 
automatic measuring networks represent the level of air 
pollution in that area. The density analysis of nitrogen 
dioxide collected by simple measuring instruments was 
significantly different from the value given by the automatic 
measuring networks. 
  The nitrogen dioxide value given by the automatic measuring 
networks on 25 March showed the lowest point was registered in 
Kwanghwamun (12 ppb) and the highest in Sinsol-tong (33 ppb) 
while the result from simple measuring instruments in 
Sinsol-tong was 37.2 ppb and in Kwanghwamun 41.8 ppb. 
Pulkwang-tong was the only area where the value registered by 
the simple measuring instrument was lower than that of the 
automatic measuring network. In other 14 areas, results from 
the simple measuring instrument were higher than those of the 
automatic measuring network by 1.13 to 4.62 times. The 
difference of nitrogen dioxide value from the simple versus the 
automatic measuring instruments by area is in the following 
order: Taechi-tong (60:13), Kwanghwamun (41.8:12), Songsu-tong 
(38:14), Kuui-tong (56:21), Ssangmun-tong (48.2:18), Sillim-tong 
(33.9:14), Chamsil-tong (41.4:23), Pangyi-tong (36.1:21), 
Hwagok-tong (33.6:23), Mapo (34.6:24), Namgajwa-tong (38.8:27), 
Myonmok-tong (37.2:29), Panpo-tong (37.2:31), Sinsol-tong 
(37.2:33), and Pulkwang-tong (26.6:32). 
  How can we explain the maximum 4.6 times difference? Since 
"the low in difference" principle can be applied to the air 
pollution value, in format theory, either one of the two 
measurings was correct or both were incorrect. 
  The statistical advantage of the simple measuring instrument 
is that it can measure pollution in places where measuring is 
difficult and it can gather various data in a certain area. Of 
course, some people question the accuracy of the simple 
measuring instrument. However, it is difficult to accept the 
fact that the nitrogen dioxide value of Kwanghwamun, where 
traffic is one of the busiest, was the lowest in Seoul. 
  Therefore, the management of the automatic measuring 
networks 
should be checked. Maybe the problem was that the automatic 
measuring instruments are not being properly maintained rather 
than that the instruments have their own defects. For instance, 
the notch on a balance must be at zero in order to accurately 
measure the weight. Keeping the notch of a pollution measuring 
instrument at zero is called "revision." If an automatic 
measuring instrument's record becomes drastically high after 
revision when there is no specific weather change, that means 
that the automatic measuring instrument was not normal before 
the revision. 
  This problem was shown in the statistics regarding the trend 
of nitrogen dioxide monitored by an automatic measuring 
instrument in Taejon city in January 1994. The revision date 
was 23 January. The pollution density of nitrogen dioxide was 8 
ppb on 22 January, 3 ppb on the 23d, but drastically increased 
to 31 ppb on the 24th, 58 ppb on the 25th, and 57 ppb on the 
26th. The fact that the values before and after the revision 
have such a significant difference makes the function of the 
automatic measuring instrument doubtful. If the government 
continued to use such incorrect automatic measuring networks, 
this means, as far as air pollution is concerned, the government 
has provided incorrect information to the people to avoid 
condemnation. 
  Usually, the causes of pollution are considered to verify 
the 
geographical characteristics of a certain pollutant. In this 
survey, the average pollution rate of nitrogen dioxide, which is 
produced during the process of cars burning fuel, thermal power 
plants, heaters, and gas stoves, was 49.5 ppb in subway 
stations, 38.7 ppb in street shops, 38.3 ppb on roads, 34.3 ppb 
in residential areas, 32.3 ppb at parks, and 28.6 ppb in 
schools. Chongnyangni station area recorded the highest at 83.6 
ppb, followed by an office in Socho-tong, Socho-ku (79.2 ppb), a 
hill in Pongchon-tong, Kwanak- ku (78.4 ppb), and City Hall 
subway station (78 ppb). 
<H5>  Apkujong Subway Station Twice as Polluted as Streets </H5>
  One notable point of this survey is that subway stations 
were 
shown to have been more polluted than the streets. It is 
difficult to find a particular pollutant source that might 
produce nitrogen dioxide in subway stations. However, they 
showed a higher rate than streets, which are constantly being 
polluted by automobile exhaust. For instance, the average ppb of 
10 spots in Mukyo-tong, Chung-ku was 35.1 while that of the 
underground arcade in the same area was 45.9. Streets near 
Apkujong station in Kangnam-ku was 37 ppb while the subway 
recorded as high as 70.4 ppb. Figures monitored from inside 
subway stations were 1.5 to two times higher than upper streets. 
The reason is simple. Ventilation problems. Nitrogen dioxide 
produced in the streets is sent to underground spaces through 
inlets and is accumulated there due to poor ventilation 
equipment. 
  Nitrogen dioxide pollution rates in the streets vary from 8 
ppb to 83.6, but are generally high. The big difference 
reflects the difference between high-traffic and jammed main 
roads and low-traffic alleys. 
  Another notable point is that inner spaces with gas stoves 
had a higher rate. SISA JOURNAL conducted another test in one 
office on 4 April and discovered different results in one office 
depending on the measuring point. A certain point showed 38.4 
ppb while another point showed a rate as high as 110.7 ppb, much 
higher than the standard environmental figure. 
  Ammonia is excluded on environmental check lists because it 
is not too harmful to humans, but is a pollutant with a strong 
odor. Because it can be easily detected by simple measuring 
instruments, SISA JOURNAL installed the instruments at 290 spots 
along with nitrogen dioxide measuring instruments. The result 
shows very high pollution rates in sewage, manholes, trash cans, 
and markets near the measuring spots. Among the measured areas, 
residential areas in Amsa-tong, Kangdong-ku had the lowest rate 
at 15.5 ppb, while streets in Pongchon-tong, Kwanak-ku had a 
pollution rate as high as 254 ppb. 
Air pollution is not visible, cannot be felt, and has a 
characteristic of being chronic when even a very small amount is 
accumulated in the human body. People say that if they wear a 
shirt even for just one day in the city it gets dirty. 
Therefore, they say that "the air has worsened" based on such 
an experience. However, they do not know why and how much it has 
worsened. The government does not know either. We call this 
the so-called `Seoul- type smog,' but we have not yet found the 
cause for this. Since symptoms do not appear immediately, there 
is a high possibility that polluted elements will slowly 
accumulate in our bodies, thus leading to a chronic disease. 
  There are only two ways to deal with air pollution. It must 
be measured accurately and its exhaust must be controlled. 
However, we are still far off from controlling exhaust under 
the current situation. It is possible to control power stations 
and industrial facilities. The problem is automobiles and 
domestic heating. These are responsible for from 70 to 80 
percent of all the carbon dioxide pollution. 
  Of all the automobiles, 36 percent are run by diesel, the 
`cause of pollution.' This is the highest percentage in the 
world. This is because the restriction for emitting gas is too 
lax and the price of diesel oil is much cheaper compared with 
gasoline. Another reason is because the management of domestic 
heating is not being carried out well. Moreover, the main cause 
of air pollution is now due to nitrogen oxide. This is truly 
due to the trend of the times. In a survey, a `horrible' study 
was made in which 50 people out of 100,000 who live in a city in 
Germany, where there are much less diesel automobiles than the 
ROK, will suffer from cancer due to diesel pollution. 
  Therefore, under the current situation, we must at least be 
accurate in `measuring.' This is the same as the proverb: We 
can become the chief of a town only when we know what the duties 
are. The government's announcements on the matter of air 
pollution is difficult to believe. This is because the state 
has almost no materials at all about this. During an interview 
with a professor studying air pollution in the process of 
gathering news on this matter, he said: "The government will 
pay attention to this matter only after an incident occurs 
regarding air pollution." 
Work investigating the "nationality" (origin) of air pollutants 
is currently under way in Korea. The Environmental Research 
Center of KIST (Korea Institute of Science and Technology) and 
Cheju National University began joint research work on 11 March 
by measuring the long-distance movement of air polluting 
substances. The investigation is being conducted at the Alpine 
Observation Station on Suwolbong located at Hankyong-myon, 
Puk-Cheju-gun, Cheju Province, on a three-year schedule. 
  The Alpine Observation Station on Cheju Island was selected 
as the measuring point because it is located in a typical "clean 
air area" of Korea, with easy access to meteorological data from 
the nearby radar of the Meteorological Observatory. In the 
capital area, including Seoul, the air pollution degree is so 
severe that it is impractical to distinguish whether pollutants 
are of native or foreign origin. 
  This research of ascertaining the source of air pollutants 
provides very essential data and materials needed by the 
government in establishing its environmental policy. Dr. Sim 
Sang-kyu of the Environmental Research Center, who is 
participating in the survey, said that "the research will be a 
great help, particularly in assessing how much influence China 
has on air pollution here in Korea." 
  China depends on coal for approximately 75 percent of its 
energy consumption. Of the world total coal production of 4.5 
billion tons, about 1 billion tons are produced in China. Over 
90 percent of its coal consumption is for fuel. It is evidently 
clear that the emission of sulfurous acid gas is estimated at 16 
million tons (on a 1991 basis), which is more than 15 times the 
figure in Korea. Even the National Environmental Protection 
Bureau of the PRC once expressed its concern in these words: 
"In China, the discharge of sulfurous acid gas is bound to grow 
sharply with the boost in its coal production, and the hazards 
of it may spread to neighboring countries." (SISA JOURNAL, Vol. 
175) 
  At one point, Japan published the result of research which 
claimed that more than 50 percent of acid rain fall in that 
country is influenced by China. Korea has only estimated the 
influence at about 30 to 50 percent, but has been unable yet to 
present any research result to back it up. The general interest 
and concern in the phenomena of yellow sand, which had been 
taken as just a natural phenomena repeated each year over 
several centuries, has abruptly risen, coinciding with the rapid 
progress in China's industrialization. There are even some 
expressing concern that some heavy metal pollutants may fly into 
this country as they are mixed with yellow sand. 
  The air pollution in the skies of Northeast Asia, such as in 
Korea, China and Japan, is now in a very serious state. Last 
March, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) 
and the Pacific Area Environmental Research Institute of Nagoya 
University of Japan jointly conducted a survey on the degree of 
pollution in the skies of the Pacific Ocean. According to the 
survey, it was found that the density of pollutants in the skies 
of the west Pacific region, such as China and Japan, was from 
five to 10 times higher than in the skies of the east Pacific. 
The survey teams have estimated that these pollutants 
originated from mainland China. 
  In determining movement courses of air pollutants under this 
plan, not only Korean institutions, but also Japan's Natural 
Environment Research Institute and Kyushu University as well as 
American universities (in California) will jointly participate. 
So much is the target of interest among many countries to 
scientifically and accurately ascertain the origin, ingredients, 
and quantities of pollutive substances. 
  Various countries in Europe already concluded the "agreement 
on long-distance movement of air pollutants" in 1979. The U.S. 
and Canada also signed the agreement on reducing acid 
rain-causing substances in 1991. The data and materials being 
made available through this survey that began this year, will 
provide valuable data for environment-related agreements by 
Korea, China and Japan in the coming days. 
  The Korean research team plans to devote their energy first 
on ascertaining the courses of movement, kinds, and distribution 
of air polluting substances. Ascertaining their chemical 
ingredients or poisonous character will be of a secondary 
consideration. The United States and Japan have steadily 
accumulated the related research data for a long time, but Korea 
has almost no data accumulated in that respect. 
  It is as important to ascertain the vertical and horizontal 
distribution of air polluting substances as it is to learn their 
course of movement. This measurement work is also being 
promoted for the first time this year. The results of this 
survey will be used for basic data required for long-range 
planning. 
  The aircraft used in the measurement work is the four-seater 
light plane called "Changgong 91," developed by Korean Air. This 
light plane is scheduled to fly over the west coast areas, 
centering around the Taean peninsula in South Chungchong 
Province, twice on days when the yellow sand phenomena occurs 
and once on the other days. 
  This study is conducted under the research plan "concerning 
the influence of yellow sand and long-distance moving pollutants 
on Korea," of which a contract order was given by the Ministry 
of Environment last October. This study will chiefly 
investigate the effect of yellow sand from China. O Sung-nam, 
director of the Earth Environmental Information System 
Laboratory of the Systems Engineering Research Institute, says: 
"The prevailing westerlies always blow in Korea. The country, 
therefore, is bound to be affected by the China continent. We 
have to distinguish the original source of the polluting 
substances at the earliest possible date. Otherwise, there is 
concern that Korea may be mistaken for a major source of air 
pollution." 
  The survey team expects that they will be able to learn not 
only the yellow sand distribution and total volume of it in the 
skies of the East Sea and Seoul, but also the kinds and 
influence of air polluting substances migrating with yellow 
sand. Dr. O said, "This aerial measurement will provide 
momentum for continuing our comprehensive and systematic 
research." 
  There are some, however, who contradict the "presumption" 
that yellow sand carries toxic pollutants of the industrial 
districts of mainland China to this country. Dr. Sim Sang-kyu 
of KIST says, "Since the courses of yellow sand and air 
polluting substances are different from each other, the story 
that yellow sand transports heavy metal lacks credibility." Sim 
maintains that what they have mistaken for heavy metal refers to 
the extremely small quantities of heavy metal contained in 
yellow sand. 
  He says: "Yellow sand rather plays the role of blocking air 
pollution. Positive ions, such as calcium and magnesium 
contained in earth, work to neutralize acid rain." Prof. Yi 
Tong-su of Yonsei University in his dissertation once disclosed 
that the quantities of yellow sand that falls in Korea are large 
enough to completely neutralize acid rain. 
  At any rate, through the aerial measurements, the 
correlation 
between the yellow sand phenomena and air pollutants will be 
unveiled. The measurements this year will likely have more 
symbolic meaning as "the first attempt ever made in Korea" than 
as any substantive research results. It is because the 
equipment mobilized and budget funds earmarked by the 
Environment Ministry are not sufficient enough to obtain 
reliable research. 
  The flight duration of "Changgong 91" is limited to three 
hours, and the flight altitude ceiling barely reaches 2 km. As 
such, the aircraft is considered unfit for measurement of air 
pollution. The sample gathering equipment on the plane is 
better than that used by the National Environment Research 
Institute, but it takes very long to accumulate samples needed 
for making a complete specimen set. 
  "In the United States and Japan, a medium-size airplane is 
usually used for measurement over 20 hours. As compared to 
them, we are just in a rudimental stage of study. It might be 
hard to expect any satisfactory results through this measurement 
project," Dr. O said. 
  The government is also taking seriously the influence of air 
pollution in China on this country. The "meeting of earth 
environment-related ministers for countermeasures to cope with 
the situation," held on April 11 demonstrates this fact well. 
At the meeting, they said that the government would study some 
plans to expand the environmental cooperation between Korea and 
the PRC to reduce air polluting substances coming from China. 
Korea signed the Environmental Cooperation Agreement with the 
PRC last October, but concrete measures have yet to be 
established. The study on the air pollutant movement, which 
began last March, and the aerial measurement of yellow sand, 
which will begin shortly, will mark the initial steps toward 
working out countermeasures. 
  The Yokkaichi incident was a typical example of the courses 
taken in solving the problems of environmental pollution after 
Japan's industrialization and economic growth. Yokkaichi is 
where Japan's first petrochemical industry complex was 
developed. Because of noxious gases belching out from chimneys 
in the complex, the inhabitants of the nearby areas came to 
suffer severe respiratory diseases, such as asthma. 
  It was in 1959 when the damage from noxious gases and 
soot/smoke from those chimneys first surfaced as a social 
problem. The Federation of Self-Government Associations in 
Shiohama, a village adjacent to the industrial complex, filed a 
petition with the Yokkaichi City authorities. "Because of the 
noises and soot/smoke from the industrial complex, we just 
cannot sleep at night," the petition said. Despite such 
petitions, damage from air pollution grew increasingly serious 
day after day. In July of that year, Yokkaichi City inaugurated 
the Yokkaichi Antipollution Committee as an advisory board to 
the mayor. The committee requested the Medical Department of 
the Mie Prefectural University to conduct a survey on causes of 
the damage. 
  Based on the results of this survey, the antipollution 
movement by the inhabitants began on a full-fledged basis. The 
occupant industries' emission of air polluting substances 
continued, however. For instance, Mie thermal power plant 
established its incinerator, the largest of its kind in Japan, 
which is exclusively used for heavy oil. Mitsubishi 
Petrochemical sharply increased the production scale of its 
products. As manufacturing activities stepped up at their 
facilities, which are equipped with no proper antipollution 
equipment, the damage suffered by the populace in the nearby 
areas grew even more. Their movement designed to get assurances 
for human health, life and safety continued even more strongly. 
  As a result of such endeavors, the Japanese Government in 
1963 launched its surveys by designating Yokkaichi areas as 
those subject to the application of the "Soot and Smoke 
Regulation Act." On the basis of this survey, the Japanese 
Government proclaimed that Yokkaichi was subject to the law. 
  The Yokkaichi Antipollution Committee, consisting of experts 
in the area, has contributed greatly to solving the problems by 
accurately pointing out the following major problems: namely, 
that the petroleum fuel ratio in the industrial complex is 
extremely high as compared to other industrial complexes, that 
the pollution damage suffered by the populace is severe because 
factory and residential areas are mingled together, that 
managers of those factories have made almost no effort to 
prevent pollution, and that the plant layout had been made 
totally ignoring the seasonal wind changes. 
  In the last analysis, the inhabitants in the areas took the 
lead; the group of experts ascertained problems and presented 
some scientific plans for solution. In so doing, the 
government, local autonomous bodies, and businesses came to 
participate in resolving the problems. As a result, the air 
pollution level in the Yokkaichi area could be brought down 
below the permissible standards. 
  In the United States, exhaust fumes from automobiles chiefly 
in Los Angeles emerged as a great social problem in 1950. 
Exhaust fumes containing carbon monoxide, hydrocarbon, and 
nitric acid compounds themselves are harmful substances. By 
reacting with sunlight, they generate large-scale photochemical 
smog. 
  To cope with this, President Nixon in 1970 proposed a plan 
to 
reduce exhaust gas from automobiles. Senator Nelson proposed 
even more powerful measures to prevent air pollution. 
Democratic Senator Muskie's bill was a compromise between the 
proposals made by Nixon and Nelson, and was formally adopted in 
1975 to reduce harmful substances in automobile exhaust fumes by 
90 percent. 
  In Japan, the Central Antipollution Measures Council in 1972 
established its plan to reduce exhaust fumes from automobiles, 
centering around details of the Muskie bill. This plan was 
designed to drastically reduce the discharge of nitric acid 
compounds from passenger cars by 1976. It was an almost 
unattainable goal with Japan's automobile production 
technologies at that time. Japanese automakers, such as Toyota 
and Nissan, filed petitions, asking for a postponement of 
enforcement of the regulations. As a result, the Japanese 
Government decided to put the regulations into force beginning 
in 1979. 
  Two major characteristics could be seen in the development 
of 
Japan's automotive industry technologies during the 1972-78 
period. The first point is that the rigid environment policy 
actually led to development of its high technologies. How to 
cope with the regulation of exhaust fumes eventually boils down 
to technological developments. It could not but be increasing 
the engine efficiency of combustion. Japan eventually succeeded 
in developing low fuel-ratio engines with high power output, and 
came to sweep over the world automobile market. 
  As compared with this example in other countries, Korea has 
been rather backing away from an environmental policy, for what 
is professed to be an economic revival. This suggests a lot 
about how our way of thinking is shortsighted. Some rigid 
environmental policy helps develop high technology and clean 
environmental technologies. We must realize that such a policy 
can be the most positive way of effectively coping with 
environmental barriers, such as the upcoming Green Round 
negotiations. 
  A certain industrial size facilitates the permeation of the 
environmental policy of the state. For instance, in the early 
1970's, the automobile industry of Japan lagged far behind the 
world's technology level, and it could not take any significant 
position in the Japanese economy. Its automobile exports to the 
United States barely accounted for about 15 percent of 
production. At that time, in the Japanese economy, the steel, 
chemical, nonferrous metal, and other basic resources-type 
industries were at the height of prosperity. 
  Therefore, when the Japanese Government established a policy 
for the rigid control of exhaust gas from automobiles, the Japan 
Automobile Industry Association lacked enough power to reject 
it. The only choice left for the industry was to develop its 
technology to cope with the situation. This sharply contrasts 
with the fact that around that time, the American Automobile 
Industry Association could successfully have postponed the 
enforcement of the Muskie bill, and that the Japanese Steel 
Industry Federation succeeded in having the environmental 
standards on nitric acid discharged from steelworks relaxed. 
  At that time, the Japanese automobile industry was too weak 
in terms of industrial scale and productivity, to reject the 
government's environmental policy, but still had enough strength 
to barely manage to develop new technologies. On the other 
hand, in our case, the scale of the automobile and other 
industries has grown too large, and the government's 
environmental policy is not readily accepted by them. Before it 
is too late, we have to do something to resolve this air 
pollution problem. To this end, the Korean Government will have 
to unfold even more powerful, rigid environmental policies. 
Yet, such policies should not lean only towards regulation. 
The government should provide various favorable conditions so 
that the businesses themselves may develop their own clean 
environment techniques. 
  What measures to reduce air pollution does our government 
have at present? First, for reduction of exhaust fumes from 
automobiles, the government has been studying the following 
measures: to reduce smoke and soot from diesel-fueled vehicles 
and develop low-pollution autos, improve the quality of 
automobile fuels, and enforce the aggregate-amount regulation of 
exhaust gas from automobiles. For reduction of sulfurous acid 
gas, it has been promoting the compulsory use of clean fuel, 
expansion of the areas where low sulfuric acid gasoline is 
supplied, as well as the collective energy supply facilities, 
and the introduction of the aggregate-amount regulation of 
sulfuric acid gas. 
  In order to reduce dust, the following plans are now under 
discussion: to regulate businesses that generate flying dust 
and reinforce the standards for installation of dust collecting 
equipment, and a master plan for reducing dust in major cities. 
It also plans to guide industrial facilities emitting 
pollutants in large quantities in establishing desulfurization 
equipment, to efficiently control industrial facilities 
discharging air pollutants, and encourage private organizations 
to participate in the guidance for and checking of pollutant 
discharging facilities. It has also been hastening the work in 
the area of expanding the air pollution gauge networks and 
improvement of the control system. 
  The problem, however, lies in the definite willingness of 
the 
government and its authorities concerned and in the possibility 
of translating policy into practice, and the transparency of the 
policy, most of all. How can air become clean when the 
government has no willingness, lacks budget funds, and has a 
shortage of necessary human resources? 
  There are many ideas to resolve the air pollution issue. 
According to Kim Chong-tal, director of the Energy Management 
Industry Research Laboratory of the Energy Economic Research 
Institute, the following measures are needed to fundamentally 
resolve the problem. In the industrial sector, which accounts 
for 53.8 percent of the total energy consumption, efforts must 
be made to build low energy-consumption types of industrial 
structures, develop technology for improvement of energy 
efficiency by type of industry, and step up the development of 
new energy-saving products. 
  In the control of demand in the transportation industry 
sector, the measures proposed include building energy-saving 
types of transportation, establishment of composite cargo 
terminals, and formulation and enforcement of plans for 
energy-saving types of land utilization. 
  According to the results of research conducted by Pak 
Yong-hun, director of the Urban Traffic Research Institute, the 
transportation systems should be built chiefly centering around 
railways and mass transit. Other alternatives suggested include 
the development and supply of low-pollution vehicles, supply of 
small automobiles, construction of bicycle roads and expanded 
supply of bicycles, construction of roads in consideration of 
ecology, and absorption of the traffic demand by the information 
and communications industry. 
  The Paedal Environment Federation, which is a private 
environment organization, has been regularly conducting 
simplified air-quality measurements. This work is considered a 
new attempt to ensure the joint ownership of information on the 
environment, which has been hitherto monopolized by the 
government, upgrade the citizens' participation in the 
antipollution drive, and supplement the automatic air pollution 
gauge networks, which are currently in an absolute shortage 
across the nation. 
  Practically, there is no way of easily resolving the air 
pollution issue. The best possible way will be to gradually 
reduce pollutants from the very sources, such as industrial 
plants, thermal power plants, automobiles, and household heaters 
and air conditioners. To this end, individual citizens are 
encouraged to actively economize on energy consumption and 
participate voluntarily in the "car-holiday system according to 
the last digit of the license plate number" (if the last figure 
is 0, the system calls for keeping the car in the garage on the 
10th, 20th and 30th days of each month). Business corporations 
for their part should endeavor to develop and adopt clean 
environment technologies. The government on its part should 
make even more strenuous efforts to supply clean fuels on an 
expanded scale, strengthen the air environmental standards, and 
regulate even more rigidly exhaust gas from automobiles. 

