Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Paris, Jan 11 (AFP) -- The French Government's 
programme for privatisation will remove 668,000 employees and 
1,760 companies from the public productive sector if it is 
carried out fully, the INSEE official statistical institute 
reported on Tuesday [11 January]. 
  In a study based on the sector of French state companies, 
the 
biggest in the European Community, at the end of 1992, it also 
said that state companies had abolished 30,000 jobs in 1992. 
  The centre-right government which took power under Prime 
Minister Edouard Balladur from socialists at the end of March, 
has announced a programme to privatise most of the main French 
industrial and financial companies in public ownership. The 
process is well under way. 
  Before the plan was announced, state enterprises employed 
1.7 
million people in 2,750 companies. At the end of 1992 employees 
in state companies accounted for 11.5 percent of the 
non-agricultural public sector working at market prices. 
  If all 21 main holding companies listed are privatised, one 
third of employees in the public sector and two thirds of the 
companies, will be removed from state control. 
  The number of people employed by the public sector would 
fall 
from 11.5 percent to seven percent of the sector working on the 
basis of market prices excluding agricultural activities. 
  If employees working for foreign subidiaries of state-owned 
groups are included, privatisation would remove one million 
people from the state's payroll. 
  After privatisation, the public sector would comprise mainly 
big public undertakings and some companies in the weapons 
industry. Of the total number of employees remaining, 75 
percent would work for the EDF and GDF electricity and gas 
companies, the coal sector, the SNCF railay network, the RATP 
transportation service in Paris, and the postal and 
telecommunications services. 
  The number of foreign subsidiaries operated by the publis 
sector would fall from 1,000 now to 150. 
  The change would have the biggest effect in the industrial 
sector, INSEE said, mentioning particularly the steel, oil, 
chemical, car, aero and electronic industries. Overall, nine 
percent of industrial jobs would be transferred to the private 
sector. 
  In the financial sector, the number of people employed by 
state- controlled companies would fall from nearly 33 percent to 
five percent, most of whom would work for the Bank of France. 
The insurance sector would become wholly-owned by private 
interests. 
  INSEE said that France stood to raise more by far than any 
other European country from privatisation. It did not provide 
figures but many estimates have put the income from the sale of 
the 21 companies at 400 billion francs (69 billion dollars). 
  INSEE said that most of the 43,000 jobs removed from the 
public sector in 1992 were shed by the Air France airline, the 
postal service, the Renault car company and the Bull computer 
manufacturer which together shed 30,000 people. 
  A further 26,000 jobs left the public sector, although not 
all of these were abolished since some were transferred to the 
private sector, and the public sector acquired 13,000 people 
through takeovers. 
  The net reduction of 43,000 people was as much as in the 
whole of the period from 1988 to 1991. 
  French Budget Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said on Monday that 
France had no alternative to its current economic policy if it 
were to contain the cost of social policies and combat 
unemployment, observers noted. 

