BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by JORDAN TIMES Staff Reporter Ayman al-Safadi] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Jordan and the United States are unlikely to 
resolve their conflict over the U.S.-led naval blockade of 
al-'Aqabah this week despite assurances by U.S. Secretary of 
State Warren Christopher that he will present His Majesty King 
Husayn with "some suggestions" to ease the burden on Jordan of 
the sanctions against Iraq, sources said Friday. 
  The sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said any 
resolution to the dispute will have to be worked out in the 
Washington-based negotiations of the Jordanian proposal to 
replace the sea-inspections of al-'Aqabah bound shipping with 
onshore inspection by the British company Lloyds Register. But 
negotiators are unlikely to reach a final agreement by Monday 
when Mr. Christopher is scheduled to meet with King Husayn in 
London, the sources said. 
  Jordan made its proposal in January after rejecting a U.S. 
proposal in August to have the international naval forces 
enforcing the embargo on Iraq conduct their inspection in 
al-'Aqabah as an encroachment upon its sovereignty. 
  Sources told the JORDAN TIMES that the United States had 
accepted the Jordanian proposal in principle but bureaucratic 
and technical problems have delayed an agreement. 
  Jordanian officials brushed aside these "pretexts," saying 
the blockade is part of U.S. pressure on Jordan to coerce it 
into signing a separate peace treaty with Israel. They said 
that the Central intelligence Agency (CIA) was opposing any 
easing of the blockade on Jordan as its position is still 
influenced by the Kingdom's stand during the Gulf crisis. 
  King Husayn in March linked Jordan's return to the 
Arab-Israeli peace talks to the lifting of the siege on 
al-'Aqabah. 
  Sources say the King's strong stand on the issue might have 
highlighted the importance of the issue to Jordan among U.S. 
officials who had not seen the significance that the Kingdom 
attached to it. 
  Officials and shipping sources say the blockade, which has 
produced strong anger against the United States among 
Jordanians, has incurred enormous economic losses on the Kingdom 
despite its adherence to the sanctions against Iraq. 
  Officials point to the non-existence of inspection 
operations 
against neighbouring countries which have trade links with Iraq 
as proof that the al-'Aqabah blockade is intended to pressure 
Jordan. 
  "The fact that we are singled out and nobody is interested 
in 
finding out what trade with Iraq goes out from Turkey, Syria and 
Iran is an indelible proof that the purpose is to pressure 
Jordan," Jordanian official said. 
  Jordanian officials said the U.S. has also been exercising 
pressure on Jordan by demanding that the Kingdom take action 
against companies which it alleges are acting as a front for 
Iraq. 
  The official said the U.S. had been using "non-paper 
diplomacy" with Jordan by providing it with lists of companies 
that it claims are working for Iraq and demanding action against 
them. 
  But after investigating these companies, officials said, the 
government found nothing illegal about their operations and 
informed the United States that the Kingdom cannot take any 
action against them because they are violating neither Jordanian 
laws nor the sanctions regime against Iraq. 
  One official said the U.S. has linked a solution to the 
al-'Aqabah siege to a crack down on these companies whose number 
could not be determined. 
  "The U.S. is applying double pressure on Jordan. It is 
applying gunboat diplomacy and non-paper diplomacy," said 
prominent Parliament Member 'Abd al-Karim al-Kabariti. 
  But the U.S. Embassy in Amman denied that there is any link 
between the two situations. 
  "The (U.S.) embassy denies the link between the alleged list 
or lists of Iraqi companies and the discussions between Jordan 
and the United States to alleviate the economic burden" on 
Jordan from the inspection operations in al-'Aqabah, said an 
embassy official. 
  Sources said that some U.S. agencies were not satisfied with 
the mechanism through which Jordan investigated the operations 
of the alleged front companies for Iraq. They added that some 
U.S. departments involved in the negotiations over the 
inspection operations want to see Jordan take action against 
these companies as a proof of the "reliability" in enforcing the 
sanctions against Iraq. 
  But Jordanian officials rejected these explanations, 
insisting that like the siege on al-'Aqabah, demands for action 
against these companies are part of the pressure the U.S. has 
been applying on Jordan to achieve political goals. 

