BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Philip Johnston on a speech by John Major to </F>
Scottish Conservatives on 13 May: "Judge Me on My Record -- 
Major"] 
  [Text] Mr Major called on his party and the country last 
night to judge him on his record over a full Parliament, and 
allow him to fulfil the mandate he received from the electorate 
two years ago. 
  In his first set-piece speech since last week's drubbing for 
the Conservatives at the local elections, the Prime Minister 
told Scottish Tories, meeting in Inverness, that he was only 
halfway through his period in office and he intended to complete 
it. 
  His speech won him a standing ovation from party activists 
as 
he called for a revival of national self confidence and policies 
that would "unleash the genius of the nation". 
  The Prime Minister said: "Judge me on my whole term. All of 
it. You can't judge a house when only the foundations are laid." 
Earlier Mr Michael Heseltine, President of the Board of Trade, 
tipped as a possible successor if Mr Major was forced out of 
office, urged the party to keep its nerve and allow economic 
recovery to deliver the political benefits for the Government. 
He also pledged to support Mr Major "through thick and through 
thin". 
  The speeches, after Mr John Smith's death, were shorn of the 
cross-party attacks that are a traditional feature of political 
conferences. There was also none of the ritual razzmatazz that 
normally accompanies the Tory leader's address. 
  Mr Major said there were higher things than politics. Common 
bonds of humanity united the nation. "I often have little taste 
for the politics of points-scoring, or for belittling others," 
he added. "I care passionately for what I believe in, but I 
don't care passionately for damning what other people believe in. 
  "Sometimes I feel there is too much knocking, too much 
sneering, too much setting up of Aunt Sally against Aunt Sally. 
Being negative can be an addictive drug, but like any drug it 
corrodes and destroys the body in which it exists, and one body 
it runs the risk of corrupting is the body politic of the nation 
itself." 
  Mr Major said he had come to Inverness to be positive and 
extol the successes of Government policies. These were taking 
the country out of recession, with the lowest inflation and 
interest rates for a generation. Mr Major outlined an agenda 
for the rest of the parliament that placed greater emphasis on 
improving standards of education and curbing crime. He 
signalled that the law and order reforms already introduced 
would be extended. 
  "The British people are heartily sick of the apologists for 
crime and the crackdown that is needed has only just begun," Mr 
Major said. 
  He criticised the opposition of some teachers to school 
tests, a hostility he found impossible to understand. "We need 
to sweep away the progressive dogma that has done so much 
damage. Extend parents' choice, insist on the basics, make sure 
we get the best results for every child, and see that those 
results are reported and tested." Mr Major also staged a 
powerful defence of his policy on Europe, the issue that 
continues to threaten Tory stability and unity and which he said 
was "the poison in the well of British politics". 
  With the outcome of next month's Euro-elections likely to 
renew the pressure on his leadership, he took a swipe at his own 
party's Euro-sceptics. He said the benefits to jobs and trade 
were too often missed by those who concentrated on the narrow 
arguments as though they were fighting a holy war. 

