BFN 

<F P=106> [Leonid Berres report: "News Briefing at Russian FCS. Main </F>
Threat to Russia Is Inside its Borders"] 
  [Text] A three-day scientific-practical conference 
"Security of the Individual, Society, State, and Russia's 
Special Services" ended yesterday. Its outcome was summed up at 
a news briefing at the central club of the Russian Federal 
Counterintelligence Service [FCS]. Taking part in it were 
Vladimir Rubanov, deputy secretary of Russia's Security Council; 
Vladimir Volokh, deputy head of the Federal Emigration Service 
of Russia; Yuriy Stsepinskiy, deputy head of the FCS analytical 
directorate; and Petr Dmitriyev, scientific director of Moscow 
State University. The news briefing was hosted by Aleksandr 
Mikhaylov, head of the FCS Public Relations Center (PRC). 
  In the course of the conference, its more than 800 
participants heard 98 reports and addresses. The main attention 
was paid to a new conception of Russia's security system and a 
doctrine enabling it. As Yuriy Stsepinskiy stated, "the main 
threat to Russia is inside its borders." Asked by journalists 
if fragmenting the Russian Ministry of Security may weaken the 
country's security, Vladimir Rubanov replied that the 
effectiveness of measures taken had been proven by world 
practice. In the opinion of Aleksandr Mikhaylov, however, the 
operation of new subdivisions, in connection with the 
reorganization, should be efficiently coordinated. 
  Vladimir Volokh dwelled upon the problems of forced 
emigration. According to Federal Emigration Service [FES] 
information, about 2 million forced emigrants from CIS republics 
and another 500,000 from developing countries have entered 
Russia in the past three years. In his opinion, it had been long 
necessary to pass a law on emigration, otherwise Russia's FES 
would "choke." 
  According to Petr Dmitriyev, actions by FCS operatives have 
virtually no legal basis. Therefore, he thought, their 
activities should be regulated by a law "On Special Services" 
whose draft is in the works. 
  Aleksandr Mikhaylov, in his turn, briefed journalists on the 
results of a snap poll of the conference participants. It was 
found during the poll that 66 percent of the respondents are 
satisfied with the activity of the counterintelligence service, 
and 18 percent are not. At the same time, 74 percent of the 
polled think that the fight against corruption and smuggling is 
not being waged at the appropriate level. 
  The PRC head also gave your KOMMERSANT-DAILY correspondent 
some details about the incident involving North Korean diplomats 
held last week by FCS officers as they tried to smuggle from 
Russia two rockets (Mr. Mikhaylov did not specify what sort of 
rockets). In his words, Russia and the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea are not interested in further publicizing this 
affair because it concerns more than relations between two 
countries. This also finds confirmation in the categorical 
refusal of DPRK Embassy personnel to give any comments in this 
regard. 

