Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Agrarian Federation head Humberto Volando by </F>
Mario Burgueno Hoese; place and date not given] 
  [Text] The head of the Argentine Agrarian Federation (FAA) 
spoke with LA PRENSA and presented a detailed analysis of the 
current situation in the national agriculture-livestock sector. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] In your meeting last Tuesday with Minister 
Cavallo and the other leaders of the key entities in the sector, 
was a solution found for the matter of the regional economies on 
that crowded agenda? 
  [Volando] You said it yourself. The agenda was very crowded, 
a very long list of issues, all of them urgent and very 
important. So the time we had to talk to Dr. Cavallo and his 
advisers was utilized to the fullest. As for the regional 
economies, we have made little or no progress. The only progress 
we made was on the issue of the self-employment funds to which 
farmers must contribute for their retirement. In the regional 
economies, perhaps 5 percent of farmers are "up to date," and 
the others owe an average of five years. 
  We were able to convince Dr. Cavallo, with respect to the 
regional economies as well as the rest of the farm sector, that 
the unpaid debt is absolutely impossible to pay. In view of this 
situation, we sought a pragmatic solution: the debt incurred 
prior to 25 January 1994 is set aside, and may in time be 
forgiven. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Should that be understood as a cancellation 
of the debt? 
  [Volando] From the legal point of view, you will not find 
any 
resolution or decree canceling that debt in the next few days. 
This is a "de facto" situation that may in the future be 
canceled by decree to give the sector some legal certainty. For 
the time being, this is a "de facto" situation in which the 
minister and his advisers gave their word in our presence. 
Moreover, agriculture-livestock producers must begin 
straightening out their situation with respect to the 
self-employment fund. In other words, beginning in February, 
they should make their monthly contributions to the fund to 
prepare for their retirement. 
  To help the farmer, this week the categories will be 
changed--right now there are several--to reverse an error that 
has existed for a long time. 
  The change in categories has already been partially agreed 
to 
at the technical levels. Thus, the farmer will contribute less 
to the fund than he does now. 
  As a counterpart to this, since there is no such thing as a 
free lunch, the self-employed agriculture-livestock producer 
will not retire simply as a function of his age (65 years), but 
he will also have to have 20 years of contributions [deportes], 
even if he has to wait until he is 80 to retire. This solution 
is not ideal, but we have not been able to find any other 
alternative. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] With regard to Buenos Aires Province, which 
is very influential in the FAA, what is your organization's 
position on the tax issue? 
  [Volando] We have been able to forestall increases in the 
Buenos Aires Province property tax in 1992 and 1993, and, 
practically speaking, in 1994. This is a veritable triumph in 
itself, since we have seen in all the provinces that it requires 
a tremendous struggle to prevent increases, and in many cases we 
have not been successful. In Buenos Aires Province we have 
managed to freeze any increases and extend payments over 96 
months for farmers who are in arrears on their taxes. This is 
not a controversial issue for the FAA. The tax on gross income, 
however, is a controversy. It applies to many activities, 
including the agriculture-livestock sector. Buenos Aires 
Province has not decided whether to eliminate it, or at least 
reduce it. Talks are being held, and despite the resistance, I 
am optimistic that it will be reduced for the farm sector. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Changing the subject, can it be said that 
the National Service for Animal Health (Senasa) is guilty of 
negligence for what happened in the Bariloche area, and the 
resultant application of the rifle sanitario 
[destroying animals for health reasons]? 
  [Volando] You have used the right word: "negligence." The 
current vaccination plan is good in principle, but it requires a 
great deal of perseverance and strict enforcement. During the 
past few years, there has been monitoring of vaccinations in 
laboratories, monitoring of the way vaccinations are given, 
massive vaccinations, etc. With all the excitement about the new 
advancements, there has been negligence. 
  Why have there been these foci in the area of Bariloche, 
Conesa, Viedma, and Patagones? Because the ban on transporting 
livestock on the hoof or meat on the bone across the Colorado 
River has been ignored. 
  There is a lot of meat smuggling going on. The Senasa is to 
blame for that, but not exclusively. The previous head of the 
SAGyP [expansion not given], Mr. Regunaga, had agreed with Rio 
Negro, Neuquen, and local farmers to set up a commission to 
monitor the situation and make sure there was no livestock 
smuggling, and that has not been done. 
  Perhaps one of the reasons is the arrival of many 
well-heeled 
foreign tourists in Bariloche, who, among other things, want to 
have a nice steak. You know that a proper steak must have the 
meat on the bone. So there is quite a large demand, which is 
even reflected in the price of cattle. Prices have improved a 
great deal south of the Colorado River. 
  Officials have "looked the other way" when meat on the bone 
is transported, and this is how the foot-and-mouth disease virus 
has been transmitted in the area. As a result, there have been 
outbreaks that have required two treatments: vaccinated cattle 
are cordoned off in a "ring" and revaccinated. Cattle that have 
not yet been vaccinated have been decimated by foot-and-mouth 
disease, and there is no alternative but to apply the 
rifle sanitario, as other countries have done, tragic 
though it may be. 
  I would like to stress that if there had been proper 
control, 
destroying animals would be the exception rather than the rule, 
as has been the case in this episode of mass slaughter. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] What do you think of the payments farmers 
receive for the destroyed cattle? Are they fair for rural 
inhabitants? 
  [Volando] The value of the animals is determined in 
conjunction with representatives of the Senasa, of the farmers, 
and of the provinces. So far everything has gone well, because 
the prices have not been low, although the loss of profits has 
not been taken into account. The problem lies in the source of 
the funds, because the national government should be paying this 
compensation. In Carmen de Patagones and Viedma, payment was 
made within 45 days of the outbreak of infection, but the money 
came from the Senasa and the Economy Ministry has yet to 
reimburse it. In addition, people like those who operated the 
excavating equipment and those who did the slaughtering have not 
been paid anything yet. 
  So, in the case of Bariloche, the question is where the 
money 
will come from. It is a much larger amount than in the previous 
case. We are demanding that the Finance Ministry, which is the 
real payer, obey the law to the letter. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] If we add to the compensation for destroyed 
animals the $100 million that some estimate is necessary to 
convert the fruit industry in Rio Negro and Neuquen, do you 
think the Economy Ministry is in a position to deal with the two 
problems at once? 
  [Volando] No. I have personally told Minister Cavallo that. 
The conversion of the agriculture-livestock holdings (which are 
providing a lot of employment in the wet pampa region, where you 
can choose among a variety of crops or go into ranching) is 
practically impossible in the Rio Negro Valley, because wiping 
out the pear and apple orchards to switch to another product and 
waiting for the new plants to begin yielding will take 
approximately 10 years. Furthermore, the technology gap is not 
so big. I have visited laboratories where juices and nectars are 
processed for the United States, etc., and they are quite good. 
Until a few years ago, Rio Negro and Neuquen were centers of 
development, so they cannot be lumped together with other 
provinces that are considered "nonviable." Rio Negro and Neuquen 
are not; they were developing provinces, and they will be again, 
because they have the resources. What is missing is an overall 
policy to serve as a framework. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Do you think that the new leadership of the 
National Institute of Agricultural-Livestock Technology (INTA) 
will take into account the serious problem of desertification in 
Patagonia, as the desert makes inroads into the wet pampa? 
  [Volando] I have not spoken to Mr. Huergo, nor do I know on 
what terms he agreed to accept the presidency of the INTA. What 
I do agree with is your statement that desertification is a very 
serious problem in Patagonia. In 1963, 30 years ago, I 
participated in a meat study by a commission, and at the outset 
it stated that desertification was already happening in 
Patagonia, and we still have done absolutely nothing. When the 
oil, the gas, and the sheep run out and we cannot fish anymore, 
Patagonia will be finished. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Speaking of fishing, how did the FAA react 
to the news that the national Undersecretariat of Fishing had 
been eliminated? 
  [Volando] We have not expressed an opinion. I eat fish 
mostly 
during Holy Week, and I do not even fish as a pastime, although 
I have been concerned about it. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Moving on to another topic, what, in your 
opinion, has been accomplished by the two programs implemented 
by the SAGyP in 1993, the Agriculture-Livestock Social Program 
and Rural Change? 
  [Volando] Rural Change, which we endorsed in a note dated 3 
March 1993, was greeted with enthusiasm and great hope by 
farmers. The plan called for 1,400 groups to be formed in 1993 
and much of 1994. In fact, the plan was surpassed, and by the 
end of last year there were already more than 1,400 groups. 
Therefore, we are avidly seeking funding so that more groups can 
be formed. This work, in addition to the mutual enrichment that 
each group will receive from the experience and the technical 
consultation from the INTA, will undoubtedly yield positive 
results. Now, the miracle of recovering lost profits within the 
framework of this current policy is not something we can expect 
of the Rural Change groups. 
  As for the social assistance aimed directly at small farmers 
in the regional economies, where there are serious problems, it 
is an expression of solidarity, aid, and sensitivity, and I 
think it is great. But handouts will not eliminate the poverty 
and backwardness of the regional economies. What needs to be 
done here is to improve and activate systems of production. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] A short time ago, you met with the head of 
the Radical Civic Union (UCR) to discuss the issue of the 
regional economies. Did that meeting produce any document 
dealing with the need to revamp the national government's policy 
on this matter? 
  [Volando] I am correcting the drafts of the guidelines we 
will submit to the UCR this week. They will explicitly state the 
changes we feel must be made at the political level to 
reactivate the regional economies. One of the first points, in 
contrast to current policy, acknowledges that Buenos Aires 
cannot dictate an overall policy for the entire country. 
Argentina is not a homogeneous country. There are several 
Argentinas. So we foresee at least five regional economies: NOA 
[expansion not given], NEA [expansion not given], Cuyo, 
Mesopotamia, and Patagonia. Each of these regions requires a 
special policy. In our view, the characteristics of each region 
must be preserved and respected in implementing policies. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] Deputy Alberti (UCR-Buenos Aires) has 
introduced an agrarian reform bill in the National Congress that 
would expropriate from its legitimate owners land in excess of 
one "economic unit." What is the FAA's position on this 
legislative proposal? 
  [Volando] From the 1930's to the mid-1970's, this was a very 
important measure. Today we see that landowning farmers, 
especially small ones, cannot subsist. So I do not think this 
proposal will have any repercussions beyond the legislator's 
intentions. I do not see it as a threat to the future. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] The FAA, the Argentine Rural Confederations 
(CRA), the Agricultural-Livestock Intercooperative Confederation 
(Coninagro), and the Argentine Rural Association (SRA) are known 
as the "mothers" of agriculture-livestock production. Do these 
four entities have a common denominator? 
  [Volando] There is a common denominator among the FAA, the 
CRA, and the Coninagro, with a few minor variations. We have 
major differences with the Argentine Rural Association, however. 
We are severely critical of this economic policy, while the SRA 
has expressed its total solidarity with the economic plan. The 
FAA considers the economic policy to be "intrinsically 
perverse," meaning that it goes beyond the intentions of its 
authors and cannot set the right course for the Republic. During 
the past three years, the conversion plan has achieved something 
we can all appreciate--stability. It has come at the cost of 
selling part of our national enterprises, sources of production, 
and even dams, something that would have been unthinkable years 
ago. Moreover, the foreign and domestic debt has grown, 
unemployment and underemployment are on the rise, and the 
balance of trade deficit is climbing as well. This policy will 
end up concentrating wealth, meaning that there will be fewer 
rich people with greater wealth and more poor people who are 
even poorer, almost destitute. 
  Recently there was a meeting of the government's social team 
to look for ways to implement an assistance plan, which I think 
is correct. But this also tells us that this policy is making it 
necessary to give food to some of our fellow citizens because 
they cannot survive on their own. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] In your relationship with Minister Cavallo, 
you have often gotten into serious verbal disputes that have 
even led to blows. How is your relationship now? 
  [Volando] Look, we are both of Italian descent, and Cavallo 
"flies off the handle" and starts shouting. No one has shouted 
at me like that except my father--and he is dead now. 
  Ours is not a personal problem; I disagree with him and he 
with me; he defends his policy and I criticize it. All of this 
causes conflicts, which are natural among passionate people. 
  [Burgueno Hoese] You say that both are of Italian descent, 
but you are both Argentine as well. Is there any point in common 
between you and the minister, besides your ethnic origin, that 
would give farmers hope for a solution to their problems? 
  [Volando] I am tremendously optimistic with regard to the 
future of the Republic. If we have not yet found the way to 
solve many of our problems, it is not for lack of human 
resources, but rather due to a deficiency in the governing class. 
  If our institutions are allowed to carry out their functions 
and the necessary debates and discussions take place, we will 
come closer to the solutions. That is why I think the results 
for the Republic will be positive in the medium term. 

