BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 10 KYODO -- Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata 
contacted Chinese Premier Li Peng and South Korean President Kim 
Yong-sam on Tuesday [10 May] to apologize for former Justice 
Minister Shigeto Nagano's remarks denying Japan's aggression 
during World War II, Foreign Ministry officials said. Hata said 
in a written message to Li and a telephone call to Kim that 
Nagano's remarks caused pain and anger to the peoples of Japan's 
Asian neighbors. 
  Separately, the government instructed Japanese Embassies in 
member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) to explain that Tokyo's policy is to face the past and 
build future-oriented ties, the officials said. ASEAN links 
Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and 
Thailand. 
  In his messages, Hata referred to his policy speech 
delivered 
earlier in the day in which he renewed Japan's recognition that 
its "past actions, including aggression and colonial rule, had 
caused unbearable suffering and sorrow for many people." 
  Hata told Li and Kim that Japan would "do its utmost toward 
the creation of peace and for the construction of a bright 
future in the Asia-Pacific region." 
  Nagano, 71, resigned Saturday, taking responsibility for his 
remarks that the 1937 Nanjing massacre was a fabrication. He 
was succeeded by Hiroshi Nakai. 
  Kim told Hata in the 15-minute call that Nagano's remark was 
"unfortunate" when the two countries are trying to build a 
"future-oriented" relations and that it shocked and gave sorrow 
to the South Korean people, the officials said. 
  Kim also said Japanese leaders should not distort history 
and 
repeat actions that would hurt the feelings of the South Korean 
people. Hata said it was important to have a correct perception 
of history. 
  Hata said Nagano's remarks also were regrettable in view of 
the fact that next year marks the 50th anniversary of the end of 
World War II. 
  Hata was quoted as saying it is a time to reflect on the 
past 
and build a brighter future in cooperation with Asian nations. 
  Japanese Ambassador to China Michihiko Kunihiro handed 
Hata's 
message to Li to Vice Foreign Minister Tang Jiaxuan in Beijing, 
the officials said. 
  Tang told Kunihiro that China appreciates Hata's policy 
speech and his commitment to promote long-term, stable relations 
between the two countries, they said. 
  Tang was quoted as saying it would help Japan boost its 
international image and contribute to peace and stability in 
Asia and the world. 

