BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on news conference by President Leonid Kravchuk with </F>
UNIAN and other unidentified correspondents at UNIAN office in 
Kiev on 2 April] 
  [Text] Kiev -- [Correspondent] Judging by the results of 
the 27 March voting, can you forecast the outcome of the runoff 
election to the Supreme Council? What will your actions be, if 
less than 126 deputies are elected, if their number is between 
126 and 300, and in the third option, over 300? 
  [Kravchuk] This is the first election in Ukraine as an 
independent state. That is why one cannot expect it to display 
the top hallmark of democracy, but the election did take place 
and was quite democratic. There were no serious conflicts in 
the process. There were instances of unethical conduct, but no 
complications in terms of rallies or strikes. 
  Of course, one wished the Supreme Council to be elected 
right 
away. This did not happen because of the large number of 
candidates. The "left" prevails among the 49 elected people's 
deputies, but not too greatly. The western region was the most 
active, electing a higher percentage of deputies than, for 
example, the eastern region. If you look at the next round, 
everything points to the dominance of the "leftist" trend. I do 
not wish to interpret the "left" with a minus and the "right" 
necessarily with a plus. We know from the experience of the 
current parliament that when important issues were tackled, they 
united intelligent and responsible people irrespective of which 
bloc they belonged to, "left" or "right." 
  I would wish for one option only -- to see a Supreme Council 
elected and for the new Supreme Council to take the following 
steps: First of all, pass two constitutional laws which we no 
longer can live without, namely, on the local bodies of power 
and their area of competence, and the law on the president in 
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine. If these two laws 
are approved, the [presidential] election will take place on 26 
June. 
  [Correspondent] Who do you think can defer the presidential 
election of 26 June, the new Supreme Council, or can the 
president do it under certain circumstances? 
  [Kravchuk] It would be best for the Supreme Council to do 
it, 
because this would be a legitimate step... But in order to do 
that, it has to be elected, and that is the most important 
problem. 
  [Correspondent] Experts remark that all the moves by Kiev 
aimed at confirming Crimea's status as an autonomous republic 
within the composition of Ukraine are used by Yuriy Meshkov to 
step up his rating on the wave of confrontation. With a view to 
this, it would be interesting to know which specific 
instructions did you give to Valeriy Horbatov, the newly 
appointed president's representative in Crimea? What influenced 
your choice of this man for such an important post? 
  [Kravchuk] I do not believe that Meshkov will be able to 
exploit for a long period of time our attempts at accord and 
cooperation. The most important thing is whether the reforms in 
Crimea will be a success, who will do this and in what manner, 
and who will assume responsibility for this. It is these very 
issues that we were discussing with Crimea's Vice Prime Minister 
Yevgeniy Saburov. The main thesis of the conversation was this: 
The leadership of Ukraine, aware of the situation in Crimea and 
its specific nature and guided by the law on the delimitation of 
plenary powers between Crimea and Ukraine, is ready to agree to 
a vast economic autonomy of Crimea. We shall be looking, on the 
edge of our plenary powers, how far one could step either right 
or left, if this serves the cause. But there will be no 
political or military plenary powers which Crimea would like to 
assume. The popularized idea that Crimea should join some 
international structure and become a subject of international 
law will not be supported under any circumstances. 
  The decree on the appointment of Valeriy Horbatov was due to 
a number of circumstances. However, he is not a president's 
representative like, for example, in Donetsk or Lugansk Oblasts. 
There, the president's representative and the administration 
perform the functions of the executive power. That is to say, I 
created a mission of the president of Ukraine and appointed a 
permanent representative with an entirely different status. 
  I outlined three groups of issues for him. Firstly, control 
over the fulfillment of the constitutional laws, decrees, and 
decisions made in Ukraine and which are mandatory on the entire 
territory, including Crimea. Secondly, assistance to Crimea in 
carrying out control over the fulfillment by the central 
government of its decisions in relation to Crimea. Thirdly, the 
permanent representative in Crimea is authorized to carry out 
control and render assistance in relations between Crimea, as 
part of Ukraine, and international organizations. 
  For example, the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development is allocating money for the construction of projects 
in Crimea. Not a single international bank, not a single 
international organization will allocate money without Ukraine's 
consent to this. The entire financial aid to Crimea will be 
channeled via Ukraine, its president, and its government. If 
Ukraine gives consent and the money goes to Crimea, the mission 
will tackle this issue. Any official perception of Crimea by 
other states as a subject of international law is out of the 
question. This is why the permanent representative can fulfill 
such instructions as visits to the officials of foreign states 
for clearing up the problems which need solution. 
  The task of the mission will be to [ensure] accord, peace 
and 
quiet between the people of Crimea and Ukraine, so we will not 
allow any conflicts to happen. 
  As far as the appointment of, specifically, Valeriy 
Horbatov is concerned, it took place because he is an 
experienced person, dedicated to the cause and the state and he 
is not splitting the state into pieces. He is a patriot of the 
land on which he lives and this he has proved by his work. 
  [Correspondent] Experts believe that Belarus is going down 
the road of losing its state sovereignty which can mark the 
beginning of the restoration of the Soviet Union. How will it 
affect Ukraine's stand in relation to the CIS? 
  [Kravchuk] I will begin with two important theses. First, 
the Soviet Union can no longer be restored. The second theses 
is that the CIS was not formed as a union, and it is impossible 
to convert the CIS to a union on the basis of the founding 
documents which we signed. The CIS was the first step towards 
the civilized disintegration of the Soviet Union's empire. 
  The president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev, has 
proposed dissolving the CIS and forming a Eurasian Union. Steps 
towards a Eurasian Union should not be rash and ill-considered, 
since Ukraine, Russia, and many other countries have now joined 
some European structures. Our foreign minister initialled a 
document on partnership and cooperation with the European Union. 
All of the [former Soviet] states have followed this road. 
There would be a conflict: First, we join the European Union, 
then a Eurasian Union emerges. The CIS charter allows CIS 
membership along with membership in any European or world 
political and economic structures. This is a matter of 
formality, but if you look deeper, it is a very serious issue. 
The members of the European Union took 35 years to reach it, 
and we think we can do it in a single decision. You cannot. 
Without preconditions, no mechanisms or structures will work. 
My opinion is that we must now utilize the potential of the CIS 
and the potential of the relations between the states. 
Decisions on the next steps must be taken only in consultation 
with the people, with parliaments. 
  [Correspondent] How will the implementation of the 
Ukrainian-American agreements be affected if the government 
preserves the fixed karbovanets-dollar rate in Ukraine's system 
of currency regulation, which the National Bank of Ukraine and 
the International Monetary Fund are opposed to? 
  [Kravchuk] We are not talking about a fixed rate, but 
rather, 
a regulated rate. It will be agreed with the National Bank and 
can vary according to the situation. I think such regulation is 
temporary and will not be our permanent policy. I do not think 
a regulated rate is an obstacle to investments promised to 
Ukraine in the USA. 
  [Correspondent] What is your attitude toward the statement 
by 
People's Deputy of Ukraine Leonid Kuchma to the effect that the 
new policy in Ukraine should be made by people "with clean 
hands?" 
  [Kravchuk] I read this statement. The analysis of the 
situation made by the former prime minister, currently the 
president of the Ukrainian Union of Industrialists and 
Entrepreneurs, was made proceeding from the realities of life. 
However, I see a moral problem here, which the answer to the 
question has led to. Attempts to shift the entire blame onto 
the government, the president, and other executive structures 
are made by the man who was in the government and who applied 
his efforts to what we have today. 
  During the "rule" of Leonid Danylovych [Kuchma] prices 
soared 
dozens of times, the correlation between the consumption fund 
and the accumulation fund was upset. The largest cataclysms and 
strikes took place at that time. The decrees by the Kuchma 
government upturned everything. Today I am signing guarantees 
to foreign firms which, for example, wish to build a terminal. 
After those decrees, they do not believe our laws and the most 
awful thing is to lose investor's trust. 
  One of the latest statements by Leonid Kuchma sets the aim 
of 
removing Kravchuk's "party of power" from leadership. When 
Vyacheslav Chornovil says this, I understand this (although he 
also belonged to the "party of power" being head of the Lvov 
Oblast council). However, the "party of power" was a "cradle" 
for Leonid Kuchma. The production association "Pivdenmash" 
[southern machine plant in Dnepropetrovsk] is a state within a 
state. Such a post gave everything one could get: Kuchma was a 
member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, a 
deputy, a director, and a secretary of the Party committee. 
Even now Kuchma belongs to the "party of power," as he heads 
the Ukrainian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs. Does 
he have any moral right to call for the removal of the "party of 
power?" It is not by chance that people say: "And who are the 
judges themselves?" 
  When Kuchma decided to leave the post of prime minister, we 
agreed that normal relations should remain between us. All of a 
sudden, Leonid Kuchma probably forgot he was talking with me. I 
have never seen anything like this happen in this world, when a 
man who left the post, would stir up such a "wave"... I 
expressed my opinion; I was silent, and now I have said this. 
And I will say more, if need be. [end Kravchuk] 
  In reply to a question by REUTER on the possibility of a 
split or even territorial dismemberment of Ukraine (a 
possibility discussed by certain political circles in Russia), 
Leonid Kravchuk said: 
  [Kravchuk] These prospects have been discussed for a long 
time. We are holding on, and I think, will hold out. I am 
mostly hoping for internal stability and, first of all, for 
economic measures. Secondly, I know from experience when a 
nation faces the problem to be or not to be, it does not take an 
irresponsible attitude. Donbass has voted for federalism, for 
the CIS (I am referring to the poll), but they did not vote for 
immediate action. This has to be done in a legitimate way. 
  For example, back in Soviet times, the Ukrainian SSR passed 
a 
law on languages recognizing Ukrainian as the state language and 
Russian -- the language of interethnic communication. 
  My opinion is this: Ukraine will not lose from having two 
official languages. It will not cease to be an independent 
state. The time will come when the ground will be prepared, 
teachers will be trained and textbooks, literature will be 
published, but we will not accomplish anything in one or two 
years. I would not even raise this issue, or raise it in this 
aspect only. [end Kravchuk] 
  Commenting on the statement made by Supreme Council Chairman 
Ivan Plyushch at the poll saying that only he who is unsure of 
his strength is afraid of elections, Leonid Kravchuk said: 
  [Kravchuk] You will not make me quarrel with Ivan 
Stepanovych. He and I have shared and continue to share a common 
view on the constitutional processes. Once the Supreme Council 
is elected, it must pass two laws: On local power bodies and on 
the president... [end Kravchuk] 
  Leonid Kravchuk responded favorably to the question about 
the 
need for the president to have his own political party which 
would command a majority in parliament. In particular, Kravchuk 
said: 
  [Kravchuk] I agree with those who say that one should run in 
the presidential election having one's own party. If the "left" 
wins the Supreme Council election, it is clear that this will 
call for a president who supports the "left" forces. Otherwise, 
the president will be unable to work, haunted by various rumors 
and unbearable moral pressure. This is confrontation. That is 
why I am emphatically in favor of the idea that the president 
must have his own party in order to win, must a majority in 
parliament and work for the interests of Ukraine. 

