Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 31 KYODO -- Two top leaders of the 
minor United Social Democratic Party (USDP) joined the Sakigake 
[Harbinger]-Japan New Party (JNP) alliance Monday [31 January]. 
  USDP Chief Satsuki Eda, now director general of the Science 
and Technology Agency, and the party's secretary general, Shogo 
Abe, left the lower house alliance between the USDP and the 
Social Democratic Party (SDP) on Saturday. 
  Eda has said the USDP will be dissolved as a result of the 
likely realignment in Japanese politics following Saturday's 
passage of reform bills in the Diet. The USDP, formed in 1978 
after splitting from the SDP, holds four seats in the lower 
house. 
  Another USDP lower house member, Naoto Kan, has already 
joined the Sakigake-JNP and became a formal member of the 
alliance on Monday. Yanosuke Narazaki, the other USDP lower 
house legislator, is expected to remain in the SDP-USDP group to 
maintain ties between the two parties. 
  Hideo Den, the USDP's only upper house member, left the 
party 
on December 24. 
  The distribution of seats in the 511-seat lower house now 
looks as follows -- Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) 222, SDP-USDP 
74, Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party] 61, Sakigake-JNP 55, Komeito 
[Clean Government Party] 52, Democratic Socialist Party (DSP) 
19, Japanese Communist Party (JCP) 15, Kaikakuonokai (Reform 
Group) five, and independents eight. 
  Meanwhile, the LDP notified the House of Councillors that 
three upper house members have left the party. 
  Ichiji Ishii, Yamato Kogure and Tomoichi Hoshino left the 
LDP 
after voting for the government's political reform bills in the 
upper house on December 21, defying the party's decision to vote 
against the bills. 
  A compromise version of the bills was enacted into law in 
the 
lower house on Saturday. 
  An upper house alliance of the JNP, Shinseito and the 
Democratic Reform Party (DRP) has given notice that the three 
LDP defectors have joined their group. 
  As a result, in the 252-seat upper house, the LDP has 96 
seats, the SDP 73, the JNP, Shinseito and the DRP 26, Komeito 
24, the DSP 11, the JCP 11, the Niin Club five and independents 
six. 

