Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The United Workers Trade Union Federation (CUT) has 
come out against the candidacy of Colombian President Cesar 
Gaviria to become the OAS secretary general. The CUT also asked 
the government not to vote for Gaviria because this organization 
believes human and union rights were systematically violated 
during the Gaviria administration. 
  The CUT and the international organization to which it is 
affiliated, the ICFTUO [International Conference of Free Trade 
Union Organizations], said that during President Gaviria's 
four-year administration the cases of human rights violations, 
far from decreasing, increased. The CUT sent a letter to Foreign 
Minister Luis Maria Ramirez Boettner stating its disagreement 
with Gaviria's candidacy. 
  The letter says: "We have proof that the personal position 
of President Gaviria and his government has been of indolent 
indifference to these events. The Colombian union movement is 
among those that have paid with their lives for their action in 
defense of workers. Colombian and international human rights 
organizations have pointed out that in a significant and 
alarming number of cases the alleged people responsible for the 
violations were members of the Armed Forces and state security 
organizations." 
  The letter adds that the seriousness of Colombia's situation 
has led the ICFTUO Human and Union Rights World Committee to 
dedicate to that country its first campaign, which is now being 
prepared. The CUT letter adds: "Therefore, we would like to 
request that Paraguay not vote for that candidate. The OAS is a 
valuable organization that cannot stain its prestige. It must be 
led by an individual who has not been questioned on an important 
issue such as human and union rights." 
  The letter sent to the foreign minister is part of a 
continental campaign by the international union movement. The 
letter concludes by saying: "It is an effort to prevent an 
individual under whose administration human rights were violated 
many times from being elected." 

