BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 6 KYODO -- The leader of Japan's No. 2 
opposition party urged Justice Minister Shigeto Nagano to resign 
over his remark that the 1937 Nanjing massacre is "a 
fabrication." 
  Tomiichi Murayama, chairman of the Social Democratic Party 
[of Japan, SDPJ] (SDP), said the matter has not ended even if 
Nagano retracted his earlier remark. "Mr. Nagano should take 
responsibility and make clear his course of action," he said. 
  Earlier in the day, Koken Nosaka, the SDP's Diet Affairs 
Committee chairman, urged Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata to sack 
Nagano as justice minister. 
  The SDP will demand Nagano's dismissal unless Hata sacks 
him, 
Nosaka said. 
  In an interview with the mass-circulation daily MAINICHI 
SHIMBUN published Wednesday, Nagano denied that the Nanjing 
massacre happened and said it is wrong to call Japan's World War 
II campaign a war of aggression. 
  Following the invasion of Nanjing in December 1937, Imperial 
Japanese Army troops slaughtered more than 300,000 Chinese 
civilians, according to Chinese estimates. 
  Japanese historians, however, tend to cite much lower 
estimates and some also contend that the mass killings were not 
ordered but caused by troops that got out of hand. The 
international war tribunal estimated the number of those killed 
at more than 200,000. 
  In a news conference Friday, Nagano retracted the remark 
which he said was an improper one. 
  The Japanese Communist Party (JCP) also demanded Nagano's 
dismissal, saying it cannot pardon his remark that completely 
denies Japan's historic crime. 
  Kazuo Shii, chief of the JCP Secretariat, said Nagano's 
remark "is an astonishingly wild one to defend the worst war 
crimes by Japanese militarism...the Nanjing massacre has been 
proved by a number of concrete facts." Shii said if Hata 
obscures the matter, it will lead to no confidence of the 
cabinet. 
  On Wednesday, a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said, "a 
Japanese cabinet member went so far as to publicly distort 
history, deny the historical facts and defend the Japanese 
militarists' aggression. We are shocked and indignant about 
this." 
  South Korea's Foreign Minister Han Sung-chu told Japanese 
Ambassador to South Korea Toshio Goto on Friday that Nagano's 
remarks are a distortion of historical facts. 
  Nagano, a member of the House of Councillors and a former 
chief of staff of the Ground Self-Defense Force, was given the 
justice portfolio in the cabinet of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata 
on April 28. 
  The SDP, whose members voted for Hata in the Diet's prime 
ministerial elections April 25, quit the ruling coalition last 
week in protest against the establishment of a large 
parliamentary grouping by coalition partners, excluding the SDP. 
  The country's two largest parties, the Liberal Democratic 
Party and the SDP, are now both in the opposition camp. 

