Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] Economy and Finance Minister Jorge 
Garnet said he is revisiting the 1994 goals stated in the 
International Monetary Fund loan program for Peru to see if 
adjustments can be made that would allow more funds to be spent 
on fighting poverty. He also said that the planned $410 million 
for social programs in Peru's 1994 budget should be increased. 
The $410 million equates to only 1 percent of the GDP. Garnet 
said he will adopt a broad approach to finding monies, including 
applying for a larger portion of the income from privatizations. 
Last year's privatizations brought in $526 million and this 
year's sales of state enterprises are expected to yield $800 
million. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 18 Feb 94 p B11) 
  Seven private enterprises have been authorized to offer a 
full range of national and international postal services for the 
next five years as concessionaires. This is a direct result of a 
decree passed in 1991 that abolished the monopoly status of the 
Peruvian Directorate of Postal Services. The private firms had 
already been operating as courier services. (Lima EL COMERCIO in 
Spanish 16 Feb 94 p A8) 
  The new mortgage loan mechanism, which will be entirely in 
private hands, has prompted Vice Minister for Housing and 
Construction Fernando Ojeda Zanartu to speculate that it could 
attract $500 million and enable the construction of 50,000 homes 
this year. This view was echoed by Carlos G. Elias, vice 
president of the Peruvian Construction Association. They both 
anticipated that the mortgage system would attract investment by 
pension funds, banks, and insurance companies. (Lima EL COMERCIO 
in Spanish 9 Feb 94 p A9) 
  A new fishing vessel that is purported to be multipurpose, 
high-capacity, and low-cost has been developed in Peru. Its 
designer, Eduardo Rubini, said that the vessel, which has a 
steel hull, can carry 25 metric tons of fish and will allow for 
a constant harvest because it has equipment that will allow the 
fishermen to switch "from tuna to squid." The equipment allows 
for trawling, dragging, and line fishing, according to Rubini. 
The vessel is equipped to navigate by satellite, radar, and 
sonar probing, and costs "about the same as a bus," Rubini said. 
A total of 16 boats are planned. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 20 
Feb 94 p A13) 
  Of 5,000 fishing vessels registered in Peru, 60 percent are 
obsolete or no longer in use, according to Audberto Morales, 
head of the Institute for South Pacific Fishing Research. 
Morales pointed out that as a result, Peruvian fishermen only 
catch 104,000 metric tons of yellow jack tuna out of a biomass 
of 5 million metric tons, and similarly only catch 39,000 metric 
tons of mackerel out of a biomass of 1.3 million metric tons. He 
added that because of the age and poor condition of the fishing 
vessels, they spend "more time in repairs than on the job." 
(Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 20 Feb 94 p Al3) 

