BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Sun Maoqing (1327 5399 1987)] </F>
  [Excerpts] Beijing, 21 Jun (XINHUA) -- The People's Air 
Force held a gathering today to commemorate the 30th naming 
anniversary of the "heroic battalion" by the National Defense 
Ministry. 
  Inscriptions from Jiang Zemin, Liu Huaqing, and Zhang Zhen 
for the "heroic battalion" were read at the gathering. 
  On behalf of the Central Military Commission and the General 
Staff Department, the General Political Department, and the 
General Logistics Department, Chief of General Staff Zhang 
Wannian warmly congratulated the meeting's opening. Zhou Ziyu, 
deputy director of the General Political Department, presented 
the "heroic battalion" with gifts and a bronze board inscribed 
with "The Powerful Guardians of the Nation's Airspace" on it. 
  The "heroic battalion" is a heroic military unit with a high 
fighting will, tough fighting skills, and a tenacious fighting 
style. [passage omitted] The battalion, after rendering 
meritorious services for the motherland and the people by 
shooting down four enemy U-2 strategic and pilotless 
high-altitude reconnaissance planes, was given the honorary 
title of "heroic battalion" in June 1964 by the National Defense 
Ministry. [passage omitted] 
  In his speech, Zhang Wannian called on officers and men to 
learn from the "heroic battalion"; from their resoluteness in 
listening to the party, their high sense of political awareness 
and strict organizational discipline in following the command of 
the CPC Central Committee and the Central Military Commission 
for all their actions; from their spirit of a high degree of 
responsibility toward state security; from their fearlessness 
before difficulties; from their indomitable spirit; from their 
efforts to master modern scientific knowledge; from their 
hard-trained military skills; and from their raising the unit's 
fighting strength through rigorous and scientific training. 
Zhang Wannian added that if we want to fulfill the important 
mission entrusted by the party and the people, we need to build 
hundreds and thousands of fighting collectives in the style of 
the "heroic battalion." In particular, we need to give play to 
the heroic battalion's revolutionary and heroic spirit of "dare 
to struggle, dare to win, and dare to crush all enemies" and to 
constantly advance our army's modernization cause. He stressed 
the need for army commanders and fighters to rally closely round 
the CPC Central Committee and the Central Military Commission 
with Comrade Jiang Zemin at the core; to be guided by Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and by the party's basic line; to greatly 
develop the old Red Army's excellent tradition and the spirit of 
revolutionary heroism; to be tenacious; to be enterprising; and 
to strive to build our army into a strong, modernized, and 
regularized revolutionary army. 
  Air Force Political Commissar Ding Wenchang also spoke at 
the 
meeting. 

