BFN 

<F P=106> [Nicholas Wood article: "Clarke Gives Hint That Eventual </F>
Goal is Single Currency"] 
  [Text] Britain could join a single currency without first 
re-entering the European exchange-rate mechanism, Kenneth Clarke 
said yesterday in remarks that threaten to rekindle the 
simmering Tory feud over Europe. 
  The Chancellor of the Exchequer was speaking at a 
Westminster 
press conference to launch the Conservative manifesto for the 
elections to the European Parliament. 
  A Strong Britain in a Strong Europe. Mr Clarke made it clear 
that Britain's enforced exit from the currency grid 20 months 
ago and its emasculation last summer were no barrier to a single 
currency and a central bank. 
  Eurosceptic Tories said that the Chancellor, who is on 
record 
as supporting the goal of economic and monetary union (EMU), had 
let the cat out of the bag and confirmed their fears that the 
Government is secretly planning to go for a single currency in 
the late 1990s, assuming it can then also win Commons support. 
But they declined to attack him publicly for fear of being 
accused of rocking the boat now that campaigning for the June 9 
poll is under way. 
  Mr Clarke said: "It is highly unrealistic that in present 
circumstances member states will go back to the narrow bands of 
the ERM [Exchange Rate Mechanism]. I do not think that Britain 
is likely to do so in the foreseeable future. If and when 
economic and monetary union ever comes on to the agenda again -- 
and no doubt some time it will -- I don't believe the route will 
be via the ERM." 
  Most Conservative MPs have assumed that the turmoil that 
struck the ERM last summer had dealt a fatal blow to the 
three-stage Delors time-table, under which the first countries 
could go ahead with a single currency in 1997. 
  John Major has said that the Delors timetable for EMU has 
"all the potency of a rain dance," and yesterday he was equally 
dismissive, saying that there were almost no signs that 
conditions for a single currency "are likely remotely to be 
established for a very long time indeed." 
  Tory MPs have also been reassured by the British opt-out 
from 
stage 3 of monetary union, which means that Britain could not 
join without the assent of Parliament. 
  However, the sceptics believe that, with stability returning 
to Europe's foreign exchange markets and with inflation and 
long-term interest rates low, some of the convergence criteria 
for stage 3 and a move to a single currency by 1997 -- or the 
later start of 1999 -- are being met. 
  A leading Tory sceptic said that Mr Clarke had realised that 
returning to the ERM was out of the question and that he was now 
considering leap-frogging the ERM and going straight to a single 
currency. 
  Another leading sceptic said: "We have known about this for 
18 months. They are going for a big bang. Ken Clarke would be 
very happy to see this happen and that's why Michael Portillo 
has said he would not have a single currency. Clarke does have 
a degree of candour. That's very refreshing but it does not 
mean he is right." 

