Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Vladimir Naumov report: "Fate of `Cosmic' Deal"] </F>
  [Text] The new year is beginning propitiously for 
Russian-Indian cooperation in space matters. The editorial 
office possesses reliable information that the sides have at 
last succeeded in emerging from the ticklish situation which 
developed following the suspension of the agreement on the joint 
development of a cryogenic booster unit [CBU]. 
  It was signed by the Glavkosmos [Main Administration for the 
Development and Use of Space Technology for the National Economy 
and Scientific Research] and the Indian Space Research 
Organization [ISRO] in 1991 and provided for the transfer of 
Russian cryogenic space technologies to India and for the 
instruction and training of specialists. The contracts were 
worth 2.35 billion rupees. By the time the agreement had been 
declared a violation of the missile technology control regime 
[MTCR] (in the opinion of some experts, the very fact of a 
violation is highly debatable), the Indians had already paid us 
1.297 billion rupees (approximately 60 percent of the total). 
  For this money the Glavkosmos passed to the ISRO 90 percent 
of the technical documentation and certain equipment needed to 
organize production. In an instant all this "property" became 
useless, since there could be no question of continuing 
deliveries worth more than 1 billion rupees. In addition, the 
Indian space program, which is entirely dependent on the joint 
development of the CBU, found itself in jeopardy. 
  It was in these starting conditions that the sides started 
debating the project's future. Three times the talks were on 
the verge of failure. Nevertheless, an acceptable solution was 
found. In the opinion of specialists, the new version of the 
agreement will fit fully within the "Procrustean bed" of the 
MTCR. 
  What, then, has been agreed? Instead of technologies, the 
Glavkosmos will supply two additional CBU flight stages and 
technological equipment for their operation for the outstanding 
sum. It will pass to India two mockup units: A service one to 
complete the ground servicing complex and a dynamic one to "fit" 
it to the launch complex. 
  In addition, an additional agreement has been concluded on 
the delivery of three more Russian-made finished flight stages. 
Each of them will cost $3 million. This will enable India not 
to curtail independent space research but merely to correct its 
program. 
  The purchaser has pledged to use the equipment obtained from 
the Glavkosmos exclusively for peaceful purposes -- to launch 
telecommunications satellites and other useful civilian payloads 
into orbit. India has agreed to a requirement not to reexport 
it to third countries and not to modernize without Russia's 
consent. Our specialists' access to places where all the space 
rockets which will use the units being sold as the third stage 
are assembled, tested, and launched will also be ensured. 
  The first Russian CBU's will be handed over to the ISRO in 
1996. But the Indians are prepared to pay one-half of the cost 
in advance ($4.5 million) as early as January 1994. In 
conditions when the Glavkosmos is finding it hard to find the 
money to support the space rocket complex, these dollars will 
come in handy. 
  The accords that have been reached are very important. They 
will not only enable Russia to "save face" as a reliable partner 
in international cooperation but will also ensure employment for 
15,000 of our compatriots -- working people in the space 
industry -- through the year 2000. 
  Thanks to the new agreement, experts believe, Russia and 
India will preserve the trade and scientific ties developed over 
the years. It is not hard to predict what the outcome would 
have been if this had not happened: In full accordance with the 
proverb "nature abhors a vacuum," our niche in the market for 
space services would be taken over by leading French and U.S. 
firms. They have long been looking longingly at this region. 

