CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by P. A. Antikayn, Doctor of Techn. Sciences, B. </F>
K. Bylkin, Doctor of Techn. Sciences, and G. N. Samarets, Eng., 
VNIIAM [unexpanded acronym], under the rubric: REFERENCE 
MATERIALS; UDC 621.311.25:621.039.621.9] 
  [Text] The conditions under which extension of the 
operating life of the equipment of a pressurized water nuclear 
power plant (PWRP) would be possible and expedient are 
considered. In order to ensure reliable and safe operation of an 
NPP after its design life has expired, the basic requirements 
for evaluating (for the extent and methods of inspection) the 
state of the base metal and welded joints have been developed. 
The concept of the creation of the Regulations Regarding 
Extension of the Life of the Equipment and Pipelines of NPP with 
VVER Reactors is presented. 
  The problem of monitoring the safe operation of NPP whose 
design life has elapsed has become urgent in many countries. For 
example, in the USA more than 2/3 out of 110 nuclear power 
plants in operation with a design life of 40 years have operated 
more than 10 years. Upon expiration of design life, license 
renewal is required [1]. 
  In Russia, out of 13 units in operation with VVER type 
reactors, with a design life 30 years, six units have operated 
for more than 10 years; three, more than 20 years; and none of 
them have exhausted design overhaul period. 
  Design life is an arbitrary value that is determined by 
economic considerations related to the equipment pay-back. The 
strength analysis and analysis of neutron radiation-induced 
embrittlement of the metal of the reactor vessel, of corrosion 
losses, etc., are based on the design life. A reliable basis for 
extension of the life exists, if it is found that actual 
operating conditions have been milder than the design conditions. 
  In the European countries there are no clear limitations for 
NPP design life (as compared with Russia and the USA). It is 
held that the principle of maintaining the level of safety and 
reliability achieved at the newest NPP should be adhered to in 
the case old plants. Thus, in 1988 a system was introduced in 
Germany for evaluating whether the safety level of each NPP, 
after no more than 10 years of operation, is meeting current 
specifications of safety standards. 
  An approach to the possible extension of NPP life should be 
based on guaranteeing safe operation, taking into account 
physical aging and obsolescence of constructions, systems, and 
equipment. In assessing the possible extension of the life, it 
is necessary to keep in mind that the effect of reactor 
radiation background on service and maintenance personnel 
intensifies with time, since gamma-radiating radionuclides 
accumulate during operation in equipment, pipelines, thermal 
insulation, structural constructions, and other elements. 
  In the present paper, the authors consider only that part of 
the NPP life extension problem which is related to the 
reliability of equipment and pipelines. 
  In the USA, the NRC has developed a final version of 
Regulations specifying the procedure for the extension of the 
standard NPP life. There is still no analogous document in 
Russia. 
  At present, Russia is experiencing a deep recession. The 
construction of new NPP has practically ceased. A severe limit 
on adding new capacities has been introduced at thermal power 
stations. Therefore, to maintain the necessary level of 
electrical and thermoelectrical power consumption in industry, 
transport, communal economy and agriculture, the maintenance of 
the equipment of thermal power stations and nuclear power plants 
in working order when their design life is over becomes an 
important matter. Such extension is possible in the following 
cases: actual reliability (durability) margins have been wide 
enough; actual operating conditions have proven to be less 
rigorous than those envisaged in the design; and after 
restorative repair of physically deteriorated equipment elements 
or partial replacement of the equipment. 
  Extension of operating life is all the more pressing in that 
the removal from service and dismantling of NPP equipment and 
structural constructions with its subsequent burial or partial 
recovery are very expensive. At the present time, the Russian 
economy does not have enough resources. A simple plant shutdown, 
maintaining a minimal number of employees and plant security 
does not prevent dissemination of [fission product] activity 
into the environment (atmospheric and aqueous). A plant that has 
been shut down presents an increased hazard in extreme natural, 
techno- or anthropogenic circumstances. 
  According to estimates of US specialists, given NPP life 
extension from 40 to 60 years, the US economy alone would gain 
more than 100 billion dollars. 
  Extension of the life of PWRP equipment seems the most 
promising. The possibility of extending the operation of 
equipment and pipelines is governed to a significant degree by 
the fact that the temperature of its metal is relatively low, up 
to 300!C. This ensures relative stability of metal properties. 
Equipment service life is limited by failure rate due to 
radiation-induced embrittlement, heat aging, metal fatigue, and 
corrosional and erosional wear. 
  The degree of radiation-induced embrittlement of a reactor 
vessel is a crucial factor at some electrical power stations 
both in Russia and in Eastern Europe, etc. The problem of 
radiation-induced embrittlement caused by intense neutron 
radiation is urgent only for the shells and welds of a reactor 
vessel in the region of the active core. In Russia 12Kh2MFA and 
15Kh2MFA steels that are more resistant to radiation than 
foreign steels were used for the vessel of the first generation 
reactors. However, the diameters of reactor vessels were 
smaller, and, due to this fact, the fast neutron flux density 
was greater. This was governed by the requirement that the 
reactor vessel be transportable by railway. 
  In Russia electrothermal processing of vessels of first 
generation VVER-440 reactors has been perfected and successfully 
carried out. The shell in the active core area is subjected to 
thermal processing to eliminate neutron radiation-induced 
embrittlement. This procedure may be carried out repeatedly. It 
is based on the elimination of crystal lattice imperfections 
induced by neutron flux during tempering or restoration of the 
plastic properties of the metal. Two options, thermal processing 
of a vessel and its replacement in case of embrittlement, have 
been examined abroad. 
  Corrosion damage, namely continuous thinning, tuberculation 
and corrosion cracks, can be monitored by nondestructive 
materials testing and by test cuttings from sections subjected 
to the most intense wear, known from operating experience and 
from the premises of design solutions. Erosional thinning can be 
easily found during visual inspection or thickness metering 
using nondestructive methods. 
  Metal susceptibility to failure caused by its fatigue can be 
eliminated at the stage preceding crack formation by means of 
local heat treatment, with high-temperature tempering [2, 3]. 
The metallophysical mechanisms of serviceability restoration for 
a cyclically work-hardened metal are far from identical to those 
for a heavily irradiated metal; however, their overall effect is 
identical, namely, the restoration of initial serviceability 
following tempering. 
  In an analysis of the status of the equipment, carried out 
following the expiration of the design life, taking into account 
constructional considerations, margins of safety, actual service 
conditions, crack detection results, and experience in ensuring 
reliability within the limits of design life that are accepted 
in the process of design engineering, the inference is entirely 
possible that partial equipment replacement is necessary. 
  There has been experience In Russia and abroad with the 
replacement of such bulky and expensive elements as steam 
generators even within the limits of operating life time. 
  The need for the partial replacement of equipment when 
extending of the life of an NPP can also be governed by latent 
possibilities of increasing the overall efficiency of an 
industrial plant (increase in the power generated, decrease in 
operating costs, etc.) that were not defined more precisely in 
the design process. 
  Extension of the life of old NPP units with VVER-440 and 
VVER-1000 appears promising; in order to ensure their further 
safe operation, this includes inspecting the equipment and 
pipelines of NPP units which are entering, according their 
design, their final operating stage, the identification of 
actual residual life of equipment and pipelines, and if 
necessary subsequent partial rebuilding or technological 
retooling. 
  Over the course of several years, in connection with the 
approaching end of the life of the equipment of NPP with 
VVER-440, some enterprises and organizations in former Comecon 
countries undertook the task of creating RRegulations Regarding 
Extension of the Life of Equipment and Pipelines of the Primary 
Circuit of NPP with VVER-440 ReactorsS [4, 5]. Because new 
capacities of NPP with VVER-1000 reactors have been intensively 
put into operation, and in connection with plans for developing 
NPP with new generation VVER, and, subsequently, in the context 
of the disintegration of Comecon, these efforts ended nearly at 
the final stage. However, the ideas that had been presented at 
that stage are evidently rational. It is worthwhile to return to 
this point, having covered the equipment of secondary and 
auxiliary circuits, and taking the specific requirements for the 
equipment of NPP with VVER-1000 into account. The Regulations 
Regarding Extension of the Life of the Equipment and Pipelines 
should specify the conditions and the procedure for determining 
the possibility of extending the life beyond the design. The 
Regulations are intended to substantiate the possibility of 
further operation of NPP units with VVER reactors; this does not 
exclude the possibility, if necessary, of replacing some 
equipment elements when their repair proves to be impossible or 
inadvisable. 
  The possibility of extending the life of the equipment and 
pipelines of NPP units needs to be confirmed by strength and 
overhaul period calculations, taking into consideration the 
results of investigation of special properties of the metal, the 
inspection of actual equipment status, and actual operating 
conditions. The recording of identified construction and 
manufacturing defects, as well as of failures during the 
operation of specific types of equipment, is also necessary. 
  The principal objective of the above-mentioned Regulations 
consisted in developing the specifications to the scope and 
methods of inspection of the base metal and welded joints of the 
equipment and pipelines; and in the selection and establishment 
of the criteria for evaluating the status of the base metal and 
welded joints of the equipment and pipelines that had outlived 
the projected life. 
  The Regulations should be unique within the full set of 
normative-technical documentation on ensurance of the reliable 
and safe operation of nuclear power facility equipment and 
pipelines. These Regulations are subject to coordination and 
approval by oversight organs and are mandatory for organizations 
and enterprises involved in the planning, designing, 
manufacturing, assembling, repairing, and operating of NPP 
units, as well as for organizations which develop programs and 
support and carry out operations to extend the life of NPP units. 
  The main equipment and pipelines, i.e., the reactor pressure 
vessel, steam generators, main gate valves, distributing rings 
of reactor coolant pumps, reactor coolant pipes, pressure 
compensators, main steam headers of steam generators, hydraulic 
accumulator of the emergency core cooling system, etc., are also 
covered by these Regulations. 
  The equipment enumerated has large overall dimensions, is 
hard to replace, and has a long manufacturing cycle. The 
Regulations contain brief characterizations of the equipment, 
indicating its operating conditions, specific features of its 
design, and the specific characteristics of construction 
materials used. In this section, principal requirements on the 
status of the material of specific equipment should also be 
listed. 
  In the development of the Regulations, all the equipment has 
been divided into two classes: the equipment of the primary and 
secondary circuits. In the process, experience with conformance 
inspection, in-service inspection, and repair of the equipment 
of the relevant NPP units with VVER has been taken into account. 
  Five to seven years prior to expiration of the life of NPP, 
control charts for the equipment elements are developed for each 
specific unit. Control charts contain at least the following 
information: equipment name; a sketch; the extent of zones and 
types of control; equipment manufacturer's name; the material, 
procedure, methods and scope of control; dates of its execution 
in accordance with instructions for manufacturing and 
operational control. 
  The monitoring of the metal of equipment and pipelines 
should 
be carried out by relevant NPP services, involving specialized 
organizations if necessary. 
  When design life is over, it is reasonable to start the 
inspection with the equipment of primary circuit, and, if it 
turns out that because of its technical status this expensive 
and labor-consuming equipment cannot guarantee the further 
reliable operation of an NPP, checking the equipment and 
pipelines of the secondary circuit is no longer worthwhile. 
  In the latter case, it may be rational to utilize the site 
cleared out after removal of the obsolete power plant for the 
construction of a new, more powerful and advanced plant. 
  Upon the expiration of design life, the aim of monitoring 
the 
base metal, welded joints, and deposit welds of the equipment 
and pipelines is the evaluation of the status of the metal of 
equipment and pipelines, the detection and recording of metal 
defects, and the evaluation of changes in physical-mechanical 
properties and structure that have been caused by operation 
effects. The control results make it possible to determine the 
possibility and conditions under which the further operation of 
the equipment and pipelines may be permitted. 
  Choosing and substantiating the metal status evaluation 
criteria are among the principal and most complex tasks. It is 
precisely clear-cut criteria for evaluation of the metal status 
that make it possible for the board of technical experts to come 
to a well-grounded decision regarding the cessation of 
operation, the possibility of carrying out heat treatment, the 
replacement of individual equipment elements, or the possibility 
of further operation until the next metal status inspection. 
  The assessment of the metal status with respect to equipment 
wear, change in mechanical properties, and the presence of 
cracks and corrosion and erosion damage has important 
significance for the development of metal status evaluation 
criteria, since, according to domestic research, decontaminating 
media used at the present time allow only five exposures of the 
metal. 
  Long-term successful experience in NPP operation and 
monitoring of the metal of its equipment has shown that the life 
of NPP equipment and pipelines can be extended if the following 
has been detected during post-operation monitoring of the base 
metal quality and welding joints: 

  -  discontinuities detected during visual, penetration, 
magnetic particle, ultrasonic, and other types of monitoring 
that do not exceed the discontinuities allowable by the 
Regulations Regarding the Monitoring of Welded Joints and the 
Base Metal of the Equipment and Pipelines During NPP Operation 
(the following monitoring methods are permitted for use as 
additional methods of monitoring the metal: acoustic emission, 
eddy-current testing, hardness measurement, etc.); 
  -  mechanical properties of the base metal and welded joints 
satisfy either the requirements of the Norms for NPP Equipment 
and Pipeline Strength Calculation or the specifications for 
structural materials; 
  -  actual wall thickness of the elements under pressure stress 
has 
not become less than projected in the detail drawings or 
required on the basis of the results of the strength calculation 
for NPP equipment and pipelines. 

    The evaluation of the serviceability of welded joints and 
base metal for which discontinuities exceeding the values 
allowed by the above-mentioned Regulations of Maintenance have 
been found can be accomplished using the Methods of Calculating 
Allowable Metal Defects of Equipment and Pipelines During NPP 
Operation that has been developed in Russia. 
  It is necessary, in order to predict the life of a reactor 
vessel by the criterion of radiation resistance of the metal of 
active core shells and the weld connecting them, to determine 
the actual fast neutron fluence values along the thickness of 
the reactor vessel and the content of impurities (copper, 
phosphorus) if they have not been indicated in the certificate 
of the reactor vessel. A shift in the critical brittleness 
temperature of the reactor vessel metal is determined on the 
basis of control samples, or if these are lacking, the 
determination of the calculation parameters of irradiation 
embrittlement is made through the coefficients of irradiation 
embrittlement. 
  To predict the life of the reactor vessel, steam generator, 
pressure compensator, and the hydraulic accumulator of the 
emergency core cooling system and the pipelines, it is necessary 
to determine the actual cycling load on the equipment at the end 
of the operating period (number of hydraulic pressure testings, 
startups-shutdowns, pressure retestings, etc.). 
  The results the inspection of the welded joints and the base 
metal, as well as the results of the prognostication of the 
life-expectancy and of change in the properties of the metal, 
are submitted to a board of technical experts (BTE). When 
necessary on the basis of the materials presented, the BTE 
prescribes measures for the restoration of the properties of the 
materials (high-temperature tempering of the metal of the 
reactor vessel in the region of the active core), or reaches a 
decision as to the impossibility of the further operation of the 
equipment and the pipelines. 
  When high-temperature tempering of the metal of the reactor 
vessel in the region of the active core is carried out, the 
degree of restoration of the mechanical properties is determined 
in accordance with the substantiation derived in the process of 
developing the method. Depending on the results of the 
restorative operations, a new lifespan and operating conditions 
of the equipment and the pipelines are designated by decision of 
the BTE, with indication of the limitations (or without 
limitations) on the design life, as are the date and the scope 
of the next inspection of the status of the metal and the welded 
joints, or a conclusion is reached as to the impossibility of 
its [sic] further operation. 
  The development of the Regulations on the procedure for 
setting the periods of further operation of the main equipment 
of units of an NPP that has completed its design life prescribed 
by the technical conditions for delivery, will precludes the 
necessity of drawing up new technical conditions for each type 
of equipment and pipelines at the end of the design service 
life, and will simplify the procedure for the formal 
presentation of the authorization for the extension of the 
service life, while simultaneously ensuring clarity in relation 
to the requirements on the properties of the metal and the 
reliable and safe operation of units of NPP with VVER reactors. 
  Extending the service life of active NPP and increasing the 
design life for nuclear installations to be designed in the 
future must be regarded as one of the promising directions for 
improving the effectiveness of atomic power. 
References 
  1. RIs the extension of the service life of NPP possible, 
ATOMNAYA TEKHNIKA ZA RUBEZHOM, 1992, No. 8, p 8. 
  2. Antikayn, P. A., The elimination of susceptibility to 
damage accumulated during cyclic loadings, DAN SSSR, 1962, Vol. 
146, No. 4, pp 52-56. 
  3. Ivanova, V. S., Antikayn, P. A., and Sabitova, N. S., The 
healing of defects accumulated during cyclic loadings of steels, 
METALLOVEDENIYE I TERMICHESKAYA OBRABOTKA METALLOV, 1965, No. 1, 
pp 21-23. 
  4. Bylkin, B. K., and Savchenko, Prodleniye sroka sluzhby 
oborudovaniya pervogo kontura blokov AES VVERS [Extension of 
the Service Life of the Equipment of the First Circuit of the 
Units of NPP with VVER], 1991, Moscow, TsNIITEItyazhmash, Ser 3, 
No. 6, p 52. 
  5. Prekrashcheniye ekspluatatsii blokov AES. Polozheniye po 
prodleniye sroka sluzhby oborudovaniya i truboprovodov pervogo 
kontura blokov AES reaktorom VVER-400. RD MKhT SAE-010-89S 
[Regulations on the Extension of the Service Life of the 
Equipment and Pipelines of the First Circuit of the Units of NPP 
with the VVER-400 Reactor. RD MKhT SAE-010-89 [unexpanded 
acronym - Generic Descriptor MKhT SAE-010-89]], 1990, Moscow, 
VNIIAM. 
  COPYRIGHT: Rossiyskaya akademiya nauk. Otdeleniye 
fiziko-tekhnicheskikh problem energetiki. Ministerstvo nauki i 
tekhnicheskoy politiki RF. Federatsiya energeticheskikh i 
elektrotekhnicheskikh obshchestv, 1993. 


