Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] A nine-point resolution was issued at the end of the 
rally, which was endorsed by the people's chants of: God is 
great, and Khamene'i is the leader. 
  The resolution praises God almighty for the victory of the 
blessed Islamic revolution in Iran, led by His Eminence Imam 
Khomeyni--may God be pleased with him--and also praises the 
self- sacrificing devotees, particularly of the Islamic 
revolution, and the martyrs of the imposed war. The resolution 
mentions: Now that the bright sun of Velayat, the pious chosen 
guide, His Eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i, the eminent leader of 
the Islamic revolution, is leading this great nation, we 
consider as a good omen the auspicious simultaneity of the 
spring of the Koran, the holy month of Ramadan, with the start 
of the blessed 16th anniversary of the Islamic revolution. We 
announce that we consider the wise and reviving guidelines of 
the great leader of the Islamic revolution and the founder of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran, His Eminence Imam Khomeyni--God's 
blessings upon him--as the fundamental and inviolable part of 
the domestic and foreign policy of the holy system of the 
Islamic Republic. We will not cease our endeavors to the last 
of our breath, until the aspirations of that great imam have 
materialized. 
  The marchers stressed the unconditional obedience of the 
Iranian nation to the guidelines of the eminent leader--an 
obedience that they considered as a religious obligation and as 
the only way of salvation for the Islamic ummah--and expressed 
their firm support for President Hashemi-Rafsanjani, the serving 
government, the Majles, and the judiciary. Furthermore, they 
asked the officials who are serving in the country's three 
powers to use all their abilities to secure social justice, 
eliminate deprivation and shortcomings, prevent corruption in 
the administrative organs, discourage a propensity towards 
luxuries and waste, and finally to hasten the process of the 
country's reconstruction and development. They also asked the 
officials to take serious steps toward rejuvenation of the 
principle of enjoinment of virtue, prohibition of vice. It is a 
principle that constitutes a solid point of reliance for the 
Islamic revolution. 
  The resolution also stresses the need for the officials to 
pay greater attention to the material and spiritual needs of 
youth and to give greater value to the Basiji culture, which is 
a great source of support for the Islamic revolution. The 
resolution, moreover, pays tribute to the lofty status of the 
martyrs and the eminent families of the martyrs, the disabled, 
released POWs, the Baijees, and all the selfless devotees of the 
Islamic revolution. It asks the serving government to consider 
the needs of these beloved ones in its comprehensive and 
long-term plans. 
  In another part of the resolution, the marchers reiterated 
that they still considered the U.S. Government as the great 
Satan, responsible for all the anti-Islamic plots and 
atrocities, and the main supporter of the aggressive acts of 
international Zionism. They emphasized the need for 
confrontation against the conspiracies of the great Satan. 
  Furthermore, the marchers expressed their support for all 
authentic Islamic movements and condemned the dastardly crimes 
of the Serbs and the silence adopted by international forums 
toward such crimes. They also condemned the compromise between 
'Arafat and Tel Aviv and asked the Muslim nation of Afghanistan 
to end the process of fratricide as soon as possible and to put 
all their efforts behind reconstructing their Islamic homeland 
and countering the conspiracies of the enemies. 

