CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "ZAVTRA Against Luzhkov"] </F>
  [Text] Luzhkov brought the suit to court. This obese 
gentleman diving into a hole in the ice was offended at ZAVTRA. 
The newspaper had published an article by I. Ivanov entitled 
"Third Power," in which Luzhkov is accused of bloodletting. 
Luzhkov, "whose role in the cruel treatment of the demonstrators 
on 23 February and 1 May is well known." This is what was said 
in the article. 
  He denies the blame and, striking an indignant pose, is 
demanding an apology from us. 
  We will not give him any apology and we are going to court 
asserting: Yes, Luzhkov is to blame for the bloody events in 
Moscow on 23 February 1992 and 1 May and 4 October 1993. He is 
also to blame for the bloodshed. This is shown by documents we 
have at our disposal and the testimony of victims. The 
procurator's investigation of this case was suspended but, 
taking it to court, we are resuming this investigation. 
  We hope that all Muscovites who were brutally beaten by 
Luzhkov's special-purpose militia detachment during the 
demonstrations on 23 February and 1 May, all relatives of those 
who died during the brutal storming of the House of Soviets on 4 
October, all people's deputies who were tortured by Luzhkov's 
men in the driveways and in the militia departments will come to 
the courthouse on 5 April 1994. We ourselves will testify about 
how Luzhkov's commandos broke into the editorial offices of DEN 
with automatic rifles and conducted a pogrom. 
  We are not afraid of losing, we are not afraid of the 
corrupt 
bureaucrats in the mayor's office. ZAVTRA, like DEN before it, 
is acting to defend the people. 
  Luzhkov wants to become the president of Russia. We are 
doing 
everything we can to make sure that this does not happen. So 
that the terror and shame of Moscow does not spread throughout 
our homeland. So that the depravity, gangsterism, drug 
addiction, whoring, bribery, corruption of morals, destruction 
of culture, and trampling on the individual do not become the 
norm in the cities and villages of Russia. 
  Luzhkov is a new type of authority who has crawled out of 
rotting Yeltsinism, cruel and merciless, relying on shady 
capital, passing himself off as someone who cares about the 
people. Issuing from this power is a new disaster the likes of 
which Russia has never seen before, but it is known quite well 
by Latin American peoples who have been transformed into slaves 
by "death squadrons." 
  All who value freedom and honor, who do not want a Luzhkov 
dictatorship, come on 5 April at 1000 to the Leninskiy Rayon 
Court at the following address: 7 Rostovskiy Lane, Building 21, 
Room No. 5. 

