CSO 

  [Text] Japan Petroleum Exploration Co. (Toshinobu Wada, 
president) revealed on 10 May a policy to commence beginning in 
June construction of a natural gas supply pipeline to the 
Sapporo area from the Hokkaido Yufutsu Gas Fields where they 
have been promoting prospecting and development projects. The 
total length will be about 75 kilometers and the diameter, 14 
inches. The total construction cost, including processing plant, 
is about 52 billion yen. It will be completed in March 1996, and 
supply of natural gas to Hokkaido Gas is scheduled to begin in 
April of the same year. Japan Petroleum Exploration Co. 
currently is carrying out construction work on a natural gas 
pipeline between Niigata and Sendai also, and two big projects 
in the country are heading toward reality at the same time by 
this. The Yufutsu Gas Fields are comprised of the structures 
(gas fields) at Akebono, South Yufutsu, and Numa no Hata in the 
vicinity of Tomakomai city. According to the test wells so far 
executed at the various structures, they have confirmed a 
considerable amount of natural gas and condensate (natural 
gasoline). At the same time as the confirmation work on the 
amount of gas ore, they have conducted negotiations for 
commercialization with Hokkaido Gas who will be the one 
supplied. As a result, a basic agreement already has been 
reached between the two companies with a shift to development 
projects, and the start of supply has been informally decided to 
begin in April 1996. However, the sales contract on natural gas, 
which will be the formal contract, could not be settled at the 
end of last year when it was initially scheduled because of the 
"opposition" of both companies on the aspect of price, and 
negotiations have crossed over into the new year and have gone 
down to the present day. However, since agreement is being 
formed in outline, they have embarked on the start of 
construction. Moreover, the pipeline will take the form of 
placement underground beneath roads and the permission of the 
road administrators will be necessary, but the Ministry of 
Construction and related municipalities basically tend to 
approve this. 

