BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Mario Munoz for the "Evening Information Review" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] Cuban Basic Industry Minister Marco Javier Portal 
appeared on the "This Very Day" national television program to 
explain the reasons behind the island's difficult energy 
situation. He also took the opportunity to talk about oil 
exploration and future projects. 
  [Begin Portal recording] We divided the island, both land 
and 
sea, into some 26 blocks to search for petroleum. We negotiated 
with several companies to invest in this search. This is 
related in one way or another to the energy crisis and the 
national situation. Why do I say that? Because this is one of 
the most difficult business ventures whereby foreign companies 
risk tens of millions of dollars in investments in the first 
phase and hundreds of millions in the second phase. In one way 
or another, these companies have already invested more than $50 
million in the Cuban oil business. The amount already invested 
in oil exploration is close to $100 million. These companies 
make investments. If they find oil they will recover their 
investments, depending on the volume and quality of the oil 
found. If it is a big field of good quality oil, 90 percent of 
it is for Cubans and 10 percent is for the foreign company. 
During the investment recovery period, the ratio is 50-50. Once 
the investment is recovered in the first years, depending on oil 
volume and quality. [sentence as heard] 
  Of the world's seven most industrialized countries -- 
meaning 
the United States, Japan, Germany, and others -- three are 
already investing in Cuban oil exploration; specifically, 
France, Canada, and the UK. I do not think it is a secret that 
the UK is the United States' most important ally. The UK is a 
country whose parliamentary institutions, the House of Lords, 
for instance, have publicly addressed its relations with Cuba. 
It is interesting to see how some British politicians and 
businessmen analyze U.S. policies toward Cuba and how they 
perceive that the North Americans have two intentions toward us: 
the obvious political intention to try to destroy the 
Revolution at any cost, and the economic intention to prevent 
other countries from investing here. 
  The British have taken a step forward. One company has 
already hired an (?oil explorer). In short, there are four 
countries investing here: France, Canada, the UK, and Sweden. 
  I am not talking about the U.S. Government. I am talking 
about the U.S. oil tycoons and the U.S. oil, mining, 
metallurgic, and tourism industries, which have expressed their 
concerns about not being able to invest here. They are aware of 
this and want to be allowed to invest here because they attended 
the meetings we held in Calgary, Canada, and London, where our 
comrades made offers. The U.S. companies obtained information 
there and learned about what is going on in Cuba. In other 
words, they are eager to invest here. I am not talking about 
the U.S. Government, whose attitude is determined by other 
considerations. But there is a great deal of interest on the 
part of U.S. investors. We confirmed it. [end recording] 
  Minister Portal also explained to Cubans the methods and 
techniques used to find oil. 
  [Begin recording] [Portal] We are currently searching for 
oil 
in all these blocks. We are using the seismic method in several 
blocks. The seismic method is important because it uses the age 
and geologic features of surrounding terrain to determine the 
best place to explore. If nothing is found, there is no 
drilling. This is the first step, a guiding point. Millions of 
dollars are invested in the first step. We need specialized 
ships for ocean exploration. High technology equipment currently 
being used in Cuba is needed for land exploration. The country 
has widely used this sophisticated equipment, which adds to the 
information that we collected for many years with the former 
Soviet Union during ocean and land exploration. We have seismic 
information about the geological features of solid minerals and 
oil. This information is very useful as we move forward so 
quickly. Currently, we have [words indistinct] already hired. 
  As for the seismic method, we have found formations similar 
to those found in other oil-producing countries in some blocks. 
These structures must be drilled. Drilling is already under way 
at sea. In the next few days, these companies will start 
drilling on land. If there were no possibility of....[pauses] 
The drilling shows if underground sedimentary rocks that are 
about the same age as rocks found in other oil-producing 
countries and which are constantly moving as the earth ages are 
oil rich or not. There is no doubt that Cuba has oil. It has 
enough oil to produce 1.2 million tons this year, and there are 
possibilities of producing even more in the future. 
  That is all I can tell you for the time being about the 
seismic method. I repeat: Drilling in those places is already 
under way. We no longer have abstract hopes; we now have 
tangible hopes. 
  [Unidentified reporter] What type of hopes... 
  [Portal, interrupting] I also want to say that if there is 
an 
oil well, we must determine how much oil it has and then build 
three or four more wells, depending on oil volume estimates. 
Then we can begin tapping oil. This operation could last two 
or three years depending on the features of the place. 
  These companies perform other tasks that give us an idea of 
how promising the Cuban oil industry is. The old Soviet 
technique was used in old oil wells that are now being tapped by 
foreign companies. Such companies have taken wells that used to 
produce 30, 20, 15, or 10 tons of oil and, using modern 
technology, significantly increased production to 60, 70, or 80 
tons of oil in some wells. This increase that Cuba would never 
have been able to produce is shared with that company. Base 
production, however, is not shared; it remains ours. It is 
shared if production increases. The Cuban oil industry has many 
possibilities, and we are enjoying them. Every time you conduct 
this type of business in the oil and nickel industry, in mining, 
in the search for precious metals, or in tourism with non-U.S. 
companies, you feel pleased. It is more than pleasure; it is 
the certainty that we will not have to conduct this type of 
business with U.S. companies only. [end recording] 
  Portal also talked about the trust that foreign investors 
have in doing business with Cuba. 
  [Begin Portal recording] These companies have noticed that 
we 
Cubans are loyal. Cuban loyalty is already a tradition. We are 
loyal even to our African ancestors. Regardless of whether the 
United States lifts the blockade, serious capitalists and 
representatives of prestigious firms sense that when we conduct 
business with one of them, we will never betray them, nor will 
we break their contracts. Very serious people in the world 
approach us. We are 29th on the list of countries where one can 
invest safely. Many nations, whose names I refuse to mention, 
are below us. I believe the media has already made this list 
public; it will probably make it public again. I am sure the 
media will comment on it, because it is a very important 
achievement. We are close to the United States, and we are the 
most promising country to import [sentence as heard]. This 
confirms our people's willingness to fight and excel. [end 
recording] 

