Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA correspondent Oleg Vladykin </F>
under the "Topical Matter" rubric: "Plotting with Criminals: 
Weapons Loss Tied to Servicemen's Involvement"] 
  [Text] As soon as spring breezes start blowing and girls' 
skirts become terribly short, every troop service agency should, 
without any instructions "from above," initiate steps to prevent 
rape and other violations (typical for the warm season) 
committed by servicemen. When I for the first time heard this 
kind of statement made at a serious conference called by the 
Ministry of Defense, it was then that I dropped my doubts about 
the Ministry of Defense possessing the capability of effecting 
major and immediate changes in its approach to old intra-Army 
problems and contradictions on the one hand, and those acquired 
relatively recently on the other. 
  It appeared that the above was an indication of an actual 
overcoming of the past tendency to explain various difficulties 
related to the organization of troop activities on the primary 
basis of placing the blame on the harmful influence of some kind 
of external factors. Nonetheless, those factors still exist and 
are not to be dropped from consideration, of course. Now, 
however, the major focus of attention is to be on purely 
Army-related causes associated with the existence of many 
negative phenomena occurring in military units, with stress 
placed on in-service, troop-generated capabilities of combatting 
these negative phenomena. 
  The above at least was the impression I gained by attending 
assemblies held at the end of last year for chiefs of 
departments (sections, groups) of troop services of RF [Russian 
Federation] Armed Forces branches, military districts, groups of 
forces, combat arms, fleets, and main and central directorates 
of the MO RF [Ministry of Defense, Russian Federation]. 
  A definite example of the information presented at the 
representative conference was the number of weapons stolen in 
1992 and 1993, a figure in excess of 22,000 pieces. In this 
connection, no one raised his hands toward heaven asking the 
Almighty about the inevitability of this kind of trouble, what 
with 1,183 incidents of attacks on military facilities that 
occurred in that time period. After all, it was possible to 
reduce by a factor greater than 16 the number of weapons stolen 
in 1993 compared with 1992. The reduction in the case of weapons 
stolen in attacks was as much as a factor of 25. Although it was 
pointed out that the socio-political instability prevalent in 
society and the raging activity of the country's criminal 
element are contributing to a rapid increase in number of 
villains rushing to get their hands on weapons, the talk was 
mostly of other causes of weapons theft. At the top of the list 
are gross violations and poor organization of weapons storage in 
units proper and a lack of skill in closing the gaps to stop the 
weapons outflow. All one need do is realize that last year not a 
single case of weapons loss in any district or group of forces 
was not attributable to servicemen's culpability. 
  As pointed out in the assemblies by Lieutenant General 
Valentin Bogdanchikov, chief of the Troop Activities and Service 
Directorate, General Staff, Russian Federation Armed Forces, 
checks made on the state of security of weapons and ammunition 
indicate that units and subunits fail to maintain strict record 
keeping by piece number of small arms and do not conduct timely 
coordination with the missile and artillery equipment (RAV) 
service. Especially surprising was the revelation that this kind 
of violation was uncovered even in the staff of the VDV 
[Airborne Troops]. 
  I can present an example of this kind of "carelessness" by 
citing an incident occurring in the Caspian Flotilla. The chief 
of a military equipment depot became overcome with anticipating 
idle pleasures and thus "forgot," before going on liberty, to 
turn over his watch to another serviceman. Returning to duty 
rested and refreshed, he was to learn that a commission working 
in the unit determined that in the weapons storage facility in 
his charge there had been a loss of 15 AK-74 assault rifles, 22 
PM pistols, and two Margolin target pistols. Investigation 
revealed that two conscripted servicemen from a guard platoon 
who had been detailed many times to stack weapons onto shelves 
had taken advantage of the depot chief's lack of attention to 
duty. 
  Incidentally, the unsound practice of employing servicemen 
from guard subunits to perform various tasks in storage 
facilities of and by itself constitutes a groundwork for theft 
of weapons. Indeed, this alone gives rise to considerable 
expansion of the circle of persons familiar with the layout of 
depot security means and restrictions and the kind of property 
located therein. 
  General Bogdanchikov was openly distressed as he informed 
the 
audience that one out of five incidents of weapons theft is 
carried out on the basis of a plot between civilian criminals 
and servicemen. Of those persons convicted of this, about 10 
percent are officers, of which one out of two commits the gross 
violation of his service duty for personal gain. 
  Alas! A flawed passion destroys the conscience and clouds 
the 
mind even in the case of officials of fairly high rank, those 
whose duty it is to personally organize the storage and security 
of weapons. Major I. Shchegolev, chief of the RAV service of a 
Far Eastern Military District regiment, was charged with his 
personally committing the theft and sale of 256 PM pistols. To 
date, 86 pieces are still missing. And, who knows, it may be 
that some of the weapons passed to the outside world by the 
major may already have taken their bloody toll. 
  One can spend much time being disturbed over the moral 
deficiency of some servicemen and make an appeal for more 
thorough cadre and educational work in units, but I nonetheless 
was pleased that at the assemblies this was not chosen as the 
plan of attack, with the recommendations instead favoring the 
much more reasonable approach of casting doubts on the 
usefulness of exhorting adults of not doing naughty things. 
Persons afflicted with moral flaws, as we all know, are always 
considerably fewer in number compared to normal people. And so, 
the majority are able to simply adhere to principles which serve 
as substantial blocks to the manifestation of the worst of human 
characteristics. In the Army, this kind of principle is 
considered to be that which is required by the regulations. 
  It is precisely in this area that we have prospects for 
resolving many problems presently plaguing us. For in the last 
few years, unfortunately, in many military units the 
requirements as set down in the regulations and in other 
normative documents have been relegated to the category of some 
kind of relative or highly conditional rules. They are 
desireable of execution, but far from mandatory, so to speak. 
How and why this phenomenon has become widespread is a topic of 
another and more detailed discussion. I would now like to cite 
the words spoken by General Bogdanchikov relative to the 
situation existing among troops in the aspect of its generating 
contempt for regulations. 
  "I find it necessary to state," said Valentin Alekseyevich, 
"that, in principle, it has become pointless in the case of a 
number of military units to speak of any kind of small forward 
movements in improving the level of internal order and military 
discipline. In those units, it is necessary to start at the 
beginning, in effect from zero, to organize the entire service, 
since the greater part of the incidents and violations is 
committed with the connivance, indeed with the personal 
participation, of duty detail officials." 
  Even in a first approximation, one can hardly consider as 
military, in the true sense of the term, the collective where 
Officer of the Day Captain V. Anoshin, acting jointly with staff 
and motor pool duty personnel, were drinking heavily without 
stopping at night in July. While this was going on, the unit 
commander's vehicle was making regular runs between the military 
installation and shopping centers so that the personnel of all 
the subunits could also have some fun in alcoholic revelry. The 
next morning, as could be expected, the entire lot of them 
suffered severe headaches. It is true, however, that the heavy 
hangover was not the only cause. Two pistols disappeared from 
the unit. 
  Last year, continued disregard of the regulations led to an 
unprecedented growth in violations in the Pacific Ocean Fleet 
(19 percent), the Baltic Fleet (26 percent), the North Caucasus 
Military District (32 percent), and the 14th Guards Army (50 
percent). Also occurring there was an abrupt rise in absence 
without official leave. As discovered by numerous checks, 
reporting of such cases does not fully reflect the magnitude of 
the situation existing there. 
  As of the time the assemblies were taking place in the Armed 
Forces, the number of conscript soldiers and sailors absent 
without official leave amounted to more than 5,000. In addition, 
commissions that were taking this count in units uncovered a 
large number of cases where this kind of violation was covered 
up. The Moscow Military Headquarters apprehends on a daily basis 
15 to 20 servicemen who are absent from their duty stations 
without authorization. Of that number, only about half are 
usually included on General Staff lists of servicemen at large. 
The names of the remaining servicemen are not reported by the 
districts. 
  All of the above compelled leaders of troop service agencies 
to do some serious thinking about their own unused capabilities 
for strengthening compliance with regulations in units and 
garrisons and for preventing violations committed by servicemen. 
Speakers discussed the need for improved organization of 
unscheduled checks in units, apprehension of violators, and 
expansion of cooperation in this activity with law enforcement 
agencies. A great deal of stress was placed on major improvement 
of the entire system of routine military duties, garrison 
service, and guard duty. 
  Discussed in the assemblies was the especially alarming 
topic 
of the poor training possessed by personnel involved with guard 
duty. Many soldiers lack the skill required to react, at the 
necessary instant, to employ their weapons decisively to counter 
attacks on guarded facilities by criminals. Last year, this led 
to 26 deaths and wounding of 60 sentries and other guard detail 
personnel. These tragic figures constitute a driving force for 
allotting a high priority to training of personnel in methods of 
offering effective self-protection and defense at their duty 
post, while demanding that guards acquire a high order of skill 
and exercise strict compliance with regulations. 
  There is more. It would appear that the personnel shortage 
in 
units should serve as an impetus to introducing technical 
security means (TSOs) on a wide basis and to initiating a 
continual shift from the mounting of guard details to the 
employment of security monitoring teams. In this connection, 
this was the purpose of deliveries of a large number of 
perimeter security systems and facility security systems in 
1993. However, the number of TSOs set up and operated showed 
virtually no increase over the previous year. The explanation of 
that is simple: In almost all military districts, the equipment 
was unwisely taken apart and the components distributed among 
units. This resulted in the mere appearance of all the districts 
possessing the equipment, whereas in reality none of the 
districts could put together an integral security system which 
could be used with maximum effectiveness. 
  Nevertheless, good experience was enjoyed in the case of 
radiation, chemical, and biological protection troops and in a 
number of large units of the RVSN [Strategic Rocket Forces], 
where an altogether different route was taken. They accumulated 
the TSOs delivered to them and set them up, according priority 
to the most important facilities. They strove to effect a 
complete shift to the use of security monitoring teams, at first 
for one large unit, then for a second, etc. This approach is 
feasible for any district or large unit. 
  However, regardless of how advanced equipment may be, still 
of decisive importance as far as normal organization of troop 
service is concerned is personnel involvement to this end. This 
item, personnel involvement, was clearly missing, judging by the 
numerous times when incidents and gross violation of military 
discipline were covered up in units. Officials of virtually all 
levels in field units were unwilling to deal with the 
unfortunate state of affairs in the units and subunits they 
commanded, desperately attempting to keep from reporting 
"upstairs" on the actual situation for fear of incurring 
punishment. 
  In essence, this unethical behavior was supported in the 
Armed Forces for decades by an incident and violation record 
keeping system and requirement for mandatory inculpation of 
commanders and chiefs for any infraction committed by 
subordinates. The fallaciousness of the above was written about 
a number of times by KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 
  Thus, in acquainting the officers with the new guidance 
documents, Major General Yuriy Kudinov, deputy chief of Troop 
Activities and Service Directorate, RF Armed Forces General 
Staff, stated that there finally is available a new and 
completely reasonable legal norm. Now commanders and chiefs will 
be held accountable for incidents and violations in units only 
in the event investigation reveals that it is their actions, or, 
alternately, the absence thereof, that lead to criminal 
activity. In a word, the situation has undergone a radical 
change. 
  Officials in line units can now feel free, without 
hesitation, to look into any "abscess" and decisively report any 
violation of regulations without fear of subsequently being 
rudely held to task. This means that it is possible to bring 
military life into full compliance with the requirements of 
Russian laws, general military regulations, orders, and other 
documents governing the activities of troops. The time has come 
to deal with the matter seriously. 

