CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tomas Hellen: "Mounting Financial Market Unrest"] </F>
  [Text] Unrest in the domestic money, capital, and foreign 
exchange markets worsened yesterday. Short-term interest rose 
sharply, the markka lost ground, and yield on state bonds was 
listed at record high levels. 
  The Helsinki Stock Exchange was also drawn into the 
pessimistic mood. Price levels fell by an average of over 1 
percent. 
  The bond market was the hardest hit. Yield on the longest 
government securities, 10-year bonds that run to the year 2004, 
was listed at 9.53 percent yesterday, up more than 0.3 percent 
for the day. 
  "An incredibly big change," said director Hannu Holma of 
Kansallis-Osake-Pankki's Treasury division. 
  The interest difference on long-term bonds in relation to 
Germany has now grown to over 2.5 percent. 
  "If we look at the base it is hard to explain such a large 
interest difference. The reasons are probably mainly technical 
and psychological," Holma said. 
  At the same time the three-month HELIBOR [Helsinki Interbank 
Offered Rate] rose 0.33 percent to 5.79 percent and one-year 
interest rose as much as 0.44 percent to 6.80 percent. 
  Tuesday's [7 June] rate for three-month interest is the 
highest since December; in one week it has now risen by almost 1 
percent. Three-month interest was at its lowest point, 4.69 
percent, on 21 February. 
  Despite the rise in interest rates the market clearly 
weakened in relation to leading currencies; for example, the 
German mark cost 3.31 [Finnish] markkas [FMk], two pennia more 
than the day before yesterday, while the ECU basket rose a scant 
penni to FMk6.406 and the dollar rose 3.5 pennia to FMk5.534. 
  It was a Nordic infection -- in Sweden yesterday, interest 
unrest was, if possible, even greater -- uncertainty about the 
government's future and European Union (EU) membership plus 
market psychology were all mentioned as causes. In addition 
confusion increased with regard to the intentions of the Bank of 
Finland with its unclear statements about the monetary policy 
line, which indicators it is really guided by, and how they 
should be interpreted. 
  Yesterday afternoon the Reuters news bureau's financial 
market service sent out a long interview with Pentti 
Pikkarainen, the new head of the central bank's money market 
division. 
  In the interview an amazingly outspoken Pikkarainen 
explained 
that "through a policy decision" in the spring the Bank of 
Finland "permitted a tightening of monetary policy" by letting 
money market interest rates rise. 
  The tightening decision was motivated, according to 
Pikkarainen, by rising long-term interest rates, rapid growth in 
the money supply, rising property prices, and increased 
inflation expectations as a result of the economic recovery. 
  The interview was received with great confusion on the 
market, although it came out so late that it had little 
influence on trading in Helsinki. 
  Earlier this spring the Bank of Finland maintained that the 
monetary policy is neutral, perhaps even unrestrained. However 
the suspicion that the line has now changed was fed by the fact 
that the Bank of Finland has kept a low profile on the market 
recently, despite all the turbulence. 
<H5>  Hamalainen Issues Quick Denial </H5>
  Most people immediately surmised that Pikkarainen, who is 
known as an economist oriented toward monetarism, was speaking 
beyond his authority and did not reflect the opinions of the 
central bank's highest leadership. 
  The Bank of Finland's highest leadership was just as 
surprised. When HUFVUDSTADSBLADET spoke to chief director Sirkka 
Hamalainen at 1630 hours she clearly repudiated Pikkarainen's 
theses. 
  "We have definitely not made any decision to tighten 
monetary 
policy," Hamalainen stated. 
  She described the recent interest rise as a "disturbance," 
caused by the fact that the markets are weak, strongly 
influenced by Sweden in particular and by the uncertainty about 
the government and EU membership. 
  She also stressed that it is market players, not the Bank of 
Finland, who are now driving up short-term interest rates. 
  "However, we at the central bank may have been restrained in 
checking the rise in short-term interest rates that was caused 
by the market. The reason is that we feel the yield curve should 
not be allowed to become steeper." 
  The yield curve illustrates the difference in interest 
levels 
for instruments of various durations. When the Bank of Finland 
says that the curve must not become too "steep" it means that it 
thinks long-term interest rates are too high in relation to 
short-term rates. And as the central bank has no way to directly 
influence long-term interest, flattening the curve must be 
accomplished by pulling short-term interest up or allowing it to 
rise. 
<H5>  Inflation in Line With Goal </H5>
  Hamalainen also stressed that the inflationary trend is 
entirely in line with the central bank's stated goal, i.e., a 
basic inflation rate of "around 2 percent" from the beginning of 
the next year. 
  Basic inflation, which is adjusted for the effect of changes 
in the interest level, among other things, was only 1.9 percent 
for the year up to March. 
  "I have a hard time seeing how any inflation can arise with 
an unemployment rate of 20 percent," she said. 
  "There is no reason to revise the inflation goal for 1995, 
even though we were a little more optimistic about the future in 
February-March," Mikko Spolander, an economist at the Bank of 
Finland, told Reuters yesterday. 
  Spolander pointed out that consumer prices were under some 
pressure from companies attempting to increase their profit 
margins. Inflationary pressure will probably be weak at the 
beginning of 1995, but the picture could be changed by the 
anticipated demands for wage increases during the second half of 
the year. 
  Unlike Pikkarainen, Hamalainen did not express any concern 
about rising property values, but described the rising price 
level as an "adjustment." 
<H5>  Bank Has No Money Supply Goal </H5>
  The fact that short-term interest rose sharply as early as 
Monday [6 June] was due to news of strong growth in the amount 
of money in circulation for April: M-1, i.e., bills and coins in 
circulation plus the general public's cash on hand, increased at 
an annual rate of 11.0 percent. 
  The market's reaction is explained by a statement from 
Pikkarainen at a financial seminar several weeks ago that the 
Bank of Finland would be "concerned" if the money supply 
increases by more than 10 percent. 
  Even if the central bank wanted to tone down the importance 
of individual figures for the total money supply, Pikkarainen 
noted in his Reuters interview yesterday that "it is good that 
the data is released to the market players." 
  However, chief director Hamalainen condemned the fixation on 
the amount of money in circulation. 
  "The Bank of Finland has no money supply goal, and M-1 in 
particular is a very unreliable indicator. It is more important 
to note that lending activities did not expand, for example," 
said the Bank of Finland chief. 

