CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prof V. F. Gorenkov by N. K. Deryugo; first </F>
three paragraphs are ZDRAVOOKHRANENIYE BELARUSI introduction; 
UDC 614.2(476)(049.3)] 
  [Text]In each civilized nation, its chiefs are always 
concerned about their people, they worry about the people being 
fed, clothed and provided with medical care. If this does not 
exist, a catastrophe occurs: people die of hunger, cold and 
disease. Fortunately, we have been spared hunger and cold, but 
morbidity is rising both among the child and adult population. 
This is related not only to the fact that there are not enough 
pure foodstuffs but also, apparently, preventive measures are 
inadequate and there is no appropriate treatment of the sick. 
  There are not enough drugs for the treatment of 
cardiovascular and oncological diseases, pneumonia, acute and 
chronic intestinal infections, etc. People with diabetes and 
neurological pathology are in a difficult situation. In general, 
if you want to be treated in a hospital bring your medicine with 
you. 
  What arsenal of drugs does our republic have at its disposal 
today? This and other questions were posed by this journal's 
editor-in-chief, N. K. Deryugo to Prof V. F. Gorenkov, general 
director of the BelRPOFarmatsiya [Belorussian Republic 
Production Association ``Pharmacy'']. His answers are published 
below. 
[Question]Valeriy Filippovich, we know that an 
extremely difficult situation exists today with respect to 
providing drugs to the republic's inhabitants. How is this 
problem being solved, and will there be improvement? If so, when? 
[Answer]I have to realize daily the entire depth of 
the crisis with drugs, since we are not yet in a position to 
meet the demands of the public and medical-preventive 
[therapeutic and preventive care] institutions. The shortage of 
drugs in Belarus has become menacing. It is on a par in its 
acuity and scope with the food shortage, and in a number of 
respects exceeds it considerably. Today, our pharmacy network 
has very few diabetic, cardiovascular, psychotropic agents, 
antibiotics, antiseptics, blood substitutes, products needed in 
anesthesiology and resuscitation, vitamins, etc. It has no 
elementary products for colds; mustard plasters, tincture of 
iodine and valerian, brilliant green, bandages, etc., are 
wanting or delivered very irregularly. The existing situation is 
the result of collapse of the former Soviet Union, which 
disrupted the system of centralized drug supply. Unfortunately, 
the pharmaceutical industry is extremely poorly developed in 
Belarus, and the assortment of drugs produced is limited. We 
produce no more than 200 out of 3000 needed drugs. Imported 
drugs constitute about 45 percent of total sales, their 
acquisition is limited since the republic does not have hard 
currency for such purposes. 
  In the existing situation, the employees of Farmatsiya 
Belorussian Republic Production Association are purposefully 
working with suppliers among CIS states, determine requirements, 
directly conclude agreements with manufacturers. Direct contact 
with plants has led to a search for barter. In exchange for 
drugs, the republic had to export to Russia television sets, 
refrigerators, foodstuffs and other consumer goods. Barter 
enabled us to also purchase imported products, since the 
necessary funds for this purpose were not received from the 
government. In the last 2 months, there has been some 
attenuation of the problem with drugs for treatment of 
cardiovascular, neuropsychiatric and gastrointestinal diseases, 
parkinsonism, bronchial asthma, diseases of the urinary tract, 
etc., by bartering with Hungary, Croatia, Bulgaria, Poland and 
Germany, as well as along the lines of humanitarian aid. 
  Contracts have been elaborated and concluded for 1993 with 
36 
foreign firms, which have promised to deliver vital drugs on YeS 
[European Community?] credit for a sum of about 30 million 
dollars. Contracts have also been concluded with the Germed 
Trade Society for delivery of drugs on German credit for a sum 
of 30 million marks, as well as with 3 firms in India for a sum 
of more than $800,000. In addition, an application has been 
submitted to the State Economic Planning Commission for 
allocation of material and technical resources totaling 40 
million dollars for bartering purchase of the most important 
drugs from foreign firms and plants of CIS states. Drugs covered 
by these contracts will start to be delivered to Belarus as 
early as the first quarter of 1993, which gives us hope that the 
drug crisis will be over. 
[Question]Many scarce drugs are being dispensed to 
patients who get preferential treatment. It is also known that 
there is great abuse. Who makes decisions about such 
preferential treatment, and who are the recipients? How can 
abuse be stopped? 
[Answer]The list of categories of people, as well as 
diseases (which presently number in excess of 50), according to 
which prescription drugs are dispensed in pharmacies, free and 
on preferential terms, is approved by the Belarus Council of 
Ministers at the suggestion of the Ministry of Health. Drugs are 
dispensed free to children (up to 3 years old), those disabled 
since childhood (to 16 years), invalids and participants of the 
Great Patriotic War, diabetics, those suffering from 
tuberculosis, bronchial asthma, spondylitis deformans, 
parkinsonism, oncological and hematological diseases. Drugs are 
free for those who have undergone heart, liver, kidney, etc., 
transplants. Drugs are dispensed at a discount (by prescription) 
to those with grades I and II disability, individuals over 70 
years old, pensioners and other categories of citizens. 
Unfortunately, the difficulty with the drug supply in the 
republic has caused negative elements with respect to use of 
very scarce expensive drugs. It is not uncommon for people who 
enjoy preferential terms to get prescriptions from different 
physicians, obtain free drugs which then appear on the market 
and sold through advertising in newspapers. Incidentally, many 
physicians are to blame for this, for writing prescriptions for 
extremely scarce drugs in larger quantities than needed for a 
course of treatment and, not infrequently, at the patient's 
request, for his relatives and friends. Such infractions and 
abuse could be curbed by abolishing free dispensation of drugs 
to some categories of citizens, replacing it with monetary 
compensation in the appropriate amounts. 
[Question]There are several pharmacies in Minsk where 
drugs are sold for hard currency. Ten analgin tablets cost $4, 
or 2000 rubles. Where do they get hard currency to purchase 
drugs, and does your firm receive some amount for acquisition of 
drugs for an ordinary patient? How is all this delivered to 
Belarus? 
[Answer]At the present time, drugs are sold for hard 
currency in only two pharmacies in Minsk. The pharmacy of the 
joint Belfarm enterprise is not part of the system of the 
Farmatsiya Belarus Republic Production Association. Its founders 
are the German firm Berlin Chemi and the Belarus Ministry of 
Health. They receive drugs from suppliers in Germany. Recently, 
they began to purchase drugs from manufacturers in CIS 
countries. The drugs are sold for hard currency and rubles at 
the rate of exchange on the day of the purchase. 
  Pharmacy No. 61 has a department that sells drugs for hard 
currency which are produced in Poland. There, an SP [sale 
agreement?] has been concluded with the Polish firm Remed, which 
delivers drugs to the pharmacy for sale. The profit from selling 
drugs for hard currency is used by them for their future 
activities. 
[Question]I have heard rumors, which I do not 
entirely believe, that all humanitarian aid remains in these 
pharmacies. What can you say on this score? 
[Answer]I think these rumors are unreliable or very 
exaggerated. Humanitarian aid is not delivered to these 
pharmacies or actually to other pharmacies in the BelRPO 
Farmatsiya system. It is usually delivered directly to 
hospitals, and specialized medical-preventive care institutions. 
Unfortunately, as indicated by the results of questioning 
employees of hospital pharmacies, humanitarian aid is used 
extremely injudiciously, there are instances of selling and 
shipping drugs beyond the Belarus frontiers. Such abuse can be 
arrested by obtaining permission from the Council of Ministers 
to sell these drugs through pharmacies at low prices. 
[Question]You recently became the general director of 
your firm. Do you have a program to improve pharmacy performance 
in the immediate future? Tell us something about yourself. 
[Answer]There is a program for reorganizing pharmacy 
operation as a measure to improve drug supply to the public and 
overcome the economic crisis in the pharmacy network. I refer, 
first of all, to putting the structure of pharmacies in order, 
organizing several compounding pharmacies within pharmacies that 
deal in packaged drugs, organization of company and commercial 
pharmacies, or commercial departments in pharmacies, 
establishment of SP between municipal pharmacies and foreign 
firms, specialization of compounding pharmacies in dispensing 
eye drops, phytoproducts, ointments, species, etc. 
  A little about myself: I was born in 1941 to a family of 
office workers. I graduated from the Pharmaceutical Department 
of VGMI [Voronezh State Medical Institute] in 1964. I worked as 
an instructor in the department of pharmacy organization. In 
1971, I defended my candidatorial dissertation. In 1973, I was 
appointed by competition to the job of senior instructor of the 
department of pharmacy organization and economics at the 
BelGIDUV [Belorussian State Institute for Advanced Training of 
Physicians], where I worked, as a docent at first and then as 
department head. Since June 1992 I have been the general 
director of the BelRPO Farmatsiya. In 1989, I defended by 
doctoral dissertation and received the title of professor. I 
have authored more than 150 scientific works, including 7 
textbooks and educational aids, such as the textbook 
``Organization and Economics of Soviet Pharmacy'' [Organizatsiya 
i ekonomika sovetskoy farmatsii]. I have been awarded the 
Excellent Public Health Worker badge. I am married. 
  Zdravookhraneniye Belarus, 1992 


