Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report on and full text of speech at China Tax Reform </F>
Publicity Conference by Director of the State Administration of 
Taxation Jin Xin (6855 9515): "I Solemnly Declare That the New 
Tax System Will Not Increase the Tax Burden on Any Foreign 
Investor"] 
  [Text] "As director of the State Administration of 
Taxation, I declare that the new tax system will not increase 
the tax burden on any foreign investor!" This was the sonorous 
and forceful tone on which Jin Xin, director of the State 
Administration of Taxation, ended his speech at the China Tax 
Reform Publicity Conference on the morning of 14 January 1994. 
  This Publicity Conference was sponsored by the State 
Administration of Taxation, being aimed at better publicizing to 
the outside world the meaning and function of the current 
tax-system reform, so that foreign investors can better 
understand China's taxes. It was attended by over 500 
participants, such as delegates from some countries' embassies 
and consulates in China, and representatives of some 
longstanding foreign-invested enterprises [FIEs] and foreign 
enterprises in China. 
  Tax Director Jin Xin gave an important speech at the 
conference entitled "The New Tax-Revenue System in Our Socialist 
Market Economy," the full text of which is published below: 
  China's tax reform is a key component part of our system 
reform to achieve a socialist market economy. Before New 
Year's Day, the NPC and State Council promulgated new tax laws 
and regulations. This was another crucial step in opening up 
wider to the outside world and steadily improving our investment 
climate. China's tax reform not only is of universal concern 
to our vast numbers of taxpayers, but also has attracted the 
attention of the governments of all countries and our friends 
throughout the world. The China Tax Reform Publicity Conference 
being held here today by the State Administration of Taxation is 
aimed mainly at fully explaining and interpreting the aims, 
principles, contents, and pertinent policies of China's tax 
reform. We hope that all will understand and support them, as 
well as strictly enforcing them in future economic activities. 
<H3>  I. Tax Reform Was Imperative To Achieve a Socialist Market 
Economy </H3>
  As all know, the 14th CPC Congress set in October 1992 the 
goal model of China's economic reforms as the achievement of a 
socialist market economy. Then in the spring of 1993, the 
First Session of the Eighth NPC passed a constitutional 
amendment, stipulating in the Constitution that "China will 
practice a socialist market economy," which provided fundamental 
legal safeguards for China's economic reforms. In November 
1993, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee approved the "Resolution on Certain Matters Involved 
in Establishing a Socialist Market Economy," particularizing 
and systematizing the reform objectives and basic principles 
involved in the establishment of a socialist market economy, 
which formed the essential framework of our socialist market 
economy system, as well as drawing the general blueprint for 
continued intensification of reform. That was China's program 
of action for seizing the opportunity to accelerate our reform 
and development. Our socialist market economy is a legal 
economy, not a laissez-faire economy; our socialst market 
economy's spirit is one of orderly and equal competition, not 
disorderly and unsystematic competition; fair tax burdens are 
one of the key conditions for fair and orderly competition 
premised on the legal system. So tax reform is a key component 
part of economic reform. 
  China's tax reform is aimed at establishing a tax-revenue 
system to meet the needs of our socialist market economy and 
modernization, or one that conforms to both international 
practice and China's national conditions. The guiding ideology 
of China's tax reform is to consolidate our tax laws, set fair 
tax burdens, streamline our tax system, rationalize our 
separation of powers, bring order to our distribution relations, 
and ensure state revenue, by establishing a tax-revenue system 
that is in line with the needs of our socialist market economy. 
  Ever since 1979, China has adhered to a policy of reform and 
opening focused on economic development, taking the path of 
socialism with distinct Chinese characteristics. In our 
economic development, we have used two resources --domestic and 
overseas resources; opened up two markets -- domestic and 
overseas markets; and learned two skills -- how to organize our 
domestic economic development and develop foreign economic 
relations. In our reform and opening, we have supplemented our 
disadvantages with the whole world's advantages, revitalizing 
ourselves with the might of all five continents. Our aim is to 
have begun to establish our socialist market economy by the end 
of the century, in order to realize our second strategic 
objective for our national economy and social development. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, China has 
successfully 
set up SEZs, EDZs, high-tech industrial development zones, and 
open zones along the Chang Jiang [Yangtse] and our borders. We 
have now evolved a multi-level, all-dimensional open order of an 
open region on our eastern seacoast, one along the banks of the 
Chang Jiang headed by the Pudong Development Zone in Shanghai, 
and an inland one centered in provincial capitals. By the end of 
1993, our number of foreign-invested projects had accumulated to 
nearly 180,000, including over 80,000 new ones in that year 
alone; our attracted foreign investments had accumulated to an 
agreed amount of $220 billion, with the agreed amount for 1993 
alone at nearly $110 billion, and the actual foreign investment 
in China had accumulated to over $60 billion, including almost 
$22 billion for 1993, or just about double that of 1992. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, we have steadily 
expanded our foreign-investment fields, from the priority in the 
early days of reform and opening on attracting production-type 
foreign investment, to the approval in 1993 of experimentation 
in some areas with commercial retail enterprises; from 
permission to invest in primary and secondary industries, which 
was expanded to permission to set up with approval tertiary 
industries, such as the establishment in SEZs, the New Pudong 
zone, and other places approved by the State Council of 
Sino-foreign joint-venture or wholly foreign-owned banks and 
insurance companies. This shows that we have steadily expanded 
our investment fields, gradually adding industrial categories. 
  In our 15 years of reform and opening, we have gradually 
improved our investment climate. Taking FIE income taxes for 
instance, in the early 1980s, China promulgated the 
Sino-Foreign Joint-Venture Enterprise Income Tax Law and the 
Foreign Enterprise Income Tax Law. But after summing up a 
decade of experience and drawing on valuable overseas methods, 
we consolidated the above two laws on 1 July 1991 into the FIE 
and Foreign Enterprise Income Tax Law, consolidating their 
tax-revenue jurisdiction, tax rates, and preferential policies. 
In order to develop our socialist market economy and promote 
equal competition among enterprises, we have conducted in 1994 a 
complete, overall, and structural reform of the tax system, with 
one of our key aims being to better improve China's investment 
climate. 
  All know that since 1979, China's tax system involving 
foreigners has been gradually established, developed, and 
perfected along with our steady intensification and expansion of 
reform and opening. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 
11th CPC Central Committee, in order to meet reform and opening 
needs and promote domestic economic reform, our tax-collection 
categories involving foreigners, such as our enterprise and 
individual income taxes with the amount of income as the 
collection target; our consolidated industrial and commercial 
tax with the flow volume as the collection target; and local 
taxes, such as real estate and motor vehicle and ship 
use-license taxes with assets as the collection target, have all 
been differentiated for taxpayers in a unique system. In 
short, since reform and opening in 1979, we have always used two 
tax systems for domestic and foreign, with separate collections. 
For instance, regarding flow taxes alone, our FIE flow tax is 
the collection of a consolidated industrial and commercial tax 
based on the 1958 Consolidated Industrial and Commercial Tax 
Ordinance (draft) and pertinent regulations passed in principle 
by the 101st Session of the NPC Standing Committee and 
promulgated for testing by the State Council. But our 
domestic-enterprise flow tax was changed on 1 October 1984 from 
the collection of the industrial and commercial tax to 
collection of product, value-added, and business taxes based on 
the Product Tax, Value-Added Tax, and Business Tax Ordinance 
(draft) published by the State Council on 1 September 1984. In 
order to help promote domestic-enterprise tax reform and 
prevent unnecessary concern by foreign firms, at the time of our 
1984 tax reform, the "NPC Standing Committee Resolution on 
Authorizing the State Council To Reform the Trial Ordinance 
Published on the Industrial and Commercial Tax" clearly provided 
that "the preceding ordinance draft published for testing by the 
State Council is not applicable to Sino-foreign joint-venture 
enterprises and FIEs." So our collection of flow taxes from FIEs 
always acted in accordance with the Consolidated Industrial and 
Commercial Tax Ordinance (draft). And while it should be said 
that the flow-tax model set up in the early 1980s basically met 
the needs of China's economic reform and development at the 
time, playing the role of regulating the enterprise profit-gap, 
easing irrational price conflicts, and promoting the in-depth 
development of economic reform, the guiding ideology of using 
different tax rates to fully regulate production, circulation, 
and consumption essentially carried a clear stamp of the state 
using administrative means to manage the economy. But as our 
socialist market economy goal model has been established, this 
flow-tax system hardly any longer meets our economic reform and 
development needs. This can be seen mainly in that: 
  1. The tax-category structure is irrational. A) In the 
industrial production link, we collect product taxes on some 
products, and value-added taxes on others. Such a structure of 
two concurrent taxes contributes neither to the inherent role of 
the value-added tax, or to the special regulatory function of 
the product tax. B) From the perspective of the whole 
commodity-circulation process, collecting product or value-added 
taxes at the production link, business taxes on the 
purchase-sale price difference at the wholesale link, and 
business taxes again on total sales volume at the retail link, 
means separate tax collection on differing taxable grounds for a 
single commodity in the circulation process, leaving the tax 
system without continuity, causing more lost revenue, and making 
it hard for flow taxes to fully play their role in organizing 
revenues. C) In separate collection in different categories for 
domestic and foreign enterprises, nonuniform tax policy creates 
many conflicts. 
  2. There are too many tax-rate grades, making tax burdens 
unequal. As our market economy grows, the prices of all 
categories of merchandise are gradually being deregulated, 
causing an increasingly glaring conflict of larger tax-rate 
differences among industries, enterprises, and products, which 
contributes to neither fair competition among enterprises, or to 
bringing into full play the basic impact of market forces in the 
disposition of resources. 
  3. Nominal tax rates are too high. Too many tax concessions 
of all types, such as reductions and exemptions, are steadily 
eroding the tax base, with real tax burdens declining yearly. 
Such a state of high tax rates, many reductions and exemptions, 
and low tax burdens, severely affects the solemnity of the tax 
laws. 
  4. The Consolidated Industrial and Commercial Tax Ordinance 
was promulgated over three decades ago, clearly no longer 
meeting current economic development needs. While it has been 
revised repeatedly in line with economic development, the 
consolidated industrial and commercial tax remains too narrow in 
coverage and scope, with quite a few taxable products and 
business items not having corresponding taxable-item tax rates; 
the conflicts of too many links and duplicate collections are 
growing increasingly glaring; and the product-tax burdens for 
domestic and foreign-invested enterprises are generally uneven. 
  In summary, China's pre-reform industrial and commercial tax 
system, due to its coexistence of two systems for domestic and 
foreign, was the basic cause of unfair tax burdens, as well as 
being the objective expression of many conflicts in the 
system-conversion process. Our establishment of a socialist 
market economy has presented a pressing demand for tax reform, 
as well as opening up fine tax-reform prospects. Through tax 
reform, we are gradually consolidating our tax laws and rates, 
putting enterprises of various natures all on a level playing 
field for fair competition, in order to speed up our socialist 
market economy development. 
<H3>  II. China's Current Tax Reform Is Characterized as Complete, 
Overall, and Structural </H3>
  The "Resolution on Certain Matters Involved in the 
Establishment of a Socialist Market Economy" of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee clearly 
provided for and expressed our tax-reform direction, goal model, 
and even particular policies. It was our tax-reform grounds. 
This tax reform involves most of our former tax categories, with 
its particular substance including mainly the following areas: 
<H5>  Flow Tax System Reform </H5>
  As the flow tax is the major part of China's tax structure, 
involving much revenue on a wide scale, flow-tax reform is the 
crux of this tax reform. Before reform, China's flow taxes 
were mainly in four categories: product, value-added, and 
business taxes on domestic enterprises, and the consolidated 
industrial and commercial tax on FIEs and foreign enterprises. 
Moreover, the tax rates for these categories were designed to 
regulate the economy on the terms of mostly planned prices, 
having too many tax-rate grades, and too great a difference 
between high and low. But our prices have now been largely 
deregulated. So in order to ensure that China's flow-tax system 
meets our market-economy needs and is in line with the basic 
international trend of flow-tax reform, we have changed from our 
traditional method of setting separate taxable items based on 
products, and of setting different tax rates for separate 
taxable items, to generally collecting value-added taxes at the 
production and circulation links, on which basis we have 
selected a few consumer goods for further collection of a 
consumption [excise] tax. For provision of labor, transfer of 
invisible assets, and sale of real property, we are continuing 
the flow-tax model of collecting business taxes. 
  Our new flow-tax system is uniformly applicable to domestic 
enterprises, FIEs, and foreign enterprises, which is aimed at 
fair tax burdens to encourage competition, as well as at 
evolving the mechanisms to perfect tax deductions among 
enterprises needed for standardizing the value-added tax. On 29 
December 1993, the Fifth Session of the Eighth NPC Standing 
Committee passed the "Resolution on Interim Regulations on Taxes 
Applicable to FIEs and Foreign Enterprises, Such as Value-Added, 
Consumption, and Business Taxes," at the same time abolishing 
the consolidated industrial and commercial tax. 
  A. Our flow-tax reform priority is to promote a 
standardized value-added tax. Since China introduced the 
value-added tax in the early 1980s, objective factors have 
always limited it to only some manufactured goods, and it has 
had 12 grades of tax rates. So in practice, it has been subject 
to problems such as taxable complexity and tax-deduction 
inaccuracy, keeping it from fully playing its proper role. But 
our establishment of a socialist market economy system-model 
made an urgent demand to standardize our value-added tax, as 
well as creating the necessary conditions. So making value-added 
tax reform the crux of this tax reform was aimed at, in line 
with current international practice and under China's existing 
conditions, establishing a more complete value-added tax 
collection mechanism, to meet market-economy tax needs. Our 
reformed value-added tax includes mainly the following items: 
  1) Our value-added tax-collection range includes production, 
wholesale, retail, and imported products, as well as 
manufacture, repairs and replacements. 
  2) Our value-added tax uses the price-exclusive taxable 
method, by making prices not including value-added taxes the 
taxable grounds. In all pre-retail links of the marketing of 
commodities, invoices must separately indicate value-added taxes 
and prices not including value-added taxes. 
  3) Our value-added tax uses the model of a one-grade basic 
tax rate and a one-grade low tax rate, with the basic tax rate 
being 17 percent, and the low rate at 13 percent. Except for 
commodities for which tax regulations stipulate the use of the 
low tax rate, all other taxable products and labor are subject 
to the basic tax rate. Export commodities are subject to a 
zero tax rate, with all taxes being returned once products are 
declared to customs as exports. 
  4) We practice a system of tax deduction [withholding] based 
on the taxes indicated on invoices. China practices a 
production-type value-added tax, with the taxes on 
foreign-bought capital-type fixed assets not being deductible 
when calculating taxable amount. Foreign-bought farm-product 
raw materials are provided tax deductions calculated at a 
10-percent deduction rate. 
  5) For small-scale taxpayers whose annual sales income is 
less than the stipulated amount and whose accounting is not 
perfect, we practice the the simplified method of calculating 
taxable amount based on sales income and a 6 percent 
tax-collection rate. 
  6) Taxpayers calculating value-added tax payments according 
to the standardized method after reform must conduct a special 
tax registration, as well as using the special value-added tax 
invoice, in the interests of strict control. 
  2. The consumption tax is a newly designed tax category in 
the flow-tax system after the industrial and commercial tax 
system reform. Based on the general collection of value-added 
taxes on commodities, our choice of a few consumer goods on 
which to collect a further consumption tax is mainly to adjust 
the structure [mix], by guiding consumption, to ensure state 
revenue. Our current consumption-tax product items are the 11 
of tobacco, alcohol, cosmetics, skin and hair care products, 
expensive jewelry, firecrackers and fireworks, gasoline, diesel 
oil, motor vehicle tires, motorcycles, and sedans. The 
consumption tax uses the tax-inclusive price, being paid at the 
production link. As to tax-system design, consumption-tax 
revenue is made up of a part of the revenue separated out from 
the former tax system's product and value-added taxes, being a 
conversion of revenue from the old to the new tax system, with 
the collection of consumption taxes on consumer goods basically 
maintaining the pre-reform tax burden. 
  3. The business tax. The post-reform business tax has nine 
collection items and three grades of tax rates: the 
communication and transportation, building construction, post 
and telecommunications, and culture and sports industries are 
taxed at a rate of 3 percent; the financial insurance industry, 
service trades, transfers of invisible assets, and sales of real 
property are taxed at a rate of 5 percent; the amusement 
industry is taxed at a rate of 5-20 percent, with details under 
the control of provincial, autonomous regional, and municipal 
governments within the limits provided by tax laws and 
regulations. 
<H5>  Enterprise Income Tax Reform </H5>
  Our enterprise income tax reform is generally designed to 
occur in two steps: A) the consolidation of domestic enterprise 
income taxes; B) at the appropriate time, the further 
consolidation of domestic enterprise and FIE income taxes. So 
this enterprise income tax reform involves mainly domestic 
enterprises, making no change in FIE and foreign enterprise 
income taxes. 
  As to domestic enterprises, since the profit-distribution 
forms of enterprises of various types of ownership used to 
differ, the enterprise income tax system that China gradually 
established had separate tax categories based on the type of 
enterprise ownership. This situation of nonuniform tax rates, 
varying preferences, and interregional policy differences 
created a jigsaw pattern in the distribution relations between 
the state and enterprises, which was very nonstandard. 
State-owned and collective enterprises had a maximum tax rate of 
55 percent, which was hard for enterprises to bear, resulting in 
the formulation of a host of preferential policies, which was 
hard in turn for the treasury to bear, causing it to take a 
piece back from enterprises in forms, such as after-tax 
collection of funds. So our development of a market economy 
meant that our enterprise income tax reform had to be aimed at 
adjusting and standardizing the distribution relations between 
the state and enterprises, to speed up the conversion of 
enterprise operating forces and achieve fair competition. 
  The main items of our enterprise income tax reform are: 
  1. Starting on 1 January 1994, we abolished our separate 
state, collective, and private enterprise income taxes, to 
practice a consolidated domestic-enterprise income tax. 
  2. Domestic enterprise income taxes are at a flat tax rate 
of 33 percent. 
  3. We have used the tax law to standardize enterprise income 
pretax expense-listing items and criteria, changing our 
customary practice of setting taxable income based on the 
enterprise financial system, to stabilize and expand the tax 
base. 
  4. We have abolished the state-enterprise regulatory tax, 
and the state energy and communications priority construction 
funds and budgetary regulation funds paid to the state by state 
enterprises. 
  5. We have rescinded our preferential policy allowing state 
enterprises to repay investment loans before income taxes, 
establishing a new standardized enterprise loan-repayment system. 
  6. Since we have consolidated our domestic enterprise income 
taxes, state enterprises will no longer contract income taxes to 
the state. 
<H5>  Individual Income Tax Reform </H5>
  As China long practiced a low-wage system, we were not 
equipped with the objective conditions to collect taxes from 
individual citizens. But since reform and opening, to meet the 
needs of changing circumstances, China first drew up an 
individual income tax law, then began to collect regulatory 
taxes on personal income, setting up an independent income tax 
for urban and rural individual industrial and commercial 
household operations. So until this reform, China's tax system 
for personal income was made up of three separate laws and 
regulations. This not only was nonstandard legally, but also 
gradually caused glaring problems, such as too low expense 
deductions and too high nominal rates. So it was necessary to 
reform our individual income tax system. Our amended individual 
income tax law has been in effect since the beginning of 1994. 
This was a key step in China's tax reform, aimed at making 
China's individual income taxes more legal, standard, and 
rational. This amended tax law regulates mainly high incomes, 
either not collecting at all or collecting less individual 
income taxes on middle and low incomes. Observing the principle 
of not making taxpayer burdens too heavy and lowering the 
overall burden somewhat, the new individual income tax law 
applies to Chinese citizens who are obligated by law to pay 
taxes and foreigners who earn income within China's borders. 
  Our individual income tax itemizes deductions, rates, and 
collections. Wage and salary income is taxed at 5-45 percent in 
a nine-grade progressive tax rate for excess income; individual 
industrial and commercial household production and operation 
income and enterprise and institution contract and leasing 
operation income are taxed at 5-35 percent in a five-grade 
progressive tax rate for excess income, for roughly the same tax 
burden as the enterprise income tax; labor and service 
remuneration is taxed at a 20-percent flat tax rate, with other 
taxable items also subject to a 20-percent flat tax rate. 
  According to the international practice of not collecting 
income taxes on basic cost-of-living expenses, we have set our 
expense deduction at a uniform standard of 800 RMB, while our 
new tax law involving foreigners adds a provision on an 
additional expense deduction, to show suitable concern for 
foreigners. 
  As our amended individual income tax has higher 
expense-deduction standards, with a wider tax range and lower 
tax rates, the wage and salary income-tax burden is generally 
lighter. 
<H5>  Other Tax-Category Reforms </H5>
  1. We have improved China's tax system for resource 
products. Our reformed resource-tax collection-range includes 
all mineral resources, with the tax categories of crude oil, 
natural gas, coal, other nonmetallic raw ores, ferrous metal raw 
ores, nonferrous metal raw ores, and salt. Meanwhile, in 
coordination with our value-added tax reform, we have 
appropriately adjusted tax burdens. 
  Our resource tax uses the tax-calculation method of specific 
quota by product category, setting taxes in a range with upper 
and lower limits. For similar resource products with different 
resource-recovery conditions, taxes also vary. 
  2. We have begun to collect value-added taxes on land, to 
appropriately regulate excessive profits from real-estate 
transactions. The land value-added tax is collected at the 
real-estate-transaction link on the appreciated part of 
transaction income. The value added to real estate is the 
balance of the income earned by taxpayers through selling real 
estate minus deductions. Deductions include mainly costs paid 
at the time of obtaining land-use rights, land-development costs 
and expenses, new housing construction and related-facility 
costs and expenses, and sales taxes. 
  Our land value-added tax uses a four-grade progressive tax 
rate, with the value added to real estate not exceeding 50 
percent of deductions at a tax rate of 30 percent; the part 
exceeding 50 percent up to 100 percent at a tax rate of 40 
percent; that from 100-200 percent at a rate of 50 percent; and 
over 200 percent at a rate of 60 percent. 
  3. We also need to adjust, by merging or rescinding, our 
urban construction-safeguard tax, land-use tax, and certain 
other odd tax categories, while appropriately adjusting tax 
rates and amounts, and devolving management jurisdiction to 
lower administrative levels. These tax-category reform plans 
are in the process of being drawn up, with each going into 
effect as it matures. 
  As to these tax-category reforms, the State Council will, 
based on the resolution of the Eighth NPC Standing Committee, 
specifically clarify whether they apply to FIEs and foreign 
enterprises. But I hold that these reformed tax categories 
ought to apply to FIEs and foreign enterprises. This is in 
consideration of fair tax burdens, as well as being needed to 
improve our investment climate. 
  In the application of our new reformed tax system, as to the 
range of tax categories applicable to FIEs and foreign 
enterprises, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee's "Resolution on 
Interim Regulations for Value-Added, Consumption, and Business 
Taxes Applicable to FIEs and Foreign Enterprises" provides 
clearly that: 1) where provided by law, implementation will be 
according to legal provisions, referring to the enterprise 
income tax, which will continue to be implemented according to 
the "PRC Income Tax Law for FIEs and Foreign Enterprises" that 
took effect on 1 July 1991; 2) were there are no legal 
provisions, implementation will be according to State Council 
provisions. The ones that are now clearly applicable are the 
value-added, consumption, and business taxes. As to the stamp, 
real estate, motor vehicle and boat use-license, 
animal-slaughtering, land value-added, and resource taxes, as 
well as other tax categories that will go into effect, the State 
Council will soon provide for their applicability. 
<H5>  III. Flow-Tax Burdens and Preferences </H5>
  China's flow-tax system-reform was quite a large adjustment 
of our macroeconomic distribution system and order. We observed 
the principles of fairness, neutrality, transparency, and 
universality; our tax-burden-design guiding ideology was to 
ensure that reform neither increased enterprise burdens or 
decreased state revenues, by keeping the overall burden of our 
former value-added, product, and business taxes. But as our 
reform had to adjust our former irrational tax structure and 
distribution order, it was impossible to completely retain our 
former interests order. Due to factors, such as tax-structure 
changes, tax-rate simplification and merger, and taxpayment-link 
reform, it was impossible to avoid changes in the tax burdens on 
certain industries, enterprises, and products. As to flow 
taxes for instance, while the tax-burden changes were mostly 
structural, leaving the overall enterprise-flow-link tax burden 
basically the same as before reform, the tax-burden changes for 
particular products and enterprises were upwards in some cases 
and downwards in others. This was a step that we had to take to 
make taxpayer burdens fairer, in order to gradually rationalize 
our distribution relations. 
  Since the uniform application of value-added, consumption, 
and business taxes to FIEs, their tax burdens will undergo some 
changes. A survey of thousands of typical FIEs in large and 
midsize cities, such as Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and 
Guangzhou, shows that most enterprise tax burdens will be the 
same as before reform, with some slightly lower, and a few 
others somewhat higher. In order to ensure the continuity and 
stability of tax policy involving foreigners, safeguard the 
legitimate interests of foreign firms, and help to open further 
to the outside world, the Eighth NPC Standing Committee has 
decided to use appropriate methods to resolve the matter of 
higher tax burdens on some FIEs. The particular methods are: 
for all FIEs approved to be set up prior to 31 December 1993, 
where tax burdens are increased due to our change to collection 
of value-added, consumption, and business taxes, upon enterprise 
application and tax-organ approval, and within approved 
operating terms or where there are no operating terms, with the 
maximum not to exceed five years, the extra taxes paid due to 
the increased burden will be returned. But all FIEs approved to 
be set up after 1 January 1994 will be subject to the provisions 
of the interim regulations on value-added, consumption, and 
business taxes. 
  As to Sino-foreign contractual joint ventures engaged in 
maritime oil recovery, while they will be subject to the new 
consolidated tax system, we have decided to tax them according 
to the former method in consideration of the particular 
characteristics of this industry. That is, crude and natural 
gas recovered from oilfields by Sino-foreign contractual joint 
ventures will be subject to collection of value-added taxes in 
kind, as well as mining area use fees according to current 
provisions, but temporarily not resource taxes. The value-added 
tax rate will be 5 percent, with no deduction of 
project-beginning taxes when calculating value-added taxes, and 
no tax rebates granted when oil and natural gas are exported. 
The independent oilfield operations of the China Maritime Oil 
Corporation will contrast with these provisions. The State 
Council will make particular provisions for this, with documents 
needed for permission at the time of implementation. 
  The basic principles of this tax reform were that the tax 
system had to be consolidated, with preferences retained in 
principle. The FIE and foreign enterprise income tax law put 
into effect on 1 July 1991 remains unchanged, with its various 
provided tax preferences also unchanged. Its key provisions 
involving FIEs are the former flow-tax preferential policies 
involving foreigners, in five particular areas: 1) 
Investment-imported capital goods are duty-free, including items 
in overall investment needed for enterprise production, such as 
machinery, equipment, and parts, as well as imported raw 
materials for production of export products. 2) Designated 
imported goods are provided tax reductions or exemptions, mainly 
SEZ FIE imports, and products made by SEZ enterprises for sale 
within SEZs with, except for mineral oil, tobacco, and alcohol 
being granted one-half tax reductions, other products being 
exempt from flow taxes. 3) Bonded areas are granted a 
preferential flow-tax policy. 4) Export products made by FIEs, 
except for crude, refined oil, and where there are other state 
provisions, are exempt from flow taxes. 5) Sino-foreign 
joint-venture or foreign banks set up with approval in SEZs and 
the new Pudong Zone are exempt from flow taxes for five years 
from the day they go into operation. These preferential 
policies are all retained in principle, with particular 
consolidation provisions being made by the State Council. 
  In short, as this tax reform neither increases FIE tax 
burdens or decreases FIE preferential policies, China's policy 
of opening to the outside world will be implemented better as 
reform intensifies. 
<H3>  IV. Along with Tax Reform, We Must Push Ahead Vigorously 
With Tax Collection-Management Reform </H3>
  Equal competition in a market economy means that the state 
must establish fair and strict market rules. Tax laws are a 
key part of market rules. A look at all countries throughout 
the world shows that those with the more developed market 
economies have stronger tax-law rigidity and sounder tax legal 
institutions. As this is a universal law, tax reform has to be 
accompanied by active progress in tax collection-management 
reform, to build a stronger tax legal system, the key substance 
of which is: 1) The universal establishment of a 
taxpayment-declaration system; 2) The active promotion of a 
tax-agent system; 3) Fast progress in the computerization of tax 
collection-management; 4) the establishment of a rigorous 
tax-auditing system; 5) the appropriate application of a 
tax-sharing system, with the organization of two-tiered central 
and local tax organs; 6) the vigorous building of stronger tax 
legal institutions, with the gradual establishment of mechanisms 
for tax legislation, judication, and enforcement with mutual 
independence and restraint. 
  Once these steps are taken, China's tax administration will 
have evolved an order of equal emphasis on the four lines of tax 
policy, taxation, auditing, and reviewed litigation, with 
mutual coordination and restraint. This will help to thoroughly 
change our current state of a lax collection-management system 
and backward collection-management methods, by basically raising 
our tax-management level, establishing a scientific and strict 
tax-management system, and ensuring the implementation of our 
tax laws, in order to speed up our socialist market economy 
development. 
  As taxes involving foreigners are a window on reform and 
opening, strengthening our tax collection-management involving 
foreigners is of prime importance. In the interests of uniform 
management, the State Council has decided that all taxes on FIEs 
and foreign enterprises, as well as individual income taxes paid 
by foreigners (overseas Chinese and Hong Kong and Macao 
compatriots), will be the responsibility of the State 
Administration of Taxation for collection and management, or the 
responsibility of the tax departments involving foreigners set 
up by tax organs at all levels under the jurisdiction of the 
State Administration of Taxation for classified collection and 
management. This makes it easy for taxpayers to pay all taxes, 
while contributing to tax collection-management. 
  Ladies, gentlemen, and friends, China's current tax reform 
is 
an important milestone in China's tax history, an objective 
requirement for the establishment and development of our new 
socialist market economy system, and in line with the needs of 
most FIEs, foreign enterprises, and our friends from all 
countries. So I believe that China's tax reform will certainly 
succeed, and that our many friends will certainly understand it 
fully and support it vigorously. I believe even more strongly 
that as China's investment climate improves steadily, all people 
of insight will certainly come to invest in China more eagerly, 
giving China cooperative partners throughout the world, and even 
brighter growth prospects. 

