Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  Move To Field Specialization with the Closing of 100 Labs </H5>
  Fujitsu Ltd. (Tadashi Sekigawa, president) will completely 
revamp its 30 year old research and development system. In 
addition to reassessing the structure and function of Fujitsu 
Laboratories (Mikio Ootsuki, president; Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki; 
(044) 777-1111) and eliminating the two pillars of Kawasaki 
Laboratory (Kawasaki) and Atsugi Laboratory (Atsugi) five 
research laboratories will be re-established for specific fields 
such as multimedia and personal systems. Furthermore, about 100 
laboratories will be eliminated and a group system will be 
adopted where each group is built around a theme. This system 
will take effect on the 29th. For the last two years, Fujitsu 
has focused on the research and development system in 
affiliation with the Business Division at headquarters. 
Shortening the time between research and development and 
commercialization, and improving the effectiveness of 
investments are planned in this large-scale restructuring. 
<H5>  Shortening the Time to Market </H5>
  The purpose of the new system at Fujitsu Laboratories is to 
move from the former region-based research system to a 
function-based research and development system which is closely 
affiliated with commercial activities. The time-to-market system 
for decreasing the time from development to product 
commercialization, which has already been introduced, will be 
strengthened. The objective is a technical development system 
with a high level of competitive strength. 
  The new organization is centered around five laboratories 
for 
multimedia systems, personal systems, electronic devices, basic 
technology, and information society sciences. In addition, four 
new project divisions will be established under the direct 
control of the president. 
  Each laboratory will promote research on technologies 
related 
to next generation information systems related to the 
commercialization of personal information devices, software, 
ultra large-scale integration (ULSI), and electronic devices. A 
research field individualized to each region will expand in an 
interdisciplinary and a commercial manner. 
  With the themes of processors, optical technology, mobile 
communication devices, and next generation mainframes, the 
project division plans to shorten the time to commercialization 
by interacting with the Business Division at headquarters. 
  A total of about 100 laboratories suitable as the 
departments 
of the Business Division will be eliminated and changed into a 
fluid organization that gathers a staff in a research department 
for each theme. Although the total number of 1,700 employees 
will not change, about 10%, 110 people, will be 
transferred to 
the Business Division. 
  Previously, Fujitsu strove for research and development with 
autonomy that was not bound to the vertical organizational 
structure of the Business Division, thus, established Fujitsu 
Laboratories as a separate corporation in 1962. 
  With the acceleration of technological innovations in 
high-tech areas and the fierce competition in development, over 
the past two years since Vice President Ootsuki was promoted to 
president of Fujitsu Laboratories, the creation of an 
environment able to reflect rapid commercialization of research 
results has been studied. 

