Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Economic Affairs Minister Jacobus Andriessen </F>
by Cees Banning in The Hague; date not given: "Andriessen: `Let 
Us Go For It'"] 
  [Excerpts] Today the eight working papers which make up the 
agenda for the "globalization forum," i.e., Economic Affairs 
Minister Andriessen's conference on the Netherlands' competitive 
position, were published. "I was afraid of a litany of 
complaining business people." Following is an interview with 
Minister Andriessen about the "Let us do it" feeling. 
  The Netherlands economy needs a thorough review, although 
there is no reason for pessimism. According to Economic Affairs 
Minister Andriessen, the sense of urgency arises 
because one out of five companies is considering transferring 
more activities abroad. "Fortunately, considering and acting 
are not always synonymous. But when it does happen, jobs are 
lost." 
  With his economic pamphlet "Globalization: A Genuine Trend," 
Andriessen set the tone for discussing competition from low wage 
countries. During the discussion of the economic budget, 
Andriessen's message appeared to have brought results: The 
parliamentarians decided to use a traditional parliamentary 
instrument to tackle the "new" subject intelligently: research." 
[passage omitted] 
  To prepare the globalization forum eight workshops were 
organized last month bringing together businessmen, scientists, 
and civil servants. Apart from three general themes (innovative 
entrepreneurship, technology, and employment) five other 
workshops focused on chemistry, the food industry, financial 
services, the metal and electrotechnical industry, and 
logistical support. On Andriessen's desk are the proceedings of 
the discussions. [passage omitted] 
  The man who is to form a new government will be informed 
about the results of the "globalization forum." After a four 
year term in the government, the minister sees "a major battle 
between salary and income. We constantly have the tendency to 
look at our income only. Labor -- and more specifically the 
creation of new jobs -- is being neglected, although it is the 
basis of the work distribution problem. This was my hidden 
agenda for the strategic conference." 
  [Banning] The diagnosis is well-known: a lack of 
flexibility. 
What does the therapy look like? 
  [Andriessen] Entrepreneurs, employees, and the authorities 
are not flexible enough. That cannot be denied. However, we 
should not get stuck in passing the buck. Entrepreneurs often 
speak of the inflexibility of the labor market, but they forget 
that in the area of innovation they themselves are not flexible 
enough. 
  The government's flexibility should go hand in hand with a 
reduction of rules and legislation. [passage omitted] 
  We calculated that each year 400 new industry-related rules 
are added. The cost of this kind of legislation for businesses 
totals around 8 billion guilders per year. I am planning to 
make an index of the cost for industry of all regulations and 
laws. In the coming government term, this index should be 
reduced from 100 to say 90. 
  Employees should be prepared for more flexible working 
relations. Entrepreneurs are afraid of labor. DAF, for example, 
is building trucks only on the basis of actual orders and not 
extra trucks for stock. This might result in a tremendous 
savings in labor costs, but in that case you must be able to 
produce more trucks in times of growing demand. This requires 
flexible working relations. In day-to-day labor relations, too, 
greater flexibility is needed. 
  [Banning] Institutional obstacles that you are referring to, 
such as working hours, can best be removed in times of economic 
recession. As Philips Chairman Timmer put it: "Change your 
organization: Create a crisis." 
  [Andriessen] I hope to avoid this kind of philosophy. The 
economy seems to be picking up, with 2.5 percent growth 
recorded. However, the structural problem is not automatically 
solved when the economy picks up. After each economic 
recession, less people are working in the major enterprises. To 
create more jobs, we need small enterprises. 
  [Banning] The Netherlands has many small enterprises, but 
relatively few continuously growing companies. Among 
entrepreneurs there seems to be a spirit of laziness, apathy. 
  [Andriessen] Compared with other countries, we have a good 
scorecard regarding start-ups, averaging 20,000 to 25,000 a 
year. However, many entrepreneurs are not adequately prepared, 
with poorly developed marketing plans and disorganized 
administrations. In these matters the authorities can be of 
help. But the biggest problem is growth, i.e., taking the steps 
that will lead from 10 to 100 employees. 
  In this respect, mentality is important. The Netherlands is 
reluctant to take risks. We had too easy a life in the past. 
Entrepreneurs will have to take up the challenge themselves; 
globalization also creates a lot of opportunities. 
  [Banning] The recurring theme of your economic pamphlet is 
the reorganization of the welfare state. But is reorganization 
sufficient to regain competitiveness. 
  [Andriessen] It is only one element. I am not saying that 
salaries in the Netherlands are too high. We should not compete 
with countries like Poland in salary matters; this is nonsense. 
The welfare state has an impact on labor costs. However, I 
want to avoid having the discussion boil down to a lament about 
social security. All election platforms dedicate a lot of 
attention to it. That subject is already under discussion. 
  In order to regain competitiveness the government can make 
its contribution by creating an appropriate entrepreneurial 
climate. There is a threat that the Netherlands' infrastructure 
will deteriorate. This government has given a strong impetus to 
improving the infrastructure: the Betuwe railway, high-speed 
train lines, Schiphol airport. Such projects also have a 
stimulating function: the "let us do it" feeling. 
  [Banning] On 24 March you will attempt to change the 
Netherlands' national character to accept globalization. 
However, when you look at the cabinet's painful discussion 
about ensuring a 1 percent yearly increase in consumer 
purchasing power, would you not rather have to deal first with 
your colleagues in the cabinet? 
  [Andriessen] I am playing a role in the ministerial council. 
The council mainly has a distributive task. We do not 
manufacture anything. We are no entrepreneurs. However, we do 
decide on 50 percent of the budget. I regularly emphasize the 
fact that we first have to earn money before we can distribute 
some. That is the "sense of urgency." 

