BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres by </F>
Lili Galili and Amnon Barzilay at the Foreign Ministry in 
Jerusalem on 22 June] 
  [Excerpt] In his office yesterday, in the midst of the 
storm rocking his party and as expectations for far-reaching 
political developments are on the rise, Foreign Minister Shim'on 
Peres seemed surprisingly calm. To a certain extent, he looked 
like someone forcing himself to display calm out of tactical 
considerations in order to signal that everything was "business 
as usual." His serenity was abruptly ruffled when he was asked 
to reply to questions implying the possibility of a future 
leadership struggle between Yitzhaq Rabin and himself or when 
his replies were interpreted in such a fashion. 
  "Why should I engage in gossip," Peres angrily retorted, "I 
am sick of justifying my actions all the time. I want to talk 
about the really important things." Nevertheless, Peres 
definitely sounded as if he wanted to keep his political options 
open. Even if he does not ultimately make use of these options, 
they will maintain the Labor party's internal balance of terror 
and preclude any possibility of treating Peres like a dead horse 
who no longer has to be appeased. 
  Peres rejected the reports about various "deals" between him 
and Rabin to buy quiet in the party with disgust. His reaction: 
"What are we, horse traders?" The foreign minister made these 
angry remarks on the day newspapers were carrying reports of 
Yosi Beilin's imminent appointment as a cabinet minister, 
describing him as "Peres' minister" and explaining that the 
appointment came as a counterbalance to the recent appointment 
of a "Rabin minister," Efrayim Sne, to the health portfolio. 
Perhaps not horse trading, but definitely minister trading. 
  Peres rejected this description: "Without a doubt, in a 
democracy there are counterbalances. I am not interpreting 
developments, but merely stating facts. It is for the prime 
minister to announce ministerial appointments. I do not want to 
engage in gossip." 
  [HA'ARETZ] Your party is in the midst of a serious crisis 
that could even lead to a split. In the past, with the 
establishment of RAFI [Israel Laborers List, in 1965], you were 
part of a large split in the Labor party. 
  [Peres] I was not part of a large split, I was party to the 
actions of a great man. When I faced the decision of either 
splitting from the party or splitting away from the man, I chose 
to follow David Ben-Gurion, and I do not regret it. The 
situation today is totally different. The party did not hold 
primaries then. 
  [HA'ARETZ] So the primaries are the root of all evil, not 
the 
mistakes made with regard to the national health insurance bill? 
  [Peres] Everything that is happening in the party now is the 
result of the primaries system. As for the national health 
insurance bill, a mistake may indeed have been made; however, 
that is not the real reason for the crisis in the party. What 
is actually happening is that the Knesset members [MK's] seek 
popularity through newspaper headlines. If we do not completely 
remedy this situation, these will continue to be the results. 
  [HA'ARETZ] What do you mean by completely remedy the 
situation? 
  [Peres] We have to divide the country into election 
boroughs, and then the MK's will be elected by the residents of 
a specific borough, as they are in Britain. Democracy is based 
on representation and constituencies. There is no point in 
having elections based on constituencies without the country 
being really divided into election boroughs. The Knesset should 
pass a bill on changing the electoral system. It is 
inconceivable that only the prime minister will be elected in 
real democratic elections while the MK's will continue to be 
elected through a sham process. 
  [HA'ARETZ] The practical ramifications of the change you 
are proposing are a delay in the implementation of direct 
elections for prime minister. Your statements imply that you 
are making your support for direct elections for prime minister 
conditional on changes in the regional election system. 
  [Peres] I think that this condition could be implemented 
within the 30 months we have at our disposal. There is no 
reason why these two electoral changes cannot be passed 
simultaneously, and I will fight for this. Then we will be able 
to reorganize the party and restore a logical order to political 
life. Do not try to impose your terminology on me. I prefer to 
make positive statements. Why should I put things negatively? 
  [HA'ARETZ] Perhaps you choose positive descriptions because 
your fear that the use of other language would be construed as 
the resumption of your leadership struggle with Yitzhaq Rabin? 
  [Peres] If I state something that I believe in, does that 
mean I am announcing my candidacy? There are still another two 
years. I have already made a decision regarding this election 
term and I will respect it for another two years. I do not know 
what will happen in another two years. I will decide at the 
appropriate time. 
  [HA'ARETZ] Do you not fear that, on top of everything else, 
the public will see the Labor party as an oligarchy of old men? 
  [Peres] I do not accept that. We have done great things 
over the last two years. Israel has undergone a fundamental 
change. If old people are capable of effecting this, then why 
not? Do not look at peoples' age, look at the results. 
  [HA'ARETZ] Right now, the results are internal chaos, and 
the members of the Ramon-Meretz Histadrut labor federation list 
are now demanding the dismissal of Hayim Haberfeld [outgoing 
Histadrut secretary general]. What is your reaction to this 
demand? 
  [Peres] The Labor party will not ostracize anyone. 
  [HA'ARETZ] Can you, as someone who in the past was himself 
considered a liability by the party, identify with Haberfeld? 
  [Peres] Some people considered me a liability, while some 
people viewed me as an asset. I do not subscribe to this 
simplistic descriptions. Anyone who reviews my record in the 
party cannot see me as a liability. [passage omitted] 

