BFN 

<F P=106> [Tanya Tsekova report: "Kozloduy: Problems, Assets"] </F>
  [Text] Sofia, March 4 (BTA) -- Bulgaria's Kozloduy Nuclear 
Power Plant on the Danube has an installed capacity of 3,760 
megawatts (MW). On-line facilities have a capacity of 2,400 MW. 
Two of the N-plant's six reactors are under repair. Radiation 
control is exercised by an automated control system and a 
special unit controlling radiation outside the system. 
According to staff, safety meets world standards while 
generation is much cleaner than at thermal or hydroelectric 
facilities, said a BTA reporter who visited the plant. No 
serious industrial accident occurred in the plant last year. 
  Now the facility generates half of the electricity the 
nation 
needs in winter, with its cost being 0.42 leva/kilowatthour, or 
half the cost of electricity generated by other energy sources. 
Radioactive discharges in the area of the plant are 
substantially lower than the acceptable limits. 
  Construction of the N-plant began in 1968 and the period 
from 
1974 to 1982 saw the successive startups of the first four VVER 
440 reactors. The 1,000 MW Units Five and Six joined the power 
grid in respectively 1987 and 1992. Now Unit One is functioning 
at 96 percent of capacity, Unit Two is undergoing a scheduled 
overhaul and being refueled, Unit Three is functioning at full 
capacity, Unit Four at 55 percent and Unit Six at 95 percent. 
Unit Five is also being overhauled. 
  The N-plant now has a staff of 5,600, with 4,000 operating 
the reactors. A staffing problem does not exist, argues the 
management. Just a couple of years ago the N-plant was 
understaffed and facing training problems. At Unit One and in 
the machine hall, where she was admitted, the BTA reporter met 
and talked with serious, intelligent young people. Engineers 
are being paid between 12,000 and 25,000 leva a month, which 
compares favorably with a minimum monthly wage in this country 
of 1,400 leva. 
  The area around the plant likely to be worse hit by an 
accident includes 43 population centres with a population of 
100,000. Emergency plans outline a 3-kilometre, a 12-kilometre 
and a 30-kilometre zones. According to the local boss of Civil 
Defence, emergency plans are updated on an annual basis and the 
personnel receives training periodically. Population in the 
30-kilometre area surrounding the plant is provided with 
protection equipment for home use. Since 1993 the plant has an 
accident management centre and a new automated radiation control 
system transmitting data to this centre and to the Committee for 
Peaceful Atomic Energy Uses and the Civil Defence Staff in 
Sofia. According to the engineer on duty at the oldest Unit 
One, eight seconds are needed to bring a reaction under control 
in case of accident in the nuclear reactor. This is achieved by 
four automated emergency systems switching on consecutively. A 
reaction can also be brought under control manually by the 
unit's operator on duty. 
  A new programme should be drawn for the overhaul of the 
first 
four units. The upgrading of each would cost between $30 and 
$40 million, according to preliminary estimates. The money 
should be sought abroad, as this year the government has 
budgeted only about 0.5 million leva (now the exchange rate is 
38 leva to the dollar). The budgeted funds would be merely 
enough for current repairs, said manager Kusma Kuzmanov. 
According to him, the oldest Units One and Two were designed to 
last up to the year 2003, according to Soviet standards in the 
1960's, and despite numerous repairs and improvements need 
constant monitoring. Experts have detected metal hull faults, 
which are being studied. If the results of the study, financed 
by EC, are unfavorable, the units will have to be switched off 
in two or three years. 
  Waste storage is the focus of attention by management and 
the 
National Electricity Company (the nation's power utility). 
Until the breakup of the Communist bloc, waste was shipped to 
the former Soviet Union, which also supplied nuclear fuel. Now, 
however, Russia demands heavy charges for waste treatment. 
Ukraine would like to be paid for trans-shipment via its 
territory. The National Electricity Company is looking for 
solutions to the nuclear waste problem. About 400 tons of fuel 
waste are stored at a Kozloduy depot which will have enough 
store room to last through mid-1995. The N-plant management 
hopes to have a radioactive waste treatment plant on line by 
that time, making waste fit for burial. The project has stuck 
at a technology-assessment stage. Half of the technology is 
Bulgarian, half to be provided by Westinghouse. The waste 
treatment plant and storage facility will be located on the 
territory of the N-plant. This decision has triggered protests 
by local environmentalists. They argue it would be dangerous to 
locate a nuclear waste depot in the proximity of the River 
Danube. 
  According to an official of Ecoglasnost, the environmental 
group, the amounts of strontium and cesium found in the soil 
around the plant are negligible. Samples of Danube water 
upstream from Kozloduy often have a higher level of 
radioactivity than samples taken downstream, according to the 
N-plant safety boss. 
  International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) officials have 
visited the N-plant on several occasions and given a positive 
assessment of the plant after the overhauls. 

