BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wang Yonghong: "Fresh Push To Stabilize Barren Soil With </F>
Trees] 
  [Text] The country's top forestry official has vowed to 
step up the ongoing afforestation drive to help improve the 
nation's ecological balance. 
  "Efforts will be made to speed up all major tree-planting 
projects to meet planned targets one or two years ahead of 
schedule, to cope with the country's brisk development," 
Vice-Minister of Forestry Zhu Guangyao told reporters over the 
weekend. 
  China ranks number one in the world for its dramatic growth 
of forest resources in the past decade, but more efforts are 
needed to make the land greener, said Zhu. 
  Planting trees on now-barren hills will be a priority goal 
for the rest of the century, the vice-minister said in an 
interview. 
  The city of Tianjin, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region and 
Anhui, Jiangxi, Hubei, Shandong, Jilin and Zhejiang Provinces 
plan afforestation for all of their barren hills that are 
suitable for tree-growing this year, according to Zhu. 
  Two-thirds of China's provinces, municipalities, and 
autonomous regions are expected to achieve their targets by the 
year 2000, when the national forest coverage will rise to at 
least 15.3 percent from the current 13.9 percent, Zhu said. 
  Every year, some 5.4 million hectares of trees are planted 
across the country. Nature reserves now account for 6.8 percent 
of the country's total area. 
  Despite the marked progress in the past decade, China still 
faces some serious environmental and ecological problems. The 
degradation, desertification, and salinization of farmland and 
grassland are continuing, while soil erosion remains serious, he 
added. 
  Ecological deterioration has worsened living conditions and 
severely hindered economic development. The ecological damage 
to agricultural production is an especially hard blow since 
China must feed its 1.2 billion population, or 20 percent of the 
world's total, with only 7 percent of world's cultivated land. 
  Over 15 per cent of China's land suffers from soil erosion 
and 5 billion tons of soil are washed away annually, Zhu noted. 
  Desert acreage is expanding by 2,100 square kilometres 
annually and has now reached 1.53 million square kilometres, or 
15.9 percent of the territory. 
  Eroded areas are particularly vulnerable to further 
environmental damage from severe weather such as droughts 
floods, hailstorms, and unseasonably hot or cold weather. 
  "All these natural disasters can be alleviated or put under 
control with more forest coverage," the vice-minister stressed. ; 
  Since the late 1970's, the country has launched seven 
ambitious afforestation and ecological improvement projects. 
  Nearly all areas afflicted by ecological damage have been 
targeted by those projects, which cover 5.8 million square 
kilometres or 60 percent of the country's territory, Zhu 
explained. 
  So far, a total of 24.2 million hectares of forests have 
been 
planted. 
  Tree zones are being created along the upper and middle 
reaches of the Yangtze River, along the coast, on the plains, 
and in the Taihang Mountain region. And work on the Three North 
shelter belt, stretching from the northeast, across the north to 
the northwest, will continue until 2050 to become the world's 
largest such tree zone. 
  When all the projects are completed, some 66.7 million 
hectares, or over two-thirds of all farmland will have more 
effective ecological protection. 

