CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by N. R. Kosinova] </F>
  [Text] The congress took place in Minsk on 24-29 July 1993 
and was devoted to chemical problems in ecology. In proclaiming 
legal ecological responsibility over the former USSR we have 
recently become more outspoken in judgment concerning ecological 
problems, but unfortunately there is little that can be done 
under the conditions of the deepening crises of our political 
and economic systems. 
  Despite all difficulties, the number of participants 
attending the congress in Minsk exceeded 1400 (this included 764 
from Russia, 156 from Ukraine, 434 from Belorus, 23 from 
Uzbekistan, 15 from Kazakhstan, and 59 from ``distant'' regions). 
  Academician L. M. Sushchenya (Academy of Sciences, Belorus) 
represented the organizational committee, Academician O. M. 
Nefedov (Russian Academy of Sciences) was president, and Doctor 
of Chemical Sciences V. N. Makatun was the learned secretary. 
  The congress in the overfilled cinema theater ``Oktyabr'' 
opened with brief introductory remarks by Academician O. M. 
Nafedov. In a salutary speech to the participants of the 
congress, Representative of Supreme Soviet Belorus Republic S. 
S. Shushkevich sharply underscored the important function of the 
meeting as a well known counterweight to the disintegrating 
processes taking place over the expanse of the former USSR, and 
emphasized the impossibility of solving ecological problems 
without the combined forces of scientists and practitioners. 
  Eight reports were heard in five plenary sessions. Probably, 
the most interesting was the report of Academician V. A. 
Koptyuga: ``Chemistry and Stable Development: Status and 
Prospects After the UN Conference in Rio de Janeiro,'' not only 
in its depth of analysis of the materials presented at this 
conference, but also in pointing out the impossibility of any 
single SNG government to solve individually ecological problems 
the extent of which continue to grow as a result of conflicts 
within the entire network. V. P. Kukhar's report on the 
ecological consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear 
Power Plant to a large extent confirm this position. S. V. 
Golubkov presented his views on possible ways for integrating 
the chemical complex of SNG nations, while G. A. Yagodin 
examined problems in ecological education in schools and higher 
institutions. 
  In all, about 800 reports were presented in 7 sections. The 
reports were arranged in the following manner: 
  1. Research and control of ecological state of the 
environment. -- 26/110* 
  2. New waste-free and low waste technologies of chemical 
production. -- 28/140 
  3. Ecological problems in functioning of large scale 
industrial and agricultural complexes. -- 23/63 
  4. Decontamination of industrial wastes and restoration of 
natural systems.-- 88/145 
  5. Migration and accumulation of chemical, radioactive, and 
biological pollutants in the environment. -- 23/62 
  6. Problems in ecological education in public education. -- 
30/35 
  7. Medical-chemical problems in ecology. -- 17/15 
  *Numerator -- oral, denominator -- standing reports. 
  Some of the reports were not heard as a result of the 
absence 
of the authors, since not everyone could find the means to pay 
the considerable amounts needed to make such a trip. There were 
only a few young participants in the congress. This category 
undoubtedly is in need of financial support from the organizers 
of any symposium. 
  It is impossible to give a detailed analysis of the reports. 
We will limit ourselves only to brief summaries of the questions 
considered at each section. 
  ``Research and control of ecological state of the 
environment'' (Yu. A. Zolotov, V. V. Sukhan, and Yu. M. 
Luzhkov). A significant portion of the reports in this section 
was devoted to the scientific fundamentals of the 
chemical-analytical control of the environment, development and 
improvement of systems for ecological monitoring of atmospheric 
and aquatic media, and new approaches to the 
ecological-analytical control of potable, waste, and sea waters. 
The important role of reliability in analytical information in 
deciding ecological problems was underscored. A number of 
reports were devoted to general problems in the analysis of 
entire groups of compounds: pesticides, heavy metals, phenols 
and chlorophenols, nitrates, mercury, arsenic, benzpyrenes, 
petroleum products, chlorinated compounds, and others. Other 
reports threw light on the status of analytical control in a 
number of concrete places, for example the radiational 
arrangements in the Belorus Republic, monitoring in the Komi 
Republic, and dioxines in Baykal. On the whole, most of the 
attention was devoted to water analysis. In one of the basic 
reports (Prof. V. Merts), an overall review was presented on 
indicators for evaluating water quality, which included a 
detailed examination of the indicator for content of 
halogen-containing compounds. In his opinion, the role of 
overall indicators keeps growing with the increasing number of 
substances to which PDK [maximum permissible concentration] 
norms are assigned. The use and development of instrumental 
methods of analysis was covered in reports on gas, liquid, and 
ion chromatography, UV- and IF-spectroscopy, 
chromato-mass-spectrometry, gas sensors, EPR-spectroscopy, 
chemiluminescence, potentiometry, and atom- adsorption 
spectroscopy. However, it became evident from the reports that 
more traditional methods of chemical analysis, such as 
extraction and sorption methods of concentrating and enriching 
initial probes, are widely used. The reports presented 
characterized the broad spectrum of approaches to the problem of 
selecting samples, concentrating them, identifying the 
compositions and making quantitative analyses. Several reports 
were devoted to problems in creating data banks on ecological 
control. 
  ``New waste-free and low waste technologies of chemical 
production'' A. M. Kutepov and G. F. Tereshchenko. Here, a 
number of essentially new approaches were presented on the 
creation of technology for chemical products, particularly: 
approaches to the creation of ecologically clean chemical 
production, and power plants not using mined organic stocks, 
non-traditional chemical reactors based on power facilities 
where the reacting and mass-exchange processes are combined, and 
an examination of organized processes and streams in chemical 
technology and energy-cryotechnology. A great number of reports 
was devoted to the development of effective catalysts and 
catalytic processes for converting methane, for protecting and 
restoring the environment, decontaminating industrial off gases 
under non-stationary conditions, and catalytic reduction of 
nitroaromatic compounds. A number of reports was devoted to 
ecologically safe technology for chemical refining of cellulose, 
enrichment of non-ferrous metal ores, ecological problems of 
chemical-metallurgical processes and the refining of other 
minerals. Important problems in the development of equipment for 
chemical processes were covered in reports on energy-saving 
filtration, membranes, mass exchange, separating equipment and 
the combining of several operations and processes into a single 
technological cycle. Typical applied problems included the 
refining of mineral ores, derivation of metals and salts, 
synthesis of organic substances, polymeric compositions, and 
practically the entire spectrum of chemical products of modern 
technology slanted toward decreasing wastes, saving energy and 
chemicals. Especially interesting was an information-modeling 
system for the development of ecologically clean chemical 
production. 
  ``Ecological problems in functioning of large scale 
industrial and agricultural complexes'' (I. I. Lishtvan and A. 
A. Solovyanov). Reports in this section concerned ecological 
problems involved in the optimization of technological life 
support systems of cities, evaluation of risks as determined by 
newly created systems for predicting extreme ecological 
situations, examination of methods for approaching the 
improvement of ecological situations resulting from 
electroplating production, and rubber products production. Also 
examined were the complex ecological problems associated with 
large scale chemical complexes (Mogilev Production Association, 
``Khimvolokno''), that of an entire region (Tulskaya Oblast), 
and the hydrochemistry of Belorussian rivers. 
  Many reports were devoted to the interaction between 
introducing to agrochemical systems items such as fertilizers, 
growth stimulants, trace elements; the appraisal of 
morphological and agrophysical properties of soils used to raise 
plants and animals; methods for evaluating the dangers of using 
chemical and petroleum-based products and their effects on the 
quality of subterranean waters, the atmosphere, and food 
products. 
  ``Decontamination of industrial wastes and restoration of 
natural systems'' (V. S. Soldatov and K. I. Zamarayev). Reports 
in this section concerned general approaches to the strategy of 
developing methods for cleansing various media from technogenic 
industrial interaction, colloidal-chemical purification methods, 
and features of sorption treatment of water and air using 
natural and synthetic sorbents, (including nitrates and heavy 
metal salts). A large number of reports was devoted to the 
description of concrete technological processes for treating 
water and air using catalytic methods, membrane aeration, 
flotation, low temperature plasma, flame treatment, and other 
methods of all types of chemical products, wastes, and 
materials. Also examined were methods for preparing and the 
properties of various sorption-filtration materials used in 
treating fibers, ion exchangers, ceramic membranes, sorbents 
made of rice, straw, natural and synthetic zeolites, liquid 
membranes, and others. 
  ``Migration and accumulation of chemical, radioactive, and 
biological pollutants in the environment'' (V. N. Kukhar and Ye. 
P. Petryayev). Although the basic trend of reports 
presented at this section bore an organization character and 
included the concepts of the State program RF on rehabilitation 
of the Ural region, migration of radionucleides, their status in 
aqueous media, their distribution in soil and plant cover, 
features of their migrations in aeration of rocks and their 
accumulation in natural waters, a major portion of the material 
referred to the catastrophe at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power 
Station and the study of its aftereffects. Other reports in the 
section dealt with the evaluation of Sr[.sup]90[/] in the 
organisms of residents of Belorus, chromium contamination 
resulting from oil refineries in West Texas, migrations of heavy 
metals in Dnieper river waters, pesticide contamination of 
Belorussian territory, vertical migration of technogenic 
contamination in Southern Ural soils, the ecological state of 
Baykal, and other concrete objects. In several reports problems 
were examined on the ecological-geochemical evaluation of the 
interactions of urbanized territories on river systems, 
accumulation of heavy metals in plants growing in industrial 
zones, geochemistry and ecology of sea water, migration and 
segregation of physical-chemical admixtures in the waters of the 
world ocean, migrations of sulfur, organic pollution, 
phosphorus, and fluorine. 
  ``Problems in ecological education in public education'' (F. 
N. Kaputskiy, P. D. Sarkisov, and G. A. Yagodin). The reports in 
this section dealt with tendencies in the development of 
ecological education in the world, the Belorus Republic, the 
technical vuzes of Russia, secondary schools and universities of 
Switzerland, Germany, and Austria. Doubtless, the work of this 
section deserves separate presentation as a result of the 
striving to create a system of direct ecological education. 
Experience in the useful familiarization of school children with 
control of the environment and food products was gathered at St. 
Petersburg University (``Center for Search and Maintenance of 
Talents''). A number of reports examined problems in the 
pleasure-aesthetic and ecological education of school children, 
integration of ecological knowledge into the system of chemical 
education, preparation of specialist-ecologists in vuzes, 
multi-level systems of active chemical-ecological education, and 
the utilization of search systems to teach one to solve 
ecological problems. 
  ``Medical-chemical problems in ecology'' (A. V. Shabrov, V. 
V. Strelko, and V. A. Pertsev). The reports in this section 
examined problems in the study of the effects of anthropogenic 
environmental factors on the human organism, the presence of any 
connection between the chemical composition and health of 
people, the study of protective mechanisms of the organism 
against the action of technogenic chemical factors, and the 
effects of toxic action of nitrites on mammalian organisms. In 
other reports concrete examples were examined on the connection 
between technogenic interaction and human health in regions of 
biotechnological and petrochemical production, the effects of 
the presence of nitrites, nitrates, lead acetate, the creation 
of several sources for the prophylaxis and treatment of 
poisoning, the use of enzymes for purification and bioindicators 
in analysis. The congress included two round tables: ``Megapolis 
- - problems associated with living in large municipal 
agglomerations,'' and ``Chemistry-Nature-Man.'' The congress 
also included for the first time an exhibit ``Ekokhim-93,'' 
which displayed devices for ecological control, monitoring 
systems, flow diagrams for ecologically safe production of 
chemical products, gas cleansing systems, waste waters, and 
others. The most interesting exhibits were demonstrated by 
institutes of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and its 
affiliates, Beloruss Academy of Sciences, the companies 
``Perkin-Elmer,'' ``Varian,'' ``Shimadzu,'' ``Anatessek,'' ``Ar 
SiMa,'' and the Angar Petroleum Combine. 
  While the congress as whole was well organized, some of the 
shortcomings common to our scientific conferences should be 
noted, such as the lack of space for demonstrations associated 
with the standing reports and their careless makeup. Throughout 
the world, however, standing reports are on a par with oral 
reports. Well presented report themes were listed in 
alphabetical order beginning with the first author's last name, 
and not by subject matter. This seriously inhibits using themes 
as a basis for examining materials of the conference according 
to specific problems. A Federation of Chemical Societies imeni 
D. I. Mendeleyev was formed at the XV Mendeleyev Congress; it 
included the majority of former republican chemical societies of 
the former VKhO [All-Union Chemical Society]. A motion was 
adopted to register the FKhO imeni D. I. Mendeleyev in the 
Belorus republic. Academician I. I. Lishtvan, Belorus Academy of 
Sciences, was elected president, while the administrative and 
organizational work will be carried out by the General 
Secretariat from Minsk. The congress concluded with the adoption 
of a declaration in which attention was directed to need for 
coordination of forces for the purpose of preventing unfavorable 
regional, inter-regional, and global ecological changes 
developing as a result of anthropogenic interaction on nature, 
the major portion of which is related to chemical substances and 
processes. The XV Mendeleyev Congress was a great and important 
event in science. Individual contacts, meetings and discussions 
confirm the need for continuing and restoring broken contacts of 
scientists, regardless of the difficult conditions of existence 
of most of them, especially in Russia. At the congress, the 
conviction was confirmed regarding the primary significance of 
ecological aspects for the existence of humanity and the 
preservation of living means, as well as for the steady 
development of various countries and individuals in health and 
suitable quality of life. Chemistry itself, the chemical 
processes and production of the entire chemical complex, 
developed chemical products and materials are capable of not 
only creating ecological problems, but also of effectively 
solving them to a large degree, while a reasoned and well 
thought out technical policy can prevent them and thereby lower 
ecological stress. 
  N. R. Kosinova, Learned Secretary, Russian Chemical Society 
imeni D. I. Mendeleyev 

