BFN 

<F P=106> [By Joem H. Macaspac] </F>
  [Text] President Ramos took a direct hand in his 
administration's waste management program yesterday and created 
a top-level committee composed of six Cabinet secretaries to 
ensure the protection of the environment and the proper disposal 
of waste materials. 
  At the same time, the Chief Executive disclosed that the 
country received a total of $32.71 million worth of assistance 
from the European Community (EC) for 1994. The money will be 
used on projects that will protect the environment and preserve 
the country's natural resources. 
  The president's move was contained in Memorandum Circular 
(MC) No. 88 which reconstituted the Presidential Task Force on 
Waste Management to ensure effective implementation of its 
various programs and projects. 
  The new memorandum amended MC 39-A issued by then, President 
Corazon C. Aquino on 19 January 1988 which designated the 
Presidential Management Staff as the task force coordinator. 
  Under MC 88, President Ramos designated Environment and 
Natural Resources Secretary Angel Alcala as chairman, with 
Public Works and Highways Secretary Gregorio Vigilar, Health 
Secretary Juan Flavier, Economic Planning Secretary Cielito 
Habito, Trade Secretary Rizalino Navarro and Interior and Local 
Government Secretary Rafael Alunan III as members. 
  The reconstituted task force, the president said, will have 
the following modified functions and responsibilities: 
  -- Ensure the implementation of the Integrated National 
Solid 
Waste Management Systems Framework as approved for adoption 
during the Cabinet meeting on 19 October 1993; 
  -- Ensure the continuous coordination and compliance by 
concerned agencies on the matter as well as on the various 
policies and presidential directives issued on waste management; 
  -- Formulate and recommend to the president all policies 
pertinent to the framework plan; 
  -- Serve as policy and management board for the Project 
Management Office on Solid Waste Management created under 
Administrative Order No. 90; 
  -- Source the financial and technical requirements of the 
plan from appropriate entities; 
  -- Create the necessary Technical Working 
Groups/Committees to assist the task force in the plan's 
implementation; 
  -- Submit quarterly reports to the president; and 
  -- Perform other functions as maybe directed by the 
president. 
  President Ramos tasked the DENR [Department of Environment 
and Natural Resources] to provide technical and administrative 
support to the task force. 
  In a report to the president, National Economic and 
Development Authority (NEDA) Director General Cielito Habito 
said the EC assistance will go to the preservation of natural 
parks, integrated protected areas and industrial pollution 
abatement. 
  Aside from boosting the government's environmental 
protection 
program, the EC assistance for 1994 will enhance institutional 
linkages, investment promotion, agrarian reform implementation 
and coconut processing, Habito reported. 
  The Chief Executive was also informed that a high-level 
business conference is expected to be held in Europe in 
September or October this year. 
  "This will explore possible business opportunities between 
the Philippines and EC countries. Hopefully, the conference 
will bear fruitful results in upgrading Philippine-EC trade 
relations," Habito said. 
  The EC infused a total of $75.37 million in the country last 
year which mostly financed rural development projects in Western 
Samar, Catanduanes, Aurora, Guimaras, Biliran, Bantayan, the 
Camotes and Pitogo. 
  The private sector also received grant financing for a 
packaging center and assistance to the computer software 
industry, which reflected greater private sector access to 
official development assistance," Habito said. 
  Habito also informed the president that the EC has expressed 
interest in initiating regular high level consultations to 
review pipeline projects as well as its ongoing projects. 
  The first consultation might be held this May, he said. 

