Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 16 Jan (EFE) -- Peruvian President Alberto 
Fujimori said today he expects the United States to fulfill the 
pledge it has made to Peru and pay the $105-million contribution 
it has pledged to pay as a member of the Support Group. 
  Fujimori added that he expects "specific results" from the 
United States during the trip that Alexander Watson, assistant 
secretary of state for Latin America, will make to Peru starting 
on 18 January. 
  In statements to the Lima newspaper "EXPRESO," The Peruvian 
president said the United States should display "reciprocity" 
toward Peru, which, he said, has fulfilled the requirements and 
has earned the right to economic support from the friendly 
countries that form the Support Group. 
  The U.S. contribution of $105 million, which was intended, 
along with contributions from five other nations, for the 
recovery of Peru's balance of payments, has not been disbursed 
due to pressure from the U.S. Senate, which believes the human 
rights situation in Peru is not the best. 
  Jorge Camet, Peruvian economy and finance minister, 
confirmed 
recently this circumstance and said the Senate's pressures are 
the result of its "being inadequately informed" about the human 
rights issue in Peru. 
  Fujimori said during the interview that although the United 
States has supported the process whereby Peru was reincorporated 
into the international financial system--from which it had been 
distanced for seven years by the government of former President 
Alan Garcia--it has "not given the money." 
  Fujimori added that Peru is asking the United States to 
fulfill its pledge to the Support Group. 
  The president argued that his country has progressed "much 
more than was expected" in the democratization process, has 
normalized its delayed payments to the international financial 
organizations, and has resolved problems such as the payment of 
a debt contracted by the previous government's nationalization 
of the U.S. "Belco" Oil Company. 
  "I expect specific results. There is no time to continue 
meditating about this," Fujimori said during his interview with 
"EXPRESO" concerning Watson's forthcoming official visit and the 
issues he will discuss with the U.S. official. 
  Various political, legislative, and diplomatic sectors 
believe that such issues as human rights, drug trafficking, and 
the U.S. contribution to the Support Group are the leading 
issues on Watson's agenda. Watson was ambassador to Peru from 
1986 to 1989. 
  Fujimori referred to a recent incident between Peruvian 
Justice Minister Fernando Vega and a commission formed by the 
U.S. State Department and Congress that was in charge of 
evaluating the administration of justice in Peru. 
  Vega had refused to meet with the commission members, 
because 
he felt the expressions used in a letter sent by U.S. Charge 
d'Affaires Charles Brayshaw to request the meeting in question 
were "unacceptable." 
  The Peruvian president justified and supported the justice 
minister's position. "A sovereign country cannot accept the 
terms expressed in the letter," Fujimori told the newspaper. 
  Fujimori said later that the incident does not imply that 
Lima and Washington "are on bad terms" and that "on the 
contrary, there are signs of improvement." 
  Various sources have said the case of the kidnapping and 
murder of nine students and one instructor from the Teachers 
College of Lima, presumably perpetrated by Army members on 18 
July 1992, and the excesses perpetr?ted by the judicial 
administration during the trials of individuals accused of 
terrorism are worrisome issues for the U.S. Administration. 
  Fujimori said during the interview that in legal and 
penitentiary related matters, "Peru has also shown proof of a 
respect for human rights," but he admitted that the case of the 
10 people missing from Teachers College, also known as La 
Cantuta, is a "thorny" issue. 

