Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report signed Yvon Avenel: "Military Tracking Precision </F>
Multiplied Tenfold"] 
  [Text] Military tracking is making progress. Traditional 
radar technologies can now offer decametric precision (at long 
ranges). Radars using conventional video cameras controlled by 
operators or one of the many GPS [global positioning system] 
technologies (differential or with an inertial unit) can reach 
precisions of one meter or even one half meter. This precision 
has just been multiplied by a factor of 10 with the tracking 
system (Master) recently developed by Sfim Industries. This 
system is thus capable of locating and automatically tracking a 
high-speed target at a distance of 1,500 m (for example, an 
anti-tank missile) with a precision of 5 cm in real time (the 
"delay" is two video frames, i.e. 40 ms) and in the region of 1 
cm in deferred time after automatic image analysis. A new 
generation of distance measurement systems currently being 
developed for the DGA [French General Armaments Delegation] 
(footnote 1) (The DGA is to purchase this system for testing 
future sub-munition missiles (of the Bonus-type, developed by 
Intertechniques with Sweden] will make it possible to 
simultaneously pick up 20 targets in real time and accurately 
track the progress of five of them, although in this case there 
will be a slight loss of precision. According to Project 
manager Patrice Huver: "It is not the tracking that is the most 
complex thing to achieve, but the robustness of the processing 
-- you need similarity criteria so that when two targets cross 
over they are not mixed up." Target tracking is ensured by a 
double image-processing technique: contrast analysis (resolution 
is 5 percent) and correlation (for each frame, the movement of 
the target is measured against its last position and is compared 
with its previous trajectory stored in memory). 
<H5>  Benefits of Software </H5>
  This high performance has mostly been made possible by 
developments in the hardware and software of new image 
processing systems which include specific real-time processors, 
and the development of servo-control systems for the turrets 
(footnote 2) (internal model control-type which takes into 
account the modeled behavior of all turret components) that 
contain the various pieces of image acquisition equipment (video 
cameras, infra-red technology, laser range-finder, etc.). 
  In addition to the control and launch tests envisaged by the 
DGA and NATO, the applications of these tracking systems are 
military (firing control for a weapons system), but also 
industrial and medical. Automatic, high-precision tracking 
could be used to produce sensitive land or sea site surveillance 
equipment or to develop equipment for localization or assisting 
large vessels in delicate port maneuvers. Work is said to be 
underway to adapt these systems for use with robots required in 
extreme operating conditions. In medical research, distance 
measuring equipment could be used to monitor or count bacteria 
or viruses viewed in an electron microscope. Other applications 
include high-speed top-of-the-range industrial process control 
and television (for automatic air photography, tracking aircraft 
or missiles, sporting events covered from a helicopter, etc.). 

