BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kuo] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 15 (CNA) -- The Chinese Association 
for Human Rights Thursday [14 April] wrote the United Nations 
Human Rights Commission to call its attention to the March 31 
Qiandao Lake tragedy, in which 24 Taiwan tourists mysteriously 
died, and to the callous handling of the case by the Mainland 
Chinese authorities. 
  Kao Yu-jen, president of the Taipei-based human rights body, 
urged the UN commission to request the mainland authorities 
conduct a full investigation into the tragedy. 
  In his letter to commission Chairman Peter Van Wulfften 
Palthe, Kao said while travel accidents are not uncommon in any 
country, the Qiandao Lake incident was extraordinary, and the 
handling of the incident was inhumane and culpable. 
  All 32 people aboard the ship, including the Taiwan tourists 
and 8 mainland Chinese crew, were burned to death in a small 
room on the ship's lower deck while the boat was touring a 
scenic lake in Zhejiang Province, Kao wrote. 
  Zhejiang authorities conducted autopsies on some bodies 
without relatives' consent, in violation of Mainland Chinese 
law, and all news media were barred from the scene, Kao said. 
  "We are saddened at the loss of so many lives, and we are 
also disappointed at the outright disrespect of human rights and 
dignity on the part of the Chinese authorities in handling the 
case," he said. 
  In another letter to Jakob Moller, chief of the 
Communications Branch under the United Nations Center for Human 
Rights, Kao said people in Taiwan are grieved at the loss of so 
many lives, but they are especially shocked by the culpable and 
incompetent behavior of the Chinese authorities in handling the 
incident. 
  Kao noted that the families were ordered to sign papers 
stating that the death was "accidental," despite the fact that 
investigations into the incident had just begun. 
  Although the Republic of China [ROC] on Taiwan in not a 
member of the United Nations, Kao wrote, Taiwan is certainly a 
member of the international community. He said that people in 
Taiwan want to know the answers to several prominent questions, 
including: 
  1. Why were all 32 victims found in the small, lower deck 
room with only one exit? 
  2. Why didn't the passengers attempt to jump overboard if 
a fire threatened their lives, especially the boat crew, who 
were believed to be good swimmers? 
  3. Why did the communist authorities insist on cremating 
the bodies near the accident site and refuse requests to move 
the remains to nearby Hangzhou for cremation? 
  4. Why were Taiwan reporters barred from the site and 
mainland news coverage heavily screened and edited before 
release? 
  Kao appealed to the UN Human Rights Center to ensure the 
mainland Chinese conduct a full investigation of the case and 
publicize any results. 

