Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Cai Hong: "Private Businesses Play a Subsidiary Role"] </F>
  [Text] China's private sector has made unprecedented 
economic gains during the past two years, according to a poll 
released by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. 
  The sample investigation of 1,432 private enterprises found 
that their economic returns are often better than those of 
collectively- owned firms and State establishments due to 
various reasons. 
  "The survey is a complete nationwide study of private 
businesses because it includes Tibet," said Lu Xueyi, director 
of the Department of Sociology of the academy. 
  Private enterprises in China are defined as those 
established 
with private capital and employing eight or more people. 
  "The private sector has proved to be a subsidiary to the 
other two," said Li Ding, director of the Society of Chinese 
Private Economy. On the other hand, it also turns out to be a 
rival. 
  In Guangdong Province alone, private businesses and the 
self- 
employed paid 1.7 billion yuan ($195 million) in taxes during 
the first half of 1993, sharing 11 per cent of the province's 
revenues. 
  By June of 1993, there were 184,000 registered private firms 
employing 2.9 million workers. The private businesses engaged 
in the service industry numbered 76,000, an increase of 130 per 
cent over the same period in 1992. 
  The growth of the private economy, however, varies from 
region to region in China. 
  East China shares 60 per cent of the nation's private 
economy, leaving 30 to the central region and a shoestring 10 
per cent to the West. 
  According to the State Administration of Industry and 
Commerce, there were 23,800 new registrations of private 
enterprises in 1993, an increase of 70 per cent over the 
previous year. 
  These figures, however, are superficial, since some private 
firms use the names of collectively-run companies, joint 
ventures or the self employed to obtain preferential treatment 
or gain maximum profits . 
  The private firms in the survey had been in business for an 
average of five years and eight months. Their registered 
capital grew by more than 30 per cent in 1992. 
  "The growth rate may plummet to 20 per cent this year as the 
development of the private sector stabilizes," said Dai 
Jianzhong, deputy director of the Department of Sociology of the 
Beijing Academy of Social Sciences. 
  The survey notes that owners of private enterprises are 
usually better off than common salary earners. 
  Every 100 families of private entrepreneurs for example owns 
136 colour TV sets, far more than the average 75 in China's 
cities and towns. 
  The income of private entrepreneurs comes from wages and 
shared bonuses. The annual earnings of an owner of a private 
business on average amounted to nearly 92,000 yuan ($10,600), 
about 20 times higher than an individual salary earner. 
  The survey found that private entrepreneurs spent most of 
their profits expanding their ventures rather than squandering 
them on non-essentials. 
  Slightly more than 12 per cent of the private business 
owners 
in urban areas were technicians before switching to the private 
sector, 22 per cent previously were government workers, 25 per 
cent were rank-and-file workers, and 17 per cent came from 
farming backgrounds. 
  According to the Department of Sociology of the Chinese 
Academy of Social Sciences, 120,000 government workers joined 
the contingent of employees in corporations in 1992 alone. A 
number of them have turned out to be private entrepreneurs. 
  Private entrepreneurs have a higher educational level than 
the average worker in China. Slightly more than 70 per cent of 
them are high school graduates. Nearly 17 per cent have had 
higher education. 
  The reasons for these people's fashionable "xiahai" -- 
risking their fortune by running a business -- differ. 
  More than 56 per cent of them left their former work places 
because "they found it hard to realize their full potential." 
Nearly 20 per cent, however, were "looking forward to making 
more money." 
  One-family-and-two-systems pattern is an operating feature 
in 
working families. When the husband runs a private business, the 
wife usually keeps their relationship with public ownerships -- 
continuing to work in State or collectively-owned institutions. 
  It indicates that they are not yet prepared to expose both 
of 
them to the forces of the market economy. 
  It is interesting, the survey reported, that contact among 
private entrepreneurs is rare. They were likely to make friends 
with government functionaries, enterprise managers and 
technicians. 
  According to the survey, private entrepreneurs spent nearly 
22 per cent of their salary on entertainment, a lifestyle 
different from wage earners. They believe that social 
interaction is integral to their businesses. 
  According to Dai, private entrepreneurs have a "clearer" 
assessment of themselves. 
  Sixty-five per cent of the private entrepreneurs claimed to 
be members of the mainstream, while 30 per cent agreed with the 
statement, "we earned a higher income." Only 5 per cent were 
not satisfied with their "lower" income. 
  Forty-four per cent of those surveyed felt they held higher 
social status than average and 49 per cent believed that they 
enjoyed average social position. Seven per cent complained 
about their low social status . 
  The survey also revealed that 37 per cent of the wealthy, 
powerful, private entrepreneurs were convinced they were playing 
an important part in their communities. 
  Private enterprises existed in China before 1950, when the 
State bought and nationalized all of them. 
  Current private enterprises are very different from the old 
ones in their labour-capital relationship, their operating 
environment, and functions. 
  Dai said he believed private enterprises will ask for more 
participation in their communities when their business ventures 
become increasingly successful. 

