Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Zhang Xia: "Rail Crisis Cries Out for </F>
Flexible Pricing System"] 
  [Text] Current freight rates fail to reflect transport 
costs and this has hurt the rail system's development, says a 
chief economist with the Ministry of Railways. 
  "The speed of development of China's railway system, to a 
great extent, depends on its price reform," said Zhang Youmin 
adding that the slow expansion of railways is hindering the 
nation's economic growth. 
  Rail transport has long been under strict central management 
with the State shipping key materials such as coal and 
disaster-relief supplies. 
  Soon, however, railway authorities will turn 20 percent of 
their freight cars over to commercial shipping. 
  "This is the first step in price reform," Zhang said of the 
plan which leaves the other 80 percent to be used by the State 
under preferential pricing policies. 
  In future, rail transportation of planned goods including 
coal and rice will be minimized, Zhang said. The current 
freight rate, set in 1990 is unable to cover the cost of 
transporting goods. 
  The rail network was in the red last year and this year's 
deficit is expected to reach a record high of 10 billion yuan 
($1.15 billion). 
  In recent years, the government has shifted its efforts to 
build in infrastructure. The railways, however, have received 
too little funding from the limited State coffers. 
  This year, rail authorities face a shortage of 15 billion 
yuan ($1.72 billion) for planned construction projects. 
  There are only 54,000 kilometres of railway in China, or a 
per capita length shorter than a cigarette, in country with a 
land mass of 9.6 million square kilometres. 
  In contrast, India has 60,000 kilometres of railway for a 
country of 2.9 million square kilometres. And the United States 
has more than 200,000 kilometres of railway spanning 9.3 million 
square kilometres China's rail system can cope with only 68 
percent of its total freight needs. And goods transport has 
become a bottleneck in the nation's economic development. 
  East and South China often run short of coal which is 
shipped 
from stockpiles in Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces and Inner 
Mongolia Autonomous Region in the North. 
  Zhang estimates the loss to the economy caused by rail 
gridlock a 500 billion yuan ($57.4 billion) last year. 
  China needs at least 100,000 kilometres of railway to meet 
the requirements of its economic development, Zhang said. 
  Plans call for the railways to be 60,000 kilometres long by 
the end of the Eighth Five-Year Plan in 1995 and during the 
Ninth Five-Year Plan (1996-2000), they are to grow to 70,000 
kilometres. 
<H5>  Collect Funds </H5>
  Various channels should be tapped to collect funds to build 
railways. 
  In Zhejiang Province, for instance a railway connecting 
Jinhua and Wenzhou is being built with funds from Taiwan. 
  However, the fact that China's railways are losing money is 
a 
stumbling block for outside investors. 
  "Only when the rail sector is profitable, can more foreign 
investment be attracted," said Zhang. "Only then, will local 
governments be enthusiastic about building railways at their own 
expenses." 
  The rail network's artificially low price system has also 
resulted in waste, said Zhang. 
  The coastal areas, where chemical industries have 
concentrated for the rich salt resources, now ship salt from 
inland areas such as Qinghai Province because local governments 
use the beaches for fish farms. 
  The profits in the breeding industry far exceed the cost of 
shifting salt from distant provinces. 
  Although this benefits local interests, the burden on the 
railway is increased. Materials such as coal which are crucial 
to the nation's economy cannot be shipped promptly. 
  Freight trains are even used as stores due to low price of 
shipping freight, said Zhang. [sentence as published] 
  Shippers often find it cost-effective to use the railways 
even though other modes of transport might be more direct and 
serve them better. 
  The current rate per kilometre for each ton of freight 
hauled 
by truck is almost 15 times that on the railways. 
  So, while the rail network is overburdened, long-distance 
trucking and shipping is underused. This applies even on the 
Chang Jiang River which has long been regarded as China's 
"golden channel." 
  Tuozitou Port was built on the Chang Jiang in Chongqing, 
Sichuan Province, to ship coal from Guizhou Province and Guangxi 
Zhuang Autonomous Region. 
  Shippers, however, make a detour by rail rather than use the 
river. 
  The port has long lain idle while the Chuanqian rail line, 
connecting Sichuan with Guizhou Province, and the Xiangyu rail 
line, connecting Sichuan Province with Hunan Province, are 
running at capacity. 
  "Rail units should have more flexible pricing systems," 
Zhang 
said. The State, for example, could set "ceiling" and "floor" 
prices for the rail sector. 
  Rail units could then transport freight under contracted 
prices within State limits. 
  Shippers wanting faster service might get priority by paying 
higher prices. 
  "This will also benefit shippers," Zhang said. It now takes 
nearly one month to apply for freight trains and, as a result, 
some shippers' products fail to reach markets in time. 
  "Once a more flexible price system is adopted, shippers will 
get prompt service," said Zhang. 

