BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Liliya Luznetsova] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 5 May -- The extremely poor state of the 
nation's health is indicated by the infant mortality level. 
Over the last three years a constant increase in the number of 
children not surviving their first year of life has been 
observed in Russia. 
  Whereas in 1990 an average of 17.4 babies per 1,000 births 
were dying, the figure became 17.8 in 1992, 18 in 1993, and 19 a 
year later. 
  These figures from the Russian Federation's national report 
to the eighth world conference on the situation of women, which 
is to be held in Beijing next year, are capable of shocking 
medical specialists throughout the world -- which is not 
surprising since in the advanced countries the figure for baby 
mortality in recent years has not only not increased, but has 
indeed decreased and stabilized at a level of five to eight 
deaths of children in their first year per 1,000 births. 
  According to statistics there has been a deterioration too 
in 
the health of babies. Whereas three years ago one in seven 
babies were born ill or became ill, the figure rose in the 
following year to one in six, and a year later it was one in 
five. 
  A steady increase in illness among children below the age of 
14 years has also been noted. Our children are particularly 
suffering from illnesses affecting the organs of the respiratory 
tract, the alimentary tract, and the nervous system. 
  The number of congenital deformities and development defects 
is also growing. The number of such defects per 1,000 people 
has increased by over 28 percent, while the number of tumors in 
children has risen by almost a quarter. 
  The appearance of a "sick generation" of Russians is shown 
by 
the fact that child invalids alone in the country (by WHO 
estimates) now number hundreds of thousands. In the pre-school 
age group, 15-20 percent of children are suffering chronic 
illnesses, and by the time they leave school almost half of the 
children are limited in their choice of vocation by the state of 
their health. Specialists claim that only one tenth of Russian 
schoolchildren are in practice healthy. 

