BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Valentin Pavlov] </F>
  [Text] Barnaul May 13 TASS -- Residents in the Altay 
territory were subjected to radiation from 58 explosions between 
1949 and 1990, including the first thermonuclear weapon test in 
August 1953, said speakers at the three-day session of the 
Scientific Council in Barnaul on the appraisal of Semipalatinsk 
explosions aftermaths on the Altay territory population. 
  Results of investigations confirm that the radioactive 
fallout of nuclear detonations at the Semipalatinsk proving 
ground covered nearly the entire Altay territory. People 
received doses on the verge of radiation injury in some areas. 
  Over a third of population living in fallout areas died in 
the first five-seven years after the 1949 explosion. A new wave 
of oncological diseases, hemopathies, diseases of hematogenetic 
organs and genetic mutations is now observed when the third 
generation of radiated people has become child-bearing. 
  These and other facts from the history of Soviet nuclear 
testing were revealed at the above-mentioned session which ended 
its work on Friday. It was attended by scientists from nearly 
60 research institutions. 
  Physicists, chemists, biologists, doctors and sociologists 
discussed the results of last year's research work and progress 
in implementing the "Polygon" comprehensive programme in the 
Altay territory, providing for urgent measures to overcome 
aftermaths of nuclear explosions, to improve the ecological 
situation and people's health as well as to give a boost to 
social and economic development of afflicted villages. 
  The session mapped out guidelines for further research. 
Valentin Koptyug, president of the Siberian branch of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences, pointed to the great importance for 
the international scientific community of massive medical 
checkup of irradiated people, which was carried in the Altay 
territory for the first time in the world. 
  According to scientists, this session of "the programme on 
distant radiation aftereffects of nuclear tests at the 
Semipalatinsk proving ground on the Altay territory population" 
(official name of the session) has also become an important 
stage in preparations for an international conference on the 
"radtest" (radiation test) programme to be held in the Altay 
territory next September. 

