Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In its government platform for the 20 March 
elections, the coalition comprising Democratic Convergence [CD], 
the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front [FMLN], and the 
National Revolutionary Movement [MNR] promises to ensure an 
orderly transition to a new stage of historic development in 
terms of democracy, economic growth, and social justice. 
  The program, which is entitled "A Proposal for Dialogue," 
includes the following areas: 
<H5>  Democratization </H5>
  The coalition proposes the free organization and constant 
participation of the people in state decisions, the 
strengthening of political pluralism, and an electoral system 
that guarantees clean elections. 
  The coalition also recommends granting autonomy to 
government 
branches; reforming the legislative branch; reforming the 
judicial system; banning illegal arrests, home searches, and 
espionage; and eradicating foundations of organized crime. 
  The coalition promises to guarantee freedom of worship and 
improve government relations with all churches; establish a 
women's ministry and a commission for female attorneys to repeal 
discriminatory laws and advance women in public positions; and 
fight discrimination against ethnic groups, as well as combat 
discrimination against the disabled and the elderly. 
<H5>  New Form of Governing </H5>
  The coalition offers to include all sectors in the 
decisionmaking process to prevent the unilateral imposition of 
its policies, as well as to seek creative contributions from 
private enterprise, workers, and local communities. 
  It pledges to fight crime and the institutional impunity 
that 
protects organized crime and corruption. It promises to respect 
freedom of expression and private property. 
  It pledges to settle accounts regarding public finances and 
to eliminate corruption, to transfer resources and 
decisionmaking power to the municipalities, and to modernize 
public administration. 
  The coalition offers to guarantee Salvadorans the right to 
air, water, and life [al aire, al agua y a la vida]; to promote 
a culture of peace; and to abide by the constitutional mandate 
to promote education for all. 
<H5>  Security for the People </H5>
  The coalition promises to counter organized crime in its 
first year of government, while also controlling corruption 
among public officials. 
  The coalition will transform the Civilian National Police 
into a modern, professional, civilian-led institution with new 
values and respect for human rights. 
  It promises to give policemen a career marked by dignity and 
professionalism. 
  It offers to re-collect combat weapons that remain in the 
hands of civilians and to enforce strict control of firearms in 
terms of both individuals and groups. 
  It offers to guarantee compensation and programs to 
reintegrate National Police officers into civilian life. 
  Productive Transformation for Human Development 
  The coalition's general objectives include fair and 
sustainable economic development, as well as an organized 
campaign to fight poverty and promote social development and 
overall democratization. 
  The basic principles are the participation and integration 
of 
the masses in the socioeconomic development plan, along with the 
development of new economic forces. 
  The coalition pledges to develop a market economy combined 
with government actions that promote and activate efficient 
distributive, regulatory, and corrective policies. It also 
commits itself to the democratization, decentralization, 
reorganization, and modernization of the state. 
  The coalition proposes an economic policy based on genuine 
competitiveness, equality, and intersectorial integration. 
  The coalition endorses the creation of an atmosphere of 
stability and trust by way of a social pact. To promote the 
practice of reaching a consensus among workers; large-, medium-, 
and small-scale private enterprises; cooperatives; communities; 
and nongovernmental organizations [NGO's]. 
  It promises to fight hunger and malnutrition and overcome 
food shortages to increase the people's productivity. It also 
promises to support, guarantee, and protect free competition and 
consumer's rights. 
<H5>  Human Development </H5>
  The coalition plans to create a national health system to 
cover the entire population -- one that caters to high-risk 
groups on a priority basis; places emphasis on prevention; 
decentralizes health care services by supporting local 
facilities; controls the cost of pharmaceuticals to give the 
people access to affordable medicine; and offers fair wages, 
promotions based on merit, and training to health care workers. 
  It promises to review academic programs, to evaluate the 
objectives of the educational system, to provide more funds, to 
train teachers and provide incentives for teachers in rural 
areas; and to decentralize the educational administration. It 
also intends to create a national cultural and art fund, as well 
as make the National Commission for Art and Culture an 
autonomous organization with ministerial rank. 
  It plans to approve the sports law and to create a Ministry 
of Culture, Sports, and Recreation. 
  The coalition promises to guarantee the reintegration of 
former combatants into productive life. 
<H5>  Environment </H5>
  The coalition promises to earmark funding for environmental 
rescue projects, financially support the NGO's, promulgate a 
general law on the environment, and include environmental 
education in the national educational system. It also promises 
to protect water, forest, and clean air resources in urban areas 
and to take steps to prevent pollution and poisoning caused by 
agricultural chemicals and industrial wastes. 
<H5>  Salvadorans Overseas </H5>
  The coalition intends to seek an extension of the program 
for 
deferred mandatory departures from the United States until after 
31 December 1994, to create a "Commission for Salvadoran 
Immigrants," and to sponsor programs that encourage citizens 
living overseas to invest in El Salvador. 
<H5>  Foreign Policy </H5>
  The coalition promises to sponsor the Central American 
integration process; to employ means of financial and technical 
cooperation with foreign governments; to establish bilateral 
relations with all countries of the world, particularly with the 
rest of Latin America and the Caribbean nations. 
  It also promises to gradually open Salvadoran markets, to 
strengthen domestic industry, and to revitalize the country's 
participation in international forums such as the UN and OAS. 
It also vows to review past efforts to enable the consultative 
group created by the Chapultepec Accords to increase its 
cooperation in rebuilding the nation. 
  It promises to implement a policy to defend Salvadoran 
residents in territories transferred to Honduras, to struggle 
against drug trafficking, to professionalize the diplomatic 
corps, and to seek better conditions for negotiations with the 
North. 

