BFN 

<F P=106>   [Parentheses in third take as published] </F>
  [Editorial report] The following review of the 6 May issue 
of Cairo AL-SHA'B summarizes articles that are Islamic in nature. 
<H5>  CONTENTS: </H5>
  1. Islamists Expected To Win Lawyers Association Elections 
  2. Students Demonstrate Against Israeli-PLO Agreement 
  3. 'Abd-al-Rahman Denies Remarks Attributed to Him 
  4. Media Treatment of Religion Criticized 
  5. Labor Party Officials Visit Detained Preachers 
  6. Court Rules Against Dismissal of Veiled Teachers 
  7. Labor Unions Demand Release of Detained Preacher 
  8. Yemeni Islamic Unification Party Leader Interviewed 
  9. Mufti's Thesis on Jews Reviewed 
  10. Democratic Experiment in Jordan Reviewed 
  11. Attacks on Moderate Islamists Criticized 
  12. Report Details State of Confrontation with Islamic 
Group 
<H5>  ISLAMISTS EXPECTED TO WIN LAWYERS ASSOCIATION ELECTIONS </H5>
  A 100-word report on page 1 by Khalid Yunis says that 
elections for the Lawyers Association branch in al-Jizah will be 
held on Sunday [8 May] and that the competition is mainly 
between "the Islamic Trend List, which includes Ahmad Rabi' 
Ghazali, Mahir Ghurab, Shawqi Dawud, and Fawzi al-Jazzar, and 
the Patriotic List." He adds that the Islamists are expected to 
win. 
<H5>  STUDENTS DEMONSTRATE AGAINST ISRAELI-PLO AGREEMENT </H5>
  A 210-word report on pages 1 and 7 by Salah al-Nahif and 
'Abd-al-Hayy Muhammad details the demonstrations staged by the 
Cairo University students on 4 May to protest the signing of the 
Israeli-Palestinian agreement. The report says the students 
chanted anti-Zionist slogans such as "Kheyber Jews, Muhammad's 
army will return" and "Islamic, Islamic, Palestine is Islamic." 
The report adds that the Islamic trend in the university issued 
a statement in which "it denounced the agreement and noted that 
it includes secret clauses according to which the PLO pledges to 
stop all the anti-Israel media campaigns and to liquidate any 
political or military campaign by the Palestinian opposition 
that aims to destroy Israel. The PLO also pledged to protect 
the lives of Israeli citizens and is not opposed to the building 
of Jewish settlements." The statement is cited stressing that 
the 'ulemas of the Islamic nation have unanimously decreed that 
religion does not allow peace [al-sulh] with the Jews. The 
statement is quoted as asking: "Do we say that the Koran is 
wrong and listen to the scared capitulationists?" It is also 
said to have highlighted the "need to declare jihad to liberate 
Palestine's territories and the captured al-Aqsa Mosque." 
<H5>  'ABD-AL-RAHMAN DENIES REMARKS ATTRIBUTED TO HIM </H5>
  An unattributed 130-word report on page 7 headlined "'Umar 
'Abd-al-Rahman denies what has been attributed to him" says: 
"Dr. 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman has denied statements attributed to 
him by AL-AHRAR, which is edited by Wahid Ghazi. In a telephone 
contact, he said that what was attributed to him was pure 
fabrication. He added that an interview by 'Adil 'Abd-al-Baqi 
and the lies and fabrications it contained do not even merit 
comment. Muntasir al-Zayyat, the legal representative of the 
Islamic groups, said that what the aforementioned paper reported 
never happened, that no one from the weekly AL-AHRAR contacted 
Dr. 'Abd-al-Rahman, and that 'Abd-al-Rahman spoke to none of the 
paper's correspondents." 
<H5>  MEDIA TREATMENT OF RELIGION CRITICIZED </H5>
  A 500-word article by Muhammad Ibrahim Mabruk on page 6 
deals 
with the way Egypt's television and media are dealing with the 
issue of terrorism and extremism. Asking what is happening in 
Egyptian television and media, he says: "They are confronting 
terrorism and bullets by making people despise religion and by 
spreading licentiousness and debauchery. They are confronting 
terrorism by throwing themselves more into the lap of the 
secularists. If al-Azhar defends the tenets of Islam against 
the secularist onslaught, then it is called extremist and is 
accused of practicing ecclesiastical hegemony and supporting 
terrorists. But the communists and atheists in general have the 
right to say whatever they like about Islam and its followers in 
the name of freedom of thought and interpretation." The writer 
adds that both the Islamists and the secularists know what they 
want and the victim is the people, which "has been forced or 
tempted to sell all its spiritual values and replace them with 
promised material temptations, which, it soon finds out, are 
false and in the meantime it has lost both spiritual values and 
material possessions." The writer then says that it is 
difficult for a people in such a condition to differentiate 
between what is right and wrong. Hence the secularists are hard 
at work to destroy the people's religious beliefs, which are 
based on Islamic values and concepts and represented by al-Azhar 
and Islam's imams. Thus, the writer adds, a neutral Islamic 
television is presented that does not mean or accept anything 
but "does not conflict with secularism, communism, and 
licentiousness. A day might come when someone will tell us that 
Islam does not conflict with overt blasphemy." The writer 
concludes by wondering whether the regime will respond to the 
"secularists' demands for estrangement between it and whatever 
is Islamic. Or will it reassess how far from the true Islamic 
tenets it has gone?" 

<H5>    LABOR PARTY OFFICIALS VISIT DETAINED PREACHERS </H5>
  An unattributed 100-word report on page 7 says that Labor 
Party officials 'Abd-al-Hamid Barakat, Naji al-Shihabi, and 
Muhammad Ibrahim visited detained Islamic preacher Shaykh 
Muhammad al-Sharif and party member 'Abd-al-Rahman Bin-Lutfi. 
The visitors conveyed the party leaders' greetings to the two 
prisoners for their part in serving Islamic propagation. The 
report says that the two were imprisoned for their propagation 
work through the Labor Party's cultural and religious seminars. 
The party leaders, it adds, have appealed to the interior 
minister to release them. 
<H5>  COURT RULES AGAINST DISMISSAL OF VEILED TEACHERS </H5>
  An unattributed 350-word report on page 7 details the ruling 
of the Administrative Court that the education minister has no 
right to dismiss women teachers who wear the veil. The court 
said in its ruling that "the veil is not banned either by 
religious shari'ah or by the law" and therefore the veil remains 
part of "personal freedom" and should not be banned. A ban 
"would infringe on personal freedom to dress and would restrict 
religious freedom." 
<H5>  LABOR UNIONS DEMAND RELEASE OF DETAINED PREACHER </H5>
  An unattributed 100-word report on page 7 says that the 
coordination committee of vocational labor unions in Alexandria 
has demanded the release of Islamic preacher Shaykh Wajdi 
Ghunaym, who was "arrested four times in a short period and 
acquitted after each arrest." The committee said that it will 
organize a sit-in at a date to be announced to protest his 
continuing detention. 
<H5>  YEMENI ISLAMIC UNIFICATION PARTY LEADER INTERVIEWED </H5>
  The paper publishes on page 8 a 1,800-word interview with 
Ibrahim al-Wazir, secretary general of the Islamic Unification 
and Action Movement in Yemen, by Muna Yasin, in which al-Wazir 
views the causes of the current crisis and fighting, the 
vagueness of the U.S. stance on Yemen's unity, the 
assassinations that preceded the fighting, and his party. 
<H5>  MUFTI'S THESIS ON JEWS REVIEWED </H5>
  A 3,500-word article on page 9 by Dr. Mahmud Himayah, 
identified as head of the Propagation Department at the College 
of Religion in Asyut, reviews the doctorate thesis of Mufti of 
the Republic Muhammad Sayyid Tantawi that earned him a doctorate 
from Al-Azhar University and was published as a 1,000-page book. 
The thesis, he writes, is a historic review of the Jews and 
"their wiles, schemes, and evil traits," particularly during the 
time of Prophet Muhammad. The book quotes extensively from the 
Koran and from Islam's early history to detail how the Jews 
schemed and plotted against the prophet and even tried to kill 
him. The writer says that "the odd thing is that this valuable 
thesis has not been published as widely as it deserves, despite 
the scientific facts it contains, which expose the danger that 
the Jews pose to the world and their schemes to control the 
world and destroy values and morals." 
<H5>  DEMOCRATIC EXPERIMENT IN JORDAN REVIEWED </H5>
  A first report from Jordan by Ashraf Khalil appears on page 
8. The 1,700-word report starts by reviewing the birth of 
democracy in Jordan in April 1989 and how the Islamic trend won 
in the first elections. It then moves to January 1993, when a 
decree was issued legalizing the formation of political parties, 
the most prominent of which is the Islamic Action Front Party, 
which is a coalition of the Islamic forces in Jordan. The 
reporter then interviews some of the leading Islamic figures on 
the Islamist stance on negotiations with Israel and other 
issues. The reporter then views the students movement in Jordan. 
<H5>  ATTACKS ON MODERATE ISLAMISTS CRITICIZED </H5>
  A 400-word article by businessman 'Ali Husni Rif'at on page 
9 
criticizes the campaign against moderate Islamic thinkers and 
writers, such as Fahmi Huwaydi. He says that the attacks on him 
are superfluous and do not deal with the substance of the issues 
being discussed by the thinker. He adds: "Are these gentlemen 
not content with their success and incitement against Huwaydi, 
which led to the disappearance of his calm articles, which 
hundreds of thousands waited to read in AL-AHRAM every Tuesday? 
Are they not content with this? Are they therefore continuing 
their vicious attacks, hoping, God forbid, to morally 
assassinate this man?" 

<H5>    REPORT DETAILS STATE OF CONFRONTATION WITH ISLAMIC GROUP </H5>
  A 2,000-word report by Jamal Imbabi on page 2 details a 
week-long visit he made to Asyut and nearby villages and towns 
to investigate the roots of the confrontations between the 
Islamic Group [IG] and the security forces and the effects this 
is having on the people and life there. He starts by saying 
that fear and anxiety prevail in Asyut despite the apparent 
calm. He then goes on to give figures on the victims of these 
confrontations. He says: "A quick reading of the statistics 
for the period between July 1992 and 1 September 1993 reflects 
the extent of the tragedy. During that period, (43) policemen 
were killed, including (seven) officers while (53) young members 
of the IG were killed. The figures also show that during the 
period between September 1992 and April 1993, that is, in just 
(seven) months, (14) policemen and (31) IG members became 
victims while the number of victims from among innocent citizens 
reached (42), killed by the bullets of the IG or the police. 
The same statistics show that (99) were wounded during this 
period, including (44 policemen), (8) IG members, and (47) 
citizens." He then adds: "It became clear during my stay that 
the IG is the strongest group in Asyut and its influence there 
is evident, especially among the young." 
  The reporter then deals with the emergence of the IG and 
with 
the speed with which it spread among the people, citing several 
local people from Asyut, Dayrut, and other towns and villages. 
A tribal chief from Dayrut, Haj Muhammad 'Uthman al-Kilani, 
says: "In the absence of an effective state role, these young 
men acted as if they were the state. They were successful in 
extending many services on every level and their leaders were 
capable. People trusted them to the extent that conciliation 
between Muslim and Christian families was not effected through 
the police but through them." The tribal leader and the other 
figures interviewed blame the government, accusing it of 
committing grave violations, not against these young ones alone, 
but against all the people. Television, for example, spared no 
effort to attack Islam and Muslim scholars were notable by their 
absence. 
  The people cited in the report agree that both the IG and 
the 
police were at fault for the excesses. 
  The reporter then says that "as the confrontation is 
escalating and Asyut has been turned into a military barracks, 
where its streets are patrolled by armored vehicles carrying 
soldiers with their weapons ready in a fear-inspiring scene, the 
government is imposing a curfew on the most tense areas. 
Hundreds of suspects are brought in daily to the police 
stations and this has made the citizens fear going out at night. 
Even shops have closed during the curfews [as published] and 
this has affected trade and work. Opening up shop, going to the 
market, or even going to school has become subject to the whim 
of the officer in charge." 
  But Major General Sa'd al-Jammal, the assistant security 
director, tells the reporter that the security organ "is dealing 
with terrorism in Asyut in a planned and tactical way and does 
not follow the policy of collective punishment. If this 
happened it was not intentional. The security forces have drawn 
up a complete plan to eliminate terrorist operations and its 
results will appear soon, after coordinating with the 
governorates neighboring Asyut." On the nature of this plan, 
al-Jammal says: "It is based on raids of all the terrorist dens 
across the governorate to capture the terrorists." Another 
security source reveals: "A strategic plan has been drawn up 
with the help of a high-level team from the Interior Ministry to 
set up an operations room that will follow a different method in 
dealing with the groups so as to capture them before incidents, 
after identifying them, their escape routes, and movements. 
This plan also depends on eliminating the weapons trade and 
financing and on cutting off these groups' contacts with other 
governorates and with their imprisoned leaders." 
  The reporter cites an unidentified IG member in Asyut as 
accusing the police "of starting the confrontation and of 
deciding to liquidate the group. He said they did so in 
accordance with instructions received from high-level figures in 
the West, which made it a condition that the regime should 
liquidate the IG as part of a general liquidation of the Islamic 
trend, which the West calls Islamic fundamentalism. The West, 
led by the United States, linked continuing aid and economic 
assistance to Egypt with the elimination of the Islamic trend 
and set a period of two years for doing so, from early January 
1993 until the end of 1994." He then adds: "For this reason, 
the coming days will witness the most atrocious and ugliest 
campaign to liquidate the IG in all its areas. The 
confrontation will spread from Asyut to other places, especially 
Suhaj and Al-Minya." When asked whether the confrontations will 
move to other areas, the unidentified IG member says: "The 
state, not us, will start the campaign. Press reports about the 
arrest of all the IG members are not true. There are only 
random arrests. Arrested individuals do not belong to the IG. 
They were detained as suspects." When confronted with the IG's 
excesses, he said: "I stress to you that only 10 percent of the 
complaints concern the excesses. I admit that the IG members 
are not angels. There are some excesses." 

