CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by reporter Zhang Yijun [1728 4135 0193]: </F>
"Tianhuangping Power Station To Import Primary Equipment, Li 
Peng Attends Signing Ceremony and Meets With Chinese and Foreign 
Manufacturers"] 
  [Text] Contracts for importing the primary equipment for 
Tianhuangping pumped-storage power station, a World Bank loan 
project for which the China Technology International Bidding 
Company has purchasing responsibility, were signed on 15 October 
1993 in Beijing. State Council Premier Li Peng and others 
attended the signing ceremony and met with representatives of 
the Chinese and foreign manufacturers involved in the 
cooperation. 
  Li Peng said that the development of electric power in China 
is now facing two problems. One is a power shortage, and the 
other is a less than rational structure of hydropower and 
thermal power, especially the shortage of hydropower regulation 
in economically developed regions. There are still great 
development prospects for pumped-storage power stations in China. 
  Tianhuangping pumped-storage power station, located in Anji 
County, Zhejiang, is China's third large pumped-storage power 
station following the Guangzhou pumped-storage power station and 
the Shisanling pumped-storage power station. Its reversible 
mixed-flow pumped-storage generators with a total capacity of 
1,800MW make it the largest scale and highest head 
pumped-storage power station in China at the present time. 
  The primary equipment for Tianhuangping pumped-storage power 
station is being purchased through international competitive 
bidding arrangements through the China Technology International 
Bidding Company under the China Technology Import/Export 
Corporation. A manufacturing group composed of companies from 
Norway, Canada, and Austria won the bidding. 
  Evidently, construction of the power station project will be 
completed in the year 2000. After going into operation, its 
primary responsibility will be to perform peak regulation, 
frequency regulation, phase regulation, accident reserve, and 
other roles in the East China Power Grid. Its completion will 
play a major role in improving the power supply situation in the 
east China region and spurring economic development in the 
region. 

