BFN 

  [Text] Bangkok -- The Money Laundering Law Drafting 
Committee revealed the increase in money laundering through the 
stock market. Money launderers are reported to have purchased 
stocks to take over businesses. Such a practice is prevalent in 
foreign countries and is now spreading in the Thai stock market. 
Preventive measures are being worked out to authorize the 
information management committee to examine financial records of 
possible launderers and keep track of stock transactions. 
  Wiraphong Bunyophat, director of the Economic Crime 
Information Center and a member of the Money Laundering Law 
Drafting Committee, disclosed that a seminar on financial 
institutes' perception of money laundering law will be held at 
the Faculty of Law of Chulalongkon University on 29 June. 
  The seminar will hear views and comments on the legislation 
from various financial institutes such as the Securities 
Exchange of Thailand, Office of Securities Exchange Commission, 
commercial banks, and central bank. 
  At the initial stage, the money laundering law will focus 
only on the money earned from narcotic trafficking to ensure its 
quick passage. It will take time if the law will be designed to 
deal with incomes from other illicit activities. In most cases, 
money launderers will deposit their money in different banks 
under the names of different persons which makes it difficult 
for official examination. 
  The committee, therefore, proposed the change in the 
regulations governing opening of bank accounts so that 
depositors are required to show their citizen identification 
cards and evidence to prove that the money is theirs. 
Meanwhile, most commercial banks are very cooperative with 
authorities in checking deposit accounts. However, a specific 
law is needed to facilitate the operation. 
  It is rather difficult to launder dirty money through the 
national bank because the latter has an effective examination 
system. 
  The stock market is the second place after commercial banks 
for money laundering. More launderers are believed to turn to 
the stock market to launder their money. As more companies 
become public companies, money launderers can buy as much stock 
as they want. In some cases, they even take over businesses. 
  Wiraphong noted: "Such a practice is prevalent in foreign 
countries, where dirty money is used to buy public companies in 
the stock market. This is now taking place on the Thai stock 
market, so preventive measures must be worked out." 
  Commenting on the preventive measures, Wiraphong said that 
the procedure now being used by commercial banks might be 
applicable. For instance, stock buyers and sellers are required 
to open accounts, and the committee is authorized to check their 
financial status at various financial institutes. No one is 
allowed to open an account on behalf of others. 
  In this regard, Pricha Suwannathat is working on the clause 
on the prevention of money laundering through financial 
institutes. 
  So far, the money laundering through stock buying and 
selling 
is being widely practiced in the northern part of Thailand. 
Money earned from narcotics trafficking is used to buy stocks 
at trading floors in the northern provinces. There is no law 
permitting the authorities to examine the source of the money. 

