Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Michael J. Inacker: "NATO Official Criticizes </F>
Bonn's Arms Policy"] 
  [Text] A high-ranking member of the German NATO mission in 
Brussels severely criticized the self-restraint of German arms 
policy, particularly as it is being exercised by the Foreign 
Office. 
  In his internal annual report for 1993, Elmer Rauch, 
official 
of the German NATO mission and in charge of arms policy and arms 
cooperation, notes Germany's isolation in important arms and 
security policy questions. Due to the restrictive stance 
concerning arms exports prescribed by the Foreign Office, 
Germany is "degrading" herself "as a second class alliance 
partner and European." 
  Rauch writes further that "the cultivation of an ethical 
mentality of rigorism on arms exports" makes Germany "incapable 
of an arms and cooperation policy in the EU [European Union], 
WEU [Western European Union], and NATO" and represents "the 
opposite of a policy of responsibility by a sovereign state." 
Evidently, the Kinkel ministry neglects to check whether Bonn's 
European and alliance capability suffers thereby. "In Bonn the 
watch on the No stands firm and true! [A pun on a German song, 
`The Watch on the Rhine'] Expedient internal and party policy 
considerations are projected externally and passed off as 
foreign policy or foreign trade policy, " the report states. 
  While other nations, such as Great Britain and France, are 
strengthening their arms technology capabilities, the German 
arms industry will further lose substance due to the restriction 
of competitive opportunities on the world market and the deep 
cuts in the defense budget. According to internal computations, 
one must postulate "that by the end of next year in France and 
Great Britain more workers will be employed in arms export jobs 
than will still exist in the entire German arms industry." 
  In Germany's arms industry, only about 30 percent of 1989 
production plants and 10 percent of 1989 production capacities 
will still exist by 1995. If this development continues, says 
the report in a different passage, "the German arms industry 
will become an extended workbench for a formally privatized, yet 
state-directed French arms industry, and a largely 
transatlantic-oriented British one." 
  Especially in the ministries for external affairs and trade, 
headed by the FDP [Free Democratic Party], a realistic attitude 
promoting German economic interests encounters opposition. Last 
fall, after talks by arms firms with the foreign and economics 
ministers, a task force on "general basic export conditions" was 
established in which Rauch, as an expert on arms export policy, 
was also a member with the approval of the defense ministry. On 
26 November of last year, when the task force wanted to hand a 
memorandum to the head of the economics department of the 
Foreign Office, Rauch as the official representative of the 
German arms director at NATO was denied participation in the 
meeting. 
  At the same time, the Foreign Office is unable to refute 
with 
facts the myths of an allegedly unscrupulous German export 
policy. It is disquieting "with how much insincerity and 
hypocrisy our allies carry out state-sanctioned illegal arms 
exports, while as a diversion, Germany is presented as the 
whipping boy, only because a few of our criminal types, who 
incidentally have nothing to do with the arms industry, cannot 
restrain their morbidly exaggerated pursuit of profit," writes 
Rauch. 
  In conclusion, the German official writes that the German 
political class nurtures a "comfortable narrowing of the field 
of vision which a people in the geopolitical center of the 
continent cannot afford, and hence should not accept being 
dictated to by friends in a peripheral location. From the 
worm's-eye view of the Bonn basin, whoever directs his gaze 
one-eyed and laboriously beyond the Rhenisch slate mountains 
toward Paris, is far from having a European vision. He does not 
even have the beginnings of an idea of the dimensions of an arms 
and defense cooperation policy, which could do its bit to secure 
freedom, peace and prosperity for the 80 million people in the 
heart of Europe in the coming century, too." 

