CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by R.F. Muratov, deputy prime minister of the </F>
Republic of Tatarstan, at the 19th session of the Republic of 
Tatarstan Supreme Soviet on 18 April 1994: "On the Foreign 
Economic Activities of the Republic of Tatarstan in 1993 and the 
Paths of Its Development in 1994"] 
  [Text] Esteemed people's deputies! In 1993, our foreign 
economic activities proceeded under quite difficult conditions. 
Pricing discrepancies in conjunction with the introduction of 
national currencies by a number of CIS countries were acutely 
felt. The introduction of various customs restrictions and new 
export and import tariffs posed a serious problem. The situation 
was complicated by continuing crisis processes in the economies 
of Russia and Tatarstan. Nonetheless, there were conspicuous 
changes in the foreign economic activities of the republic. The 
volume of foreign trade of the enterprises and organizations of 
the republic came to $1.7548 billion, which was 2.7 times more 
than in 1992. A number of factors were responsible for the 
increase in the volume of foreign trade, including an increase 
in the number of participants in foreign economic relations, of 
whom there were 1,340. The 1993 exports came to $1.0166 billion, 
of which $760.8 million was through direct relations. In terms 
of the sectoral structure of exports, changes occurred in the 
direction of increasing the proportion of raw and other 
materials from 79 percent in 1991 to 89 percent in 1993. The 
proportion of machinery and equipment declined accordingly from 
20 percent in 1991 to 10 percent in 1993. Last year, the 
enterprises and organizations of the republic imported products 
worth $738.2 million, of which $188.2 million was through direct 
relations. 
  In the three and a half months of 1994, 10 enterprises with 
the participation of foreign investors were registered. The 
total number of such enterprises reached 127 as of 15 April 
1994. Thirty-three representatives of companies from America, 
England, France, Germany, and Austria have been accredited. 
  The conclusion of a treaty between the Russian Federation 
and 
the Republic of Tatarstan, as well as an agreement between them 
on the delimitation of powers in the area of foreign economic 
relations have fundamental [word illegible] for our foreign 
economic activities. The treaty has clearly laid down the right 
of the republic to independent foreign economic activities. The 
treaty and the agreement impart the necessary certainty to the 
regulation of foreign economic activities, the jurisdiction of 
the parties, their powers, and their responsibility. 
  Tatarstan is free to sign commercial and economic agreements 
with foreign states, as well as foreign partners. At the same 
time, a mechanism for the implementation of these important 
documents is lacking at present, and an enormous effort to 
develop it lies ahead. 
  The speaker went on to note that a number of projects and 
programs in the area of foreign economic activities have now 
been developed, in particular, the draft of an incentive program 
for industrial exports from Tatarstan and a draft program for 
attracting foreign investment to the republic. 
  Much attention has been paid to integrating the republic 
into 
the existing system of international economic relations. 
Forty-four projects to create new production facilities and to 
introduce new technologies have been selected. Standard forms 
for substantiating investment projects have been developed; a 
computer database for these projects has been developed; 
patterns for the receipt of loans from foreign banks and 
financial corporations to be guaranteed by the Republic of 
Tatarstan government have been specified. 
  At the same time, the raising of foreign capital is hampered 
for two principal reasons. First of all, we have yet to complete 
working with the federal government on defining independence in 
the area of setting quotas and issuing licenses for products 
delivered for exports, as well as in the area of export and 
import duties. At this point, R.F. Muratov stressed that for us 
to be able to make a clearer determination as to our prospects, 
we must agree that these quotas, if there are such, should be 
established for a term of no less than five years. At the same 
time, it is necessary for the republic to agree with the federal 
government that the government of the republic will set export 
and import customs tariffs independently within the concept of a 
national program in which priority directions for the 
development of the economy will be mapped out. 
  If we want to attract foreign investment, we must say to 
what 
degree we can guarantee its return so that the excessively 
frequent change in the decisions of the federal government 
related to export and import tariffs will not eliminate the 
opportunity to make long-term projections of investment in the 
economy of Tatarstan. 
  The second reason is related to issues of an internal 
nature. 
This is primarily the issue of ownership, further on, the issue 
of the finance and credit policy of the republic, and only after 
that the establishment of market-economy institutions. 
  At present, the issue of ownership is the bone of 
contention, 
beginning with the ownership of land. Uncertainty in this area 
may hamper the process of foreign capital investment. It should 
also be clearly perceived that the financial and credit status 
of the republic is such that it cannot cure the ailing economy. 
It is necessary to rationally use finance and credit within the 
circulation of the ruble itself by revealing internal reserves. 
In the process, it is also necessary to take into account [word 
illegible] funds that are yet to be received during 1994 from 
our enterprises in the form of taxes. At present, unconventional 
decisions are needed with regard to the use of credit from the 
Central Bank of Russia and federal credit as a whole. 
  R.F. Muratov went on to say that the issues of creating 
market institutions are becoming increasingly current. If such 
are active in some quarter it is necessary to support them so 
that they will be able to work with foreigners directly. If we 
want to integrate into the world economy, and we do wish to do 
this, we should definitely accept the rules of the game of those 
who already operate in this sphere. They demand that we create a 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, an agricultural chamber, 
leasing and insurance companies, and banks, and give them an 
opportunity to operate. All of them should be privatized, i.e. 
amount to joint-stock companies or be privately administered. 
  We proceed as an independent state, and we must be aware of 
and know how to analyze economic problems. Undoubtedly, the 
analytical segment of our operations should be developed to this 
end. In view of this, it has become necessary to create within 
the State Committee for Statistics of the republic a service 
that would engage in the development of clear-cut approaches, 
the forecasting of financial and credit relations, and the 
dovetailing of our actions with those of the economic components 
and customs statistics of the Russian Federation as a whole. We 
would like to hope that in the future, this would be done to 
European standards. 
  The speaker subsequently noted that very many questions 
arise 
concerning approaches to and the implementation of the program 
of priority areas. These questions are asked with a sense of 
alarm over the propriety of the use of foreign exchange funds 
received. We must say that there has been certain progress on 
this score. An export department has been established at the 
Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations; expert reviews are 
administered with the use of specialists. As a result, funds 
exceeding $700,000 have been saved since the beginning of this 
year alone. It is necessary for the Ministry of Foreign Economic 
Relations to be in possession of all informational materials, 
for a long-range program to be developed, and for action to be 
taken to solve urgent problems. 
  Touching on the disbursement of foreign exchange funds 
obtained by the republic in 1993, R. Muratov said that, on the 
whole, oil exports yielded $306.5483 million. The balance of 
funds as of 1 January 1993 came to $67.8362 million. Therefore, 
$376.6473 million were allocated by us to meet social needs. As 
of 1 January 1994, we had $22.3608 million. 
  Owing to credit resources, we paid $116 million less for 
foodstuffs in 1993 than had been envisioned. That a number of 
goods whose prices increased considerably were delivered by 
various unorganized structures and were sold in the territory of 
our republic also was a factor. Health care and the organization 
of leisure also made certain economies. Overspending was allowed 
to occur in the agro-industrial sector in conjunction with 
purchases of insecticides and pesticides, seeds, and machinery, 
and the acquisition of advanced technologies. This endeavor 
should be put in order. We cannot go along with such purchases 
turning into the free handout of additional funds. I would like 
to stress that in the long term, all foreign exchange outlays 
will be accompanied by ruble cover out of the budget. There is 
no other way. 
  We have issued to you, the deputies, a detailed table based 
on the projection of foreign exchange proceeds from the export 
of oil in 1994. To my mind, it does not even require commentary. 
What is important is that the severance export duty established 
by the federal government eliminates oil from the export 
potential because it becomes unprofitable. However, we must say 
that the issue of not setting quotas at all for the delivery of 
oil abroad is being discussed by the Russian Government, as well 
as the issue of the reduction of the export duty. The government 
of the republic is making efforts to this end; however, so far 
we have not heard about a decision of the federal government to 
exempt oil within the regional quota from the export duty. 
  At present, oil is sold through the Tatneft Association. As 
you know, in keeping with a decision of the federal authorities, 
all export deliveries and the foreign exchange they yield are 
exempt from duties of all kinds on the condition that these 
funds are allocated to expand prospecting for oil, and the 
production and delivery of it and other energy resources. At 
present, a similar situation is also emerging at the 
Nizhnekamskneftekhim Production Association whereby a number of 
key petrochemical products, beginning with fuel oil, first, are 
subject to the export duty and, second, are covered by the 
decision on delivery quotas and licensing. Therefore, the 
Nizhnekamskneftekhim could have customers abroad who would pay 
in foreign exchange; however, the customers want to work with a 
supplier, say, at least a year rather than one to two months. 
  In summation, R.F. Muratov stressed that the export 
potential 
of the republic is sufficiently large and its development may 
proceed in a more optimistic mode. However, a precise 
coordination of activities is needed to this end. 

