Accidents   Viewed 

<F P=102> 94WN0238A Kiev ZELENYY SVIT in Ukrainian No. 4, Mar 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 94WN0238A </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev ZELENYY SVIT </F>
<F P=105>  Ukrainian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Letter by Svitlana Ihorivna Luchyts, co-chairman, </F>
Democratic Green Party of Chelyabinsk Oblast: ``I Want To Tell 
You About the Chelyabinsk Tragedy''] 
  [Text] Ukrainian People's Deputy Volodymyr 
Yavorivskyy quite recently received a letter which related the 
fate suffered by the hostages of the ``Urals Chernobyl''--the 
Mayak Industrial Combine. Volodymyr Oleksandrovych conveyed this 
letter to our newspaper, as its author had requested. We offer 
it here for your attention. 
  Dear fellow-countrymen! 
  I am writing to you from the distant Ural city of 
Chelyabinsk. I was born near Kherson, studied at Odessa 
University, worked for 11 years at the Odessa Polytechnical 
Institute, and I have been here for 26 years--at the Chelyabinsk 
Technical University. 
  My older children and grandchildren are Ukrainians, whereas 
my younger daughter is Russian; I have brothers and sisters 
living in Kiev, Kherson, Odessa, and Moscow. Both Ukrainian and 
Russian cultures are near and dear to me. In my soul and in my 
consciousness Russians and Ukrainians are fraternal peoples. 
  I want to tell you about the Chelyabinsk tragedy so that you 
may know what is menacing you. 
  Some 45 years ago in this short-lived ``Ural Switzerland'' 
an 
enterprise began to be built for the purpose of making an atom 
bomb. The best minds of our nation were brought here, and they 
worked self-sacrificingly, believing in the need to create an 
atomic shield for our Fatherland. This plant was built in record 
time. 
  But the technology of radiation safety was still at a very 
low level at that time. Plutonium was carried about in glass 
vessels, adulterated radioactive wastes were poured into the 
small Techa River, on the bank of which the ``Mayak'' Chemical 
Combine was situated. That came to be the name of the production 
association which produced nuclear weapons. 
  Thousands of nuclear specialists and service personnel 
perished during the first few years of Mayak's operation, and 
nobody has ever counted the number of people living around there 
who also were lost. 
  Finally the authorities came to their senses and began to 
resettle people away from the river. They fenced it about with 
barbed wire and prohibited people from drinking its water, 
bathing in it, or watering their cattle in it. But for many 
years they did not explain to people the reason for these 
prohibitions. And people used to drink contaminated milk, eat 
vegetables from cities which used water from the Techa for 
irrigation purposes, and they continued to bathe in this river. 
  The average life expectancy declined to 40 years. And these 
could not really be called lives. Everone's bones hurt, they had 
headaches, they were weak, and suffered from bleeding. And in 
the town of Ozersk (Chelyabinsk-65) more and more children came 
into the world with birth defects. Whereas in 1955 these 
amounted to 10-11 per 1000 births, in 1988 this indicator stood 
at 22 per 1000 births. 
  Another misfortune was that the medical personnel were 
forbidden to make correct diagnoses. This was a state secret. 
The physicians had to sign an agreement not to divulge their 
diagnoses. How many tragedies could have been averted if it had 
not been for this anti-humane decree or regulation! 
  In 1957 there was an explosion at a tank in which diluted 
radioactive wastes (RAO) were being stored for safekeeping. As a 
result of this rupture, a trail 105 km long and 8-10 km in width 
was created. The fate of the persons who happened to be on the 
territory of this radioactive trail was tragic. Without any 
explanations of the reasons for this, all such persons were 
herded into barracks; their clothing and personal effects were 
burned, and they were given different clothing. A ditch was dug, 
and bulldozers were used to dump everything in it together with 
the cattle and bury the whole lot. The people were hauled away 
and resettled in temporary buildings. And then they were 
forgotten. 
  The third significant accident at the Mayak Chemical Combine 
occurred in 1967. After the toxification of the Techa people 
began pouring RAO into man-made or natural lakes. In one such 
lake, in Karachay, RAO accumulated having an activity factor of 
600 million Curie units (12 times greater than the amount 
emitted at the time of the Chernobyl disaster). 
  The summer of 1967 was a scorcher. The Karachay grew very 
shallow; the banks became denuded; the radioactive algae and mud 
dried up and turned into dust. The wind raised this lethal dust 
and and carried out about over an area inhabited by close to a 
half a million people. 
  Small or modest-sized accidents which occur--in the 
specialists' words--within the ``regulated system'' (that is, 
with discharges less than the allowable parameters) happen all 
the time and with great frequency. Thus, for example, on 17 July 
of last year there occurred a discharge at one subdivision of 
the Mayak Chemical Combine; and a slurry pipeline burst on 4 
August. 
  The authorities reassure us that such discharges are less 
than the parameters of the allowable norms, but we doubt that 
the grounds justifying these norms are adequate. Furthermore, 
their frequency is so great that the sum-total turns out to be 
significant. 
  The swamps and ground waters of our oblast contain a total 
RAO having an activity of 1 billion, 300 million Curie units 
(equivalent to approximately 26 Chernobyls). There are 935 
persons here who are ill with radiation sickness. Our hematology 
units at the local treatment facility are completely filled with 
sick children; 80 percent of them will die, and their places 
will be taken by others. 
  The nuclear shield of the Fatherland not only protects but 
also kills people. The military-industrial complex throughout 
the world is guided solely by its own departmental interests, as 
well as by the desire to preserve and safeguard its own 
scientific potential, its own privileged position, and with 
those of people in general. 
  We consider that nuclear production--including nuclear 
electric-power engineering--is leading us to destruction. We 
must re-orient ourselves as rapidly as possible to alternative 
energy sources. For gigantomania will utterly ruin us. 

