Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, 24 Feb (XINHUA) -- Zhang Yishan, deputy 
representative of the Chinese delegation attending the 50th 
session of the UN Human Rights Commission, today called on the 
commission to strictly abide by the objectives and principles of 
the UN Charter if it truly wants to help realize human rights 
and basic human freedoms. 
  Speaking on the topic of rationalizing the work of the Human 
Rights Commission, Zhang Yishan stressed that many countries 
deem it necessary for the commission to rationalize its work 
because under certain circumstances, the commission's work has 
deviated from the objectives and principles of the UN Charter, 
and such deviations are not good for the promotion of 
international cooperation in human rights and the general 
realization of human rights and basic human freedoms. He noted 
that malpractices and abnormalities -- such as politicizing 
human rights issues, employing double standards, and using human 
rights issues as pretexts to interfere in other countries' 
internal affairs -- must be eliminated. 
  He said: The Human Rights Commission has made it a yearly 
practice to adopt a resolution on the human rights situation in 
many countries. Certain countries are extremely self-important 
[wei wo du jun -- 0707 2053 3747 1415] and relentless in 
attacking others for human rights violations while still 
claiming that they are observing international standards of 
human rights. In their eyes, all other countries are violating 
human rights and only they themselves are meeting human rights 
standards. 
  Zhang Yishan stressed that the practice of exerting pressure 
on other countries by adopting resolutions every now and then is 
anachronistic and that facts have proved that such a practice 
cannot really help the efforts to promote human rights. 
  He continued: The Human Rights Commission should act in 
accordance with the objectives and principles of the "UN 
Charter" as well as the provisions of the "Vienna Declaration 
and action program," to make sure that human rights issues are 
handled objectively and not selectively. Moreover, the 
commission should promote human rights-related dialogues and 
cooperation between countries on the basis of respecting each 
other and treating each other equally so that they can exchange 
views and experiences, promote understanding, and learn from 
each other's strong points to offset each other's weaknesses. 
Only by doing so can the commission truly and effectively 
promote and protect human rights and basic human freedoms. 
  Zhang Yishan added: While reforming its agenda, the Human 
Rights Commission should make sure that the issues which the 
majority of developing countries are concerned about can be 
fully examined and discussed. He said: While reforming the 
agenda, the Human Rights Commission should attach importance to 
economic, social, and cultural rights as well as the right to 
development so that there will be a balance between all kinds of 
rights. 

