Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Kang Song-san, member of the Workers Party of </F>
Korea Central Committee Political Bureau, and premier of the 
Administration Council, at a national agricultural meeting held 
on 25 February at Pyongyang gymnasium--recorded] 
  [Text] Comrades: Today, at a time when all of the people 
across the country are accelerating the general march of 
socialism with the overflowing dignity and honor of being 
victors, greeting the 30th anniversary of the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song's publication of the theses on the socialist 
rural question in our country, we are holding the national 
agricultural meeting with the joy of having achieved a bumper 
harvest last year. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's publication of the 
great theses on the socialist rural question 30 years ago was an 
event of historic significance in achieving the victory of the 
chuche socialist cause and the eternal grandeur and prosperity 
of our fatherland and people. [applause] 
  The period of 30 years cannot be said to have been lengthy 
in 
the course of socialist construction which brings the people's 
independent and creative life into full bloom. Furthermore, the 
30-year period is merely a short, momentary period for creating 
a new socialist life in our countryside when considering the 
fact that even after the socialist system was established, many 
legacies remained from the old society when our countryside was 
the target of feudal exploitation and imperialistic plundering. 
  Over the past 30 years, however, our party and people have 
made epochal changes in all sectors of socialist rural 
construction by vigorously advancing along the road illuminated 
by the great rural theses. [applause] 
  In his historic letter to the current national agricultural 
meeting, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song extensively summed 
up the brilliant successes that our people and agricultural 
working people achieved in implementing the rural theses under 
our party's leadership and brilliantly illuminated the brilliant 
future of our country's rural economy and its future struggle 
task. [applause] 
  The party Central Committee in its congratulatory message 
highly assessed and warmly congratulated the great victory won 
by our people and agricultural working people during the past 30 
in the implementation of the rural theses. [applause] 
  All participants of the national meeting exude the great 
emotion and happiness of receiving the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song's historic letter and the party Central Committee's 
congratulatory message, and they are also filled with even 
firmer determination to accelerate the socialist rural 
construction cause by brilliantly fulfilling the programmatic 
task presented in the letter. [applause] 
  This current national agricultural meeting was convened amid 
the great interests and expectations of all the people and the 
agricultural working people not only to sum up the brilliant 
victory won in the implementation of the rural theses under the 
wise leadership of the party and the leader [suryong], but also 
to discuss the struggle task of the agricultural sphere to 
accelerate the chuche socicalist cause by further consolidating 
and developing the socialist rural economic system of our 
country and by exalting its superiority. The meeting will 
become the victors' meeting summing up the implementation of the 
task illuminated in the rural theses. It is a meeting of 
singlehearted unity. It will become not only an event which 
effects a new turn in the development of the rural economy of 
our country, but also an event of historic significance in the 
struggle of our people and agricultural working people to 
accelerate socialist construction. [applause] 
  Comrades, correctly solving the rural question by winning 
victory in the socialist revolution and by establishing the 
socialist system is a principled problem related to the success 
or failure in the socialist cause. 
  We can strengthen chuche of the revolution and fortify the 
socialist bases in the rural communities politically, 
ideologically, materially, and technologically only if we 
correctly solve the socialist rural question. Also, the final 
victory of socialism can be won by removing the difference 
between urban and rural communities, as well as the class 
difference between the working class and farmers. 
  Correctly solving the socialist rural question has emerged 
as 
a more pressing issue as imperialists and reactionaries attempt 
to block the victorious advance of socialism by imperialists and 
reactionaries and crudely slander the socialist rural economic 
system in order to weaken its driving force. 
  At a time when we desperately need to elucidate the future 
road of the socialist rural communities internationally or 
domestically, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has published 
the "Theses on the Socialist Rural Question in Our Country," an 
immortal classic, by deeply grasping the importance of the need 
to solve the rural question in the socialist society. As a 
result, he defined the most correct way for socialist rural 
construction. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has taught: In the 
"Theses on the Socialist Rural Question in Our Country," our 
party illuminated the basic principles and ways to finally 
solving the peasant and agricultural questions after the 
establishment of the socialist system, and rallied the whole 
party, the whole country, and all people to implement them. 
  The basic ideology in implementing the rural theses is that 
the working class firmly adhere to the principle of the party, 
state, and revolution; vigorously and highly display the 
superiority of the socialist collectivist economy by 
continuously advancing the revolution, and fully guarantee the 
independent and creative lives of agricultural workers, the 
masters of rural communities, even after the cooperativization 
of agriculture in rural communities. 
  The first to provide correct answers to all theoretical and 
practical questions in the settlement of the rural questions and 
to break new ground in the development of the revolutionary idea 
of the working class, the rural theses is a classical work and a 
great program of socialist rural construction that has been 
worked out with the man-centered chuche idea as its base. 
[applause] 
  The rural theses of our party opened a broad road for 
revolutionizing the peasants and assimilating them into the 
working class, industrializing and modernizing agriculture to 
elevate the agricultural productive forces to a high degree, and 
building affluent and civilized socialist rural communities so 
that agricultural workers will enjoy independent and creative 
lives as much as they want. [applause] 
  The rural theses sums up the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song's profound and unique ideology and theory and 
far-reaching plan of the socialist and communist construction. 
This is our party's socialist rural construction program. The 
rural theses consistently called forth all of our people and 
agricultural workers toward the large scale struggle to 
construct a new socialist farm, and made it possible to smash 
[chitbusyoborida] the attack and slander by the imperialists and 
reactionaries in the socialist rural economy system by embracing 
the world's revolutionary people with faith and future prospects 
of socialism. 
  It was inevitable to carry out the struggle by our party and 
people for the development of the rural theses by overcoming all 
obstacles and difficulties by themselves while defeating 
antisocialist and anti-Republic maneuvers that are being 
endlessly continued by the imperialists and reactionaries at a 
time when the country is divided. In particular, socialism was 
frustrated in various countries recently and capitalism was 
restored. As a result of such a situation, the wicked political 
and military blockade and maneuvers of economic sanctions are 
being committed by the imperialists and reactionaries to isolate 
and crush [apsal] our Republic. Therefore, the internal and 
external situation in our country was more complicated and acute 
than ever before, and new and grave barriers and difficulties 
were laid forth in the future road of our revolution. 
  Our people's struggle in the socialist rural construction 
and 
overall socialist construction were conducted under a very tense 
situation, and to strengthen the country's [word indistinct], it 
was inevitable for us to adjust the speed and scope of economic 
development. Thus, it was inevitable to put greater efforts 
into [word indistinct]. However, it was not able to surprise 
our people and agricultural workers, who are fighting for the 
just cause, in any provocation and aggressive maneuver by the 
enemies. It also could not prevent our advance. 
  Our people and agricultural workers who are endlessly loyal 
to the party and the leader are highly upholding the 
revolutionary policy put forth by the party and are carrying out 
the indomitable heroic struggle in accordance with the changed 
situation and in accordance with the demand of our revolution. 
Thus, they firmly defended socialism of our own style centered 
on the popular masses, achieved endless upsurges in all fields 
of socialist construction, and achieved a decisive victory in 
the historical process of carrying out tasks put forth in the 
rural theses. Therefore, they were able to highly rise for the 
ultimate solution of the rural question. [applause] 
  Through the vigorous struggle to implement the rural theses, 
the human remolding work was successfully promoted in our farms 
more than anything else, and the ideological and cultural life 
of the agricultural workers blossomed and developed on a full 
scale. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song presented the human 
remolding work in the rural theses as the most important task in 
socialist rural construction, uprooted the old ideology which 
remained among the farmers, and elucidated the way to put in the 
forefront the ideological revolution so that they can be armed 
with the advanced working class revolutionary ideology. 
  According to the task of the rural theses to (?carry out) 
the 
ideological revolution, the ideological and indoctrination work 
to revolutionize and achieve working classification of the 
farmers were strengthened. Therefore, all of our agricultural 
workers were firmly armed with our party's revolutionary 
ideology, chuche ideology, and socialist ideology, and also the 
farm's chuche idea was filled to full capacity. 
  Today, the old ideological trait of society which we 
historically inherited in our farms, is not regarded as a 
problem. Also, all the agricultural workers regard the advanced 
ideology of the working class and the chuche idea as a firm 
faith, and is formed with the strong main force of the 
revolution of single-heartedly uniting around the party and the 
leader through ideological will, morality, and integrity. 
  Recently, the imperialists and reactionaries are viciously 
committing a political and ideological offensive more than ever 
before to destroy faith in socialism in the people's hearts, and 
have extremely aggravated the situation of our country. 
However, our agricultural workers have firm faith only in the 
party and the leader without the slightest wavering, are 
advocating with the do-or-die spirit the party, are smashing 
[chitbusyoborigo] overflowing with faith and optimism all kinds 
of challenges by the enemies, and have firmly defended the 
socialist rural construction. [applause] 
  Our agricultural workers who have traversed the arduous 
road of struggle for independence, reunification, and socialism 
with the party endlessly trust and follow the party and the 
leader [suryong], cherishing in their hearts deep trust and 
loyalty cemented through their actual experiences. They 
unconditionally entrust their destiny and future to our party. 
  Holding aloft the slogan of loyalty -- What the party 
decides, we will do -- our agricultural workers support and 
defend every line and policy of the party; seek value and pride 
on the course of implementing the slogan; and work progressively 
with indomitable grit for the implementation of the party's 
rural policy. This is precisely the ideological and mental 
features of our agricultural working people. 
  Our peasants do not know of all sorts of rotten capitalist 
social evils that destroy one's mental, cultural life, and 
everyone of them treasures the interests of the party and 
revolution and that of the society and group as a master of the 
social group in the society in which it is politically stable. 
They, with their labor exploit, carry out their social duties as 
a socialist worker who is in charge of the nation's rice 
granaries, and highly display the beautiful communist trait of 
helping and leading each other forward under the slogan of one 
for all and all for one. 
  Such a high level of the mental and ideological feature of 
our agricultural workers, the masters of the rural areas, proves 
that our society has been highly developed and that the 
socialist political, ideological framework has been firmly laid 
in our rural areas. [applause] 
  The party and the leader [suryong] believe in the 
agricultural masses, all agricultural workers endlessly trust 
and follow the party and the leader [suryong], and a 
sociopolitical organ in which the leader [suryong], the party, 
and the masses live eternally has been formed: This is the 
grandiose reality of our rural area in which the agricultural 
workers fight vigorously with firm confidence in the victory of 
the socialist cause. [applause] 
  Under the party's leadership, all agricultural workers share 
their life and death with the party, and devotedly strive to 
complete the chuche-oriented revolutionary cause and the 
socialist rural construction. In addition, the great changes in 
the ideological and moral traits and manner of work of our 
peasants have taken place. These are the most precious success 
achieved in our efforts to implement the theses, which is 
incomparable even to millions of tons of rice and herein lies a 
firm guarantee which brings about an endless upsurge in 
agricultural production and prosperity to our rural areas. 
[applause] 
  As a result of the active cultural revolution along with the 
ideological revolution in the rural areas, our peasants have 
grown to be more powerful beings and their cultural living 
conditions have been fundamentally improved. 
  As a result of the cultivation of agrotechnicians and 
experts 
and adult education, the technical and cultural levels of, not 
only the new generation, but also our agricultural working 
people have risen very high, and the conditions for the cultural 
life of the rural inhabitants have greatly improved. 
  Regular universities and colleges of agriculture and such 
study-while-working centers for training technical personnel as 
farm colleges have been firmly built up in each province, at 
which a large number of agrotechnicians and experts are being 
trained. 
  Under the popular policy of our party, water, bus, wire 
radio, and television services have been introduced, clinics 
have developed into hospitals and cozy modern dwelling houses 
have been built in the rural areas. Newspapers, magazines, and 
various books find their way to each peasant household. Thus, 
our countryside has turned into a prospering modern socialist 
countryside good to live and work in, which is little different 
from towns. [applause] 
  All the results achieved on the road of vigorously carrying 
out the ideological and cultural revolution in rural areas, 
revolutionizing the peasant and assimilating them into the 
working class, and improving all aspects of their ideological 
and cultural life proudly show that a great turning point is 
arriving and a brilliant victory has been achieved in the 
implementation of the difficult and complicated human reform 
task presented by the rural theses. [applause] 
  A solid socialist material and technological foundation is 
laid in our rural areas because the four major tasks of rural 
technological revolution are being brilliantly implemented 
through a resolute struggle named the (?construction) of the 
rural theses. Through this, the peasants' independent and 
creative living conditions are satisfactorily guaranteed. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song said in earlier days 
that the problem of technological revolution is not a matter of 
technological development to simply improve production capacity, 
but a problem of general society to completely achieve the 
independence of the popular masses. He further defined 
irrigation, electrification, mechanization, and chemical 
application as the four basic tasks of rural technological 
revolution in the rural theses and wisely led the struggle to 
achieve this. [applause] 
  The task of irrigation and electrification of the rural 
economy as presented in the rural theses was achieved on a high 
level long ago in our country since the party's policy for rural 
technological revolution had been successfully implemented. 
[applause] 
  In carrying out the rural technological revolution, our 
party 
consistently prioritized irrigation. This policy is the most 
sophisticated and unique policy based on a general analysis of 
the characteristics of agricultural production, which is much 
affected by nature, and our country's weather conditions. In 
the early days of the construction of the new society, the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song personally stood in the front line to 
guide large-scale nature transforming projects and orderly led 
the great struggle to complete the irrigation in rural areas for 
our people's long-cherished desire of the century -- to solve 
the water problem. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song presented a unique idea 
that rice farming is water farming, and the most important 
fundamental of rice farming is water. He devoted his efforts to 
establish a policy of irrigating paddies, which account for a 
large part of our country's agricultural production, and had it 
finished in a short period. Based on the results, he also 
wisely led the all-people struggle to complete the irrigation of 
nonpaddy fields so our country has the most developed and 
powerful irrigation system that could reap rich and stable 
harvests under any natural conditions. 
  Particularly, based on the brilliant achievement of the 
construction of Sohae lock gate -- a great monumental creation 
-- through the heroic struggle of our people, soldier, and 
constructors, a 2,000-ri waterway was built recently to 
completely solve the water problem in rich grain districts, and 
the great nature transforming project of connecting the Taedong 
River and Yesong River, Amnok River and Taeryong River into one 
great irrigation channel was victoriously carried out so as to 
more satisfactorily fulfill the increasing demand for water in 
our rural areas. 
  Along with the irrigation construction, the party's policy 
to 
vigorously carry out drainage works simultaneously was 
brilliantly implemented and numerous small and large pumping 
stations and thousands of kilometers of drains have been 
constructed, rivers and streams were rearranged, embankments 
were built, reforestation works were widely carried out, and 
crop damage due to standing and dirty water were completely 
eliminated in our rural areas. 
  The irrigation system in our country is a system that 
thoroughly reaches all paddies and fields from flat areas to 
mountain villages. It is the most reasonably established mighty 
irrigation system in which major irrigation networks are linked 
to circulate. In addition, irrigation methods vary according to 
geographical conditions: pumping stations, 
transportation-style, and constant irrigation. 
  Indeed, the irrigation facilities in our rural areas 
provided 
by the wise leadership of our party are perfect [word 
indistinct] which guarantees the endless development of our 
agriculture, and are brilliant creations that demonstrate the 
invincible great might of our party and people and the great 
might of popular masses-centered socialism of our own style. 
Our country has become a proud country in the world with 
developed irrigation and an exemplary country in which 
irrigation has been completed. [applause] 
  With the accomplishment of the electrification task put 
forward by the agricultural theses, the electrification of our 
farms has reached a very high level. 
  With a view to meeting the daily-increasing electricity 
demand on a securer basis, our party put forward the policy of 
simultaneously building large-scale hydroelectric and 
thermoelectric power stations as well as building small- and 
medium-size power stations in many places. Our party saw to it 
that the struggle to implement the policy was vigorously carried 
out. 
  The construction of large-scale hydroelectric and 
thermoelectric power stations was actively pushed ahead during 
the Third Seven-year Plan period in compliance with the party's 
correct electrification policy, and many small- and medium-size 
power stations were built throughout the country. As a result, 
the nation's power bases have been further strengthened. 
  Thanks to the chuche-oriented electric power and energy 
provided in our country, the electric power used by our farms in 
a year increased 8.6 times from that in 1963 and the scope of 
the use of electricity in the rural economy has been constantly 
expanded. 
  With the rapid development of and under the vigorous support 
by the chuche-oriented industry, a turning point was effected in 
the mechanization and scientification of the rural economy. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song put forward the work of 
emancipation of peasants, who suffered various hardships for a 
long time because of difficult and arduous labor, as a lofty 
historic mission assigned to the revolutionaries of our era, and 
wisely led the struggle for mechanization and the application of 
science in the rural economy. 
  Thanks to the nation's powerful mechanical industry, the 
party's policy for building agricultural machine production 
bases has been carried to accomplishment. As a result, tractor 
and truck production bases have been firmly built and 
agricultural machine production plants have been constructed in 
the central and local areas. Accordingly, various efficient 
agricultural machines and tools suitable for practical 
situations in farms have been produced and supplied to farms on 
a large scale. 
  To meet the daily-increasing demand for tractors and 
trucks--the most important technological means in agricultural 
production--our party took a comprehensive step of epochally 
increasing productivity in the Kumsong tractor complex in the 
seventies and of constantly strengthening the material and 
technological foundation in the Sungni truck complex. Our party 
also saw to it that a new production base for truck engines was 
built. 
  As a result, the number of tractors serving the rural 
economy 
sector increased six times and trucks five times for the past 30 
years. Thanks to this, the comprehensive mechanization of the 
rural economy in our country today has reached a lofty stage and 
all farming works, from the cultivation of paddies and farms to 
sawing, seedling, weeding, harvesting and threshing, are carried 
out by machines. 
  Repair bases were firmly built in all provinces, cities, 
counties and cooperative farms in compliance with the increased 
mechanization in farms. At the same time, the work of training 
of tractor and truck operators was strengthened and the ranks of 
operators serving the rural economy were increased. 
  With the use of chemicals in the rural economy, a greater 
amount of chemical fertilizers was produced and supplied to 
farms. Thus, the amount of chemical fertilizer production for a 
chongbo [2.45 acres] of paddies and fields reached over nine 
tons, far surpassing the goal set forth in the rural theses, and 
various kinds of chemical fertilizers were combined reasonably 
and their qualitative (?constitution) was improved. 
  The scientific manuring system, in which various kinds of 
fertilizers are manured according to the characteristics of the 
soil and to the unique nature of the growing crops, was 
established. As a result, economic efficiency in the manuring of 
chemical fertilizers was enhanced and (?productivity) in each 
area was expanded. The quantity of grains produced on the basis 
of quantity of manured nitrogen fertilizer has been ensured 
satisfactorily in accordance with a (?1:10 ratio). 
  Self-reliant agricultural chemicals and herbicides 
production bases were firmly built in our country under the 
party's wise leadership and efficient agricultural chemicals and 
herbicides were produced and satisfactorily supplied to the 
farms. Thus, harmful insects were eliminated through 
agricultural chemicals. By introducing various biological 
agricultural chemicals and vegetation growth adjustment 
elements, we protected and managed grains with a scientific 
method. 
  With the implementation of an irrigation system, the 
electrification, mechanization and the use of chemicals in the 
rural economy, peasants were emancipated from difficult and 
arduous labor and the agricultural productivity was rapidly 
developed even while peasants worked easily and joyfully. This 
brilliant achievement clearly proved that we won a proud victory 
in implementing the tasks of a rural technological revolution 
set forth in the rural theses and that we have far advanced in 
industrializing and modernizing agriculture by reforming the 
society. [applause] 
  Through the persistent struggle to carry to accomplishment 
the rural theses, a great advance was effected in the domain of 
reforming social relations in conformity with the socialist 
demand in the farms. 
  Social relations in farm and ownership over production means 
are closely linked with the state's guidance system and method 
on the agricultural cooperative economy. The correct resolution 
of the issue of guidance and management of the rural economy has 
a great impact on the development of ownership. 
  The new agricultural guidance system created by the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song is a most superior agricultural 
guidance system which enabled us to precisely combine the 
party's unitary guidance, the nation's political interest, 
democracy, and creativeness by brilliantly embodying the demands 
of the Chongsanri spirit and method and the Taean work system in 
the guidance and management of the rural economy. This system 
also enabled us to constantly improve and strengthen the 
management and operation of the socialist cooperative economy 
and to successfully push ahead with the work of (?developing) 
ownership and economic management. 
  Through the struggle to epochally demonstrate the 
superiority 
of the new agricultural technological system, which regards the 
management committee of a county cooperative farm as the basis, 
the difficult and complex problems in guiding and managing the 
rural economy have been excellently solved in our country based 
on the principle of collectivism and according to the original 
nature of socialism. The guidance of enterprises through the 
management committee of a county cooperative farm and material 
and technological support by the state have been strengthened. 
As a result, advanced business management of industry and 
production culture have been widely disseminated to farms, and 
differences between industry and agriculture in the fields of 
business management and ownership over production means have 
been successfully reduced. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's unique idea and 
policy 
on business units and strongholds in socialist rural 
construction have been brilliantly embodied. As a result, 
organizations in counties, including the management committee of 
county cooperative farms, satisfactorily carried out their 
missions under the guidance of the county party committee. The 
position and role of the county in the overall socialist 
construction, including rural construction, have been 
drastically enhanced. 
  Today all counties in our country are a comprehensive unit 
that (?consolidates) local economic foundation and links cities 
and farms in all fields of politics, the economy, and culture. 
They are excellently fulfilling their missions as the stronghold. 
  As the work of reforming men, nature and society has been 
successfully carried out in the farm, the party's 
agriculture-first policy and chuche agricultural method have 
been thoroughly carried out. As a result, our agricultural 
production is constantly developing. 
  The grain production in our farms has increased 1.9 times, 
and of these grains, rice production increased 1.8 times and 
corn 2.2 times in the past 30 years since the rural theses were 
published. 
  After 1973, when the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song 
provided a watershed of turn by standing at the van of the 
agricultural front, our agriculture has been raised onto a 
higher scientific and technological foundation. Our agriculture 
again effected a new upsurge in harvesting bumper crops by 
overcoming serious damages caused by cold weather and abnormal 
low temperatures that lasted for a long time last year in the 
wake of the 30th anniversary of the publication of the rural 
theses. [applause] 
  The work to acquire new land was actively pushed ahead 
across the country, increasing the farmland area. The 
nationwide field plowing campaign improved the soil's fertility. 
With the brisk campaign of winning the title of high-yield 
county, the cities and counties producing over 100,000 tons and 
150,000 tons of grain, such as Sukchon County and Pyongwon 
County, South Pyongan Province, Anak County and Yonan County, 
South Hwanghae Province, and the cooperative farms producing 
over 10,000 tons, such as the (Sungjon) cooperative farm in 
Chungsan County, have been further increased. In particular, the 
(Yoltu) and (Samcho) cooperative farms in Sukchon County, which 
could produce only some 4,000 tons 30 years ago, were successful 
in producing some 20,000 tons of grain. 
  With the comprehensive embodiment of the [word indistinct] 
agricultural method based on the right crop-in-the right time 
principle and the early farming method and with the thorough 
realization of the demands of the chuche agricultural method 
based on the farming system by farming processes, the grain 
output per chongbo of farming land has reached a very high level 
in our country, thus bringing forth an innovation of producing 
eight to 15 tons of rice and corn from the land which used to 
produce two to three tons per chongbo. 
  With the implementation of the party's policy of developing 
various kinds of produce giving fundamental emphasis to the 
production of grain, all areas of agricultural production, such 
as meat, vegetables, fruit, cocoon, and industrial products, as 
well as grain, are developing rapidly in all units, including 
Kaechon, Unjon County, Yonggang County, (Saengsang County), 
(Changwon County), and Samsok-kuyok. 
  With the rapid development of agricultural production in the 
grand struggle since the publication of the rural theses and 
with greater state support and cooperation to systematically 
relieve the farmers of their burdens, all the cooperative farms 
in our country have grown to be mighty, large-scale socialist 
collective bases with their own solid production and financial 
foundation, and the lives of our farmers are improving with each 
passing day. 
  In our rural areas, the agricultural tax payment-in kind 
system was abolished long ago. Now our farmers do not know of 
the word tax. They, just like workers, enjoy as affluent and 
happy lives as those who live in urban areas do, enjoying all 
sorts of state and social benefits such as free education, free 
medical care, sick leave, paid holidays, fuel supply, and 
(?acknowledgement of social accomplishment). 
  With the three revolutions vigorously conducted in rural 
areas, the farmers' standard of ideological consciousness, 
technology, and culture has been enhanced, the material and 
technological base of agriculture strengthened, and the gap 
between industry and agriculture and between urban and rural 
areas has been reduced in all fields. Therefore, all the 
conditions necessary to convert cooperative ownership to 
all-people ownership are being formed more smoothly in our 
country. 
  All the successes the rural areas have achieved in the 
struggle to remake the relations among man, nature, and society 
show that a momentous upturn is being made on the road of 
ultimately solving the rural problem. With the great victory of 
the rural theses, our rural areas have been turned into the most 
advanced and prosperous socialist rural areas. [applause] 
  The brilliant victory of the rural theses is a great 
historical event that took place in the rural areas in addition 
to the land reform after the 1945 national liberation and the 
introduction of agricultural cooperative in the post-war period. 
This is the victory of our party's socialist rural area building 
program and the victory of the might of the wholehearted unity 
of our people and agricultural working people firmly united 
around the party and the leader. [applause] 
  This brilliant victory is a proud fruition which can only be 
achieved in the chuche Korea, the chollima country led by the 
great leader and the great party where the popular mass centered 
our-style socialism has firmly taken root and is in full bloom. 
[applause] 
  The great victory of the rural theses is a historical 
victory 
that enables all our people and agricultural working people to 
have even firmer faith in the justness and invincibility of the 
cause of socialism and strengthens the might of the country and 
casts more resplendent prospective for the future of our 
revolution. [applause] 
  The brilliant victory of the rural theses will give greater 
strength and encouragement to the South Korean people who are 
waging a brave struggle for independence, democracy, and the 
country's reunification and to the world's revolutionary people 
who are launching themselves into a new struggle for socialism. 
It will deal the imperialists and reactionaries a blow of 
horror and despair. [applause] 
  Comrades: The epochal change taking place in our rural areas 
with the brilliant realization of the rural theses is the 
victory of the socialist rural economic system of our popular 
mass-centered country, and the demonstration of its unequalled 
vitality. [applause] 
  Our country's socialist rural economic system is the most 
superior rural economic system of our own style which embodies 
the chuche idea. Our country's socialist rural economic system 
is not something that someone has given us, nor something copied 
from someone else. It is the most independent and 
people-oriented rural economic system our people and 
agricultural working people built on their own in conformity 
with their faith and demand by embodying the rural theses under 
the leadership of the party. 
  Different from our country's socialist rural areas, where 
the 
agricultural production continuously develops and the farmers 
lead independent and creative lives in all areas--political, 
economic, and cultural--with the embodiment of the rural theses, 
agricultural production is in a great crisis in many capitalist 
countries, including Japan, posing a great threat to the 
farmers' existence. 
  In particular, in South Korea, which shares the same border 
with the northern half of the Republic, agricultural production 
is extremely deteriorated because of the ruling bunch's outside 
force-depending policy and antipeople agricultural policy, and 
the farmers are suffering from serious destitution under all 
sorts of exploitation and oppression. As for South Korea's 
agriculture last year, South Korea suffered the worst crop since 
1980 facing an unprecedented severe agricultural crisis. The 
traitorous Kim Yong-sam clique's policy of opening rice market 
brought about serious social and political unrest, leading the 
farmers to the worst wretched life. This pitiable reality in 
clear contrast with the socialist rural areas of the northern 
half of the Republic shows more clearly the superiority and the 
inexhaustible strength of the people-centered our-style 
socialist rural economic system embodying the chuche idea. 
  Our country's socialist rural economic system is the most 
solid and vital rural economic system and advances with firm 
conviction along the road of socialism based on collectivism. 
[applause] 
  Collectivism is the life of socialist society, and the 
socialist rural economic system can be consolidated and its 
superiority can be enhanced only when they are based on 
collectivism. Socialist ownership, formed by the ownership by 
the state and all the people and ownership by a cooperative of 
the means of production is the economic basis of the socialist 
society based on collectivism. 
  Today, while perpetrating more viciously than ever before 
hindrance maneuvers against socialism, the imperialists and 
their errand boys are talking about the so-called superiority of 
the private ownership system based on individualism and 
frantically running wild to destroy socialist ownership. 
However, this is nothing but a foolish act. 
  The reactionary nature of private ownership system based on 
individualism has already been completely proven by history. If 
socialist ownership is dismantled and converted into private 
ownership it is clear that all means of production turned into 
private ownership, regardless of how it is turned into private 
property, will be concentrated into the hands of a handful of 
the exploiting classes, including the privileged classes and 
enterprises. The superiority of the private ownership system the 
imperialists and reactionaries are talking about only means none 
other than an unlimited law of the jungle competition designed 
to amass more wealth. 
  The ownership by the state and all the people and the 
ownership by cooperative of the means of production alike are 
developing rapidly in our country, and the organic combination 
of the two kinds of ownership has been successfully achieved. As 
a result, all cooperative farms have been firmly developing 
toward the direction of becoming large-scale cooperative farms 
under the ownership (?of all the people). 
  In our rural communities, firmly uniting in a comradely 
manner and helping and leading each other, all the agricultural 
working people are waging large-scale nature remaking projects, 
which are inconceivable under the private farming system or 
under the small-scale farming system, and they are constantly 
and quickly developing their agricultural production. This is 
precisely because they base their farming on the large-scale 
socialist collectivist rural economy and firmly rely on its 
superiority. 
  Our country's socialist rural economic system embodies the 
working class' most revolutionary (?position) in which the party 
and the state look after and lead to the end the peasants' 
living and destiny in a responsible manner. [applause] 
  How the party and the state of the working class deal with 
the peasants' living and their future under the socialist system 
is a principled matter related to the consolidation and 
development of the socialist rural economic system and its 
prospect. As they led peasants to carry out the revolution and, 
thus, changed the old social system, the working class party and 
state should strengthen the worker-peasant alliance, which is 
the political basis of the socialist society and should look 
after and lead peasants to the end even after the establishment 
of the socialist system. 
  Without the working class party's leadership and the state's 
support peasants cannot embark on the road of socialism, nor can 
they advance to the end along the single road of socialism, and 
nor can they enhance the superiority of the socialist rural 
economic system. 
  The incomparable superiority and vitality of the socialist 
rural economic system, which are being highly enhanced with each 
passing day in our country, are possible thanks to our party's 
leadership within the socialist collectivist economy and 
peasants being strengthened and to the state's guidance and 
support constantly being deepened. Indeed, our country's popular 
masses-centered socialist rural economic system, which has 
embodied the chuche idea, is a most superior rural economic 
system under which the agricultural working people have become 
the master of everything and everything in society serves them. 
[applause] 
  The epochal changes achieved in our country's rural 
communities on the strength of the embodiment of the rural 
theses and today's realities of our country are evoking great 
admiration among the people of the world and enjoy their praise. 
Our country has had a 5,000-long history since the Tangun Korea 
was founded on the [word indistinct] sacred land at the dawn of 
the (?history) of mankind. However, there has been no time as 
today when our rural communities are opulent and prosperous and 
when our fatherland's honor and might are being highly 
demonstrated as we witness in the era of the Workers Party 
called after the dignified name of our great party. [applause] 
  All brilliant victories and successes achieved in the 
struggle for the implementation of the socialist rural theses in 
the past are a noble result of the wise leadership of the party 
and the leader [suryong]. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song--who had provided the 
deep and strong historic roots for a solution to the rural 
question in our country and who had solved uniquely and on a 
chuche-oriented basis the peasants' question, that is, the 
agricultural question, which arose in the stages of the 
anti-imperialist and antifeudal revolution for democracy and the 
socialist revolution--presented the "Theses on the Socialist 
Rural Question," and, thus, he gave perfect ideological and 
theoretical explanations to all difficult and complicated 
problems arising in socialist rural construction, and wisely led 
the struggle for their realization. [applause] 
  Our party, the great organizer and guide of the struggle for 
the implementation of the rural theses, presented the cardinal 
direction that should be firmly grasped in the realization of 
the rural theses at every stage according to the respected and 
beloved leader's farsighted plan and ways for its realization. 
At the same time, the great leader vigorously organized and 
mobilized the entire party, the whole country, and all the 
people into the rewarding struggle for the implementation of the 
rural theses. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's leadership in solving 
the socialist rural question is a model of the revolutionary 
leadership, which makes it possible to firmly adhere to the 
socialist principles in all sectors of rural construction and 
agricultural production and to brilliantly embody them. 
[applause] 
  Attaching particular importance to enhancing the ideological 
consciousness of peasants, who are the masters of rural 
communities in accelerating socialist rural construction and in 
developing agricultural production, the great leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song has firmly given priority to the ideological revolution 
over all works and, at the same time, has energetically led the 
people to vigorously push ahead with the technological and 
cultural revolutions alike. 
  Even at the time when the internal and external situation 
became very difficult and complicated and when heavy and vast 
tasks arose in succession before our revolution, the great 
leader Marshal Kim Il-song presented the slogan, "Rice Is 
Synonymous With Socialism, Communism," defined the agricultural 
front as one of the main offensive fronts of socialist 
construction, and saw to it that the agricultural working people 
vigorously supported rural communities in all fields of 
politics, the economy, and culture. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has shown a brilliant 
model in scientific farming which most correctly embodies the 
inevitable demands of socialist rural construction by leading 
the struggle for the implementation of the rural theses to 
victory. [applause] 
  With his deep insight into all difficult and complicated 
problems arising in socialist rural construction, the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song has organized work in detail and 
taken measures lest we should lean toward one side and we should 
miss even one problem. 
  As the size of agricultural management becomes larger and 
its 
technical provisions gradually meet the level of demands, the 
great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, by enhancing the superiority 
of chuche-oriented agricultural guidance system of our own style 
which uses county cooperative plant management committee as a 
basis, has seen to it that we constantly improve and strengthen 
large-scale socialist collectivist economic management and 
operation work. At the same time, he has seen to it that while 
enhancing the guidance role of ownership by all the people over 
the ownership by cooperative we prepare with foresight the work 
of gradually converting the ownership by cooperative into 
ownership by all the people. 
  With deep insight into the role of the county in developing 
agricultural production, the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song 
has concentrated great efforts on the work of strengthening the 
county, which is a regional unit, a strong point, linking 
between cities and rural villages in all fields of politics and 
culture, and our party has firmly built county party committees 
in every period and taken active measures so that they can guide 
rural work in a substantial manner. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song created the chuche farm 
method, a most scientific farm method, which is suitable to the 
specific situation of our country, and led peasants, personally 
standing at the head of the agricultural front. Thus, he has 
created an epochal turn in the development of our agricultural 
production. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song led the entire party, 
the entire country, and all the people to wage the grand 
struggle to build socialist rural areas. In this way, he showed 
a brilliant example in leading the masses by implementing the 
popular mass line. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song always stayed among the 
popular masses, listened to their voices, and had their earnest 
desires and aspirations fulfilled, and led them to wage a new 
heroic struggle and bring about feats. 
  Last year, the respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim 
Il-song energetically gave guidance to rural work during his 
visits to various rural areas, including a tideland in Taean, 
Yonsa County of North Hamgyong Province, the (Pyongmu) Plateau 
of Yanggang Province, Kwail County of South Hwanghae Province, 
and the Yonbaek Field, an area close to the Demarcation Line. 
[applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's visits to the popular 
masses were visits to educate and awaken them and to mobilize 
them to the struggle to implement the party's policies. They 
were also courses to analyze realities in the rural areas, learn 
the people's aspirations and earnest desires, sum up their 
experiences, and reflect all of them on the lines and policies 
of the party and state. These visits resulted in our prosperous 
and developed socialist rural areas today. [applause] 
  The entire course of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song's 
leadership in building socialist rural areas was filled with his 
warm love and trust for all our agricultural workers. [applause] 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song talked with peasants at 
dry paddies at wind-swept valleys, wet paddies on mid-summer 
days, or ondol rooms deep into the winter night, took care of 
all their working and living conditions, and extended 
considerable favors to the peasants by resolving problems facing 
them. 
  It is the great leader who first realizes our peasants' 
frustrating problems and their difficulties and resolves them. 
[applause] 
  All the popular masses-centered policies of our party and 
state concerning the rural areas are filled with the great 
fatherly [oboi] love of the great leader, who even worries about 
the peasants' [word indistinct] at a time for transplanting rice 
seedlings, their rain coats during the summer, and [words 
indistinct]. They are also filled with our party's warm favors. 
[applause] 
  Truly, a few words are not enough to fully describe the wise 
leadership of the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song and our party 
Central Committee's energetic guidance in building socialist 
rural areas. [applause] 
  What do the struggle which was waged for the past thirty 
years to build socialist rural areas and all historic victories 
which were brought about in this process tell us? They tell us 
that the "Theses on the Socialist Rural Question in Our 
Country," which the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song presented, 
are the only just guideline that completely eliminates the 
legacies of the outdated society -- which remained in the rural 
areas even after the socialist system was established -- and 
ultimately resolves the rural question and that only when one 
follows the wise leadership of the party and the leader 
[suryong], one can brilliantly complete the cause of building 
socialist rural areas and build an excellent and [word 
indistinct] chuche-oriented socialist society -- which all 
people earnestly desire -- without any deviation, twist, or 
turn. [applause] 
  The cause of liberating peasants, a cause that the great 
leader Comrade Kim Il-song cultivated in the dawn of the Korean 
revolution and has persistently developed ever since, has 
advanced far under our party's leadership, and we will in the 
near future see the day when we will complete the historic cause 
of building socialist rural areas and fire a salute of guns on 
the complete victory of socialism. [applause] 
  The rural theses, which many people considered to be ideal 
30 years ago, have become a brilliant reality in our rural areas 
today. With the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song, who has 
brought about this cataclysmic change, in attendance, we today 
are summing up the historic victory of the rural theses. This 
is our people's great honor and a great felicitous revolutionary 
event. [applause] 
  Under the wise leadership of the party and the leader, we 
brilliantly solved the problem involving peasants and the 
agricultural problem, which are difficult and complicated 
problems in building socialism, from the stand of chuche. In 
this way, we showed an example in building socialist rural 
areas. We can proudly talk about this. [applause] 
  Our people and agricultural workers will also in the future 
defend and maintain the most excellent socialist rural economic 
system that the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song established and 
that our party is glorifying. They will also more vigorously 
accelerate the chuche-oriented cause of building socialism. 
  On this meaningful National Agriculture Meeting in which we 
are summing up the rural theses, with the boundless admiration 
and fervent loyalty of all people and agricultural workers, I 
extend the greatest honor and warmest thanks to the great leader 
of our party and our people Comrade Kim Il-song, who built the 
most excellent socialist rural economic system in our country, 
created a brilliant example in solving the socialist rural 
problem, and wisely led our people's long struggle -- to build 
socialism -- to endless upsurges. [applause] 
  Comrades: Today, we have an honorable task to further 
consolidate and develop the rural economic system in our country 
and score new upsurges in agricultural production based on the 
great victories of the rural theses. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song elucidated a militant 
task to thoroughly implement the policy of giving top priority 
to agriculture, the light industry, and foreign trade, a policy 
presented in his New Year's address, his historic letter to this 
meeting, and the decision at the 21st plenary meeting of the 
sixth party Central Committee, and to further accelerate the 
cause of building socialist rural areas. He also elucidated how 
one can carry out this militant task. [applause] 
  The revolutionary economic strategies and tasks to build 
rural areas the party presented are a major guideline that must 
be firmly adhered to in the struggle to fulfill our people's 
earnest desire to eat rice and meat soup, wear silk clothes, and 
live in a tile-roofed house and in the struggle to further 
glorify popular masses-centered socialism of our own style. 
They are also an encouraging banner that calls all our people 
and agricultural workers to a new worthwhile struggle and feats. 
  Scoring endless upsurges in the building of rural areas and 
light-industrial production is a key to success in carrying out 
the party's revolutionary economic strategies. As indicated in 
the old saying "Agriculture is the foundation of a nation," 
nothing is more important than doing farming well and 
satisfactorily solving the food problem. As the saying "Well 
fed, well bred" goes, when we do farming well and have abundant 
food as a result, the people's awareness will improve and we 
will be able to solve the clothing and housing problems smoothly 
and strongly defend socialism and continuously glorify it 
despite the enemy's challenges and aggression maneuvers. 
  In the supply of rice to the people, realizing the communist 
distribution of rice is our party's firm position. 
  We should continuously make innovations and advance in all 
areas of rural construction and agricultural production, firmly 
holding the party's agriculture-first policy. By doing so, we 
should further strengthen the might of the chuche-oriented 
socialist rural economic system. 
  In order to strengthen the socialist rural [word indistinct] 
and to effect a new upsurge in the rural construction and 
agricultural production, we should continue to advance, without 
deviation, along the revolutionary road that the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song elucidated in the "Theses on Our Socialist 
Rural Problems," as we did in the past. 
  Because of their truthfulness and universality, ideologies 
and theories in the rural theses have eternal vitality in the 
struggle to consummate the popular masses' cause of 
independence, and serve as an immortal banner and beacon that 
illuminates the future of socialist rural construction. 
[applause] 
  We should, above all, continue to vigorously carry out the 
ideological revolution in the rural areas, so that we can firmly 
unite all agricultural working people around the party and the 
leader, strengthen the single-hearted unity of our revolutionary 
ranks, and raise them all to be enthusiastic revolutionaries who 
are loyal to the socialist cause. 
  It is an important task we face in the course of the 
ideological revolution today to make all agricultural working 
people have firm faith in and will for the victory of the 
socialist cause. One's ideology that is unswayable and 
invariable under any difficult situation comes from a firm faith 
in the greatness of one's leader [suryong] and one's leader 
[yongdoja]. Faith indoctrination [sinnyom kyoyang] and will 
indoctrination [uiji kyoyang] are essential in helping people 
deeply experience the greatness of the party and the leader 
[suryong]. 
  We should take the greatest care of our revolutionary ranks' 
single-hearted unity hardened as firm as a rock under the 
party's leadership and should further consolidate and develop 
it. We should also have a strong will and the firm belief that 
the chuche socialist cause will achieve the victory without fail 
as long as the leadership of the party and the leader exists, 
and should consider the loyalty to the party and the leader a 
faith, consciousness, a moral, and a routine. 
  Functionaries and working people of the agricultural sector, 
in particular, should highly display the revolutionary spirit of 
self-relience and fortitude. 
  The spirit of self-relience and fortitude is the 
revolutionary spirit based on the economic view that we will 
consummate the revolution and construction with our own 
strength. It is also the invincible fighting spirit of 
defending the revolutionary banner, unyielding under any trial 
or difficulty. 
  Just like we have advanced while upholding the revolutionary 
slogan for self-relience and fortitude, we should smash all 
antisocialist maneuvers by imperialists and reactionaries and 
consummate the socialist cause, upholding this slogan in the 
future, too. "Let Us Vigorously Accelerate the General Onward 
March of Socialism With the Revolutionary Spirit of 
Self-Relience and Fortitude" is called for by our party and is a 
militant slogan that our people should uphold today. [applause] 
  Following all the functionaries and working people in the 
agricultural sector who struggled to increase food [words 
indistinct] in those severe days of war, cities and rural areas 
that were laid to ruin, in an empty land devoid of practically 
anything were reconstructed and effected a great Chollima 
upswing, we should stoutly struggle with the vigor of the 
Chollima speed of the nineties and with the revolutionary spirit 
of self-relience and fortitude. By doing so, we should 
completely implement the party's revolutionary economic strategy 
and greately advance the superiority of the chuche-oriented 
socialist rural economic system to the maximum. 
  Also, we must work so that all the agricultural workers 
enthusiastically concur with the great reality of our system and 
our socialist fatherland and strengthen socialist and patriotic 
indoctrination, so that we can have high spirit and affection 
toward our system and socialist fatherland. In addition, we 
must work so that all the agricultural workers endlessly 
treasure, firmly advocate and adhere to, and endlessly elucidate 
generation after generation the immortal leadership achievements 
of the party and the leader that infinitely devote their energy 
and efforts to provide a gracious socialist system. 
  We must further strengthen collective indoctrination in 
accordance with the intrinsic nature of socialist society among 
the agricultural workers so that they can firmly establish the 
chuche-oriented outlook on life and collective outlook on 
living, and endlessly train themselves through organized life 
and practical production to persistently and assiduously carry 
out farm work from the position of master responsible for the 
country's rice chest. We must also highly display the communist 
virtue in all fields of socialist life and decisively reject all 
kinds of capitalist ideology and out-dated conventionalities 
based on individualism. 
  Continuously pushing ahead with the technological revolution 
on farms is an important task in enhancing agriculture to a 
highly industrial and modern level, making the farmers carry out 
farm work more easily and pleasantly, and in achieving endless 
upsurges in agricultural production. We must consolidate the 
results achieved in irrigation, standardization, mechanization, 
and chemicalization in the rural economy, increase state 
investment in agriculture, and further strengthen the material 
and technological basis, so that a new epoch-making progress can 
be made in agricultural production. 
  We must manage and reinforce the existing irrigation 
facilities in the rural economy section well, and prospectively 
carry out irrigation construction which can sufficiently 
guarantee water in the increasing reclaimed land and new land. 
This is to all the more smoothly solve the demand of [word 
indistinct] irrigation water and actively promote the irrigation 
of the technological land reclamation construction to change the 
pumping water irrigation system into a natural water supply 
system, and thoroughly establish the [words indistinct] system 
so that the [word indistinct] irrigation system of our country 
can bear even more fruit. 
  We must maintain the electricity production technology which 
we have already provided even more, exert efforts to normalize 
production at a high level, quickly finish the construction of 
the on-going construction of power stations, and construct more 
small, and medium-sized power stations through an all-people's 
movement, to smoothly satisfy the demand of electricity which is 
increasing on farms. 
  We must consolidate and develop the results achieved in the 
overall irrigation of the rural economy even more to further 
enhance the mechanization level of the rural sector, and work so 
that farming can be carried out without aid from cooperative 
farms. If the overall mechanization level of the rural economy 
is to be endlessly enhanced, various modern agricultural 
machines such as tractors and trucks must be produced and 
supplied. 
  We must continue to exert efforts for the mechanization of 
the rural economy to smoothly solve the increasing demand of 
tractors and trucks in the farms, and must produce and supply 
more agricultural machines which are necessary in the 
mechanization of difficult work including rice planting, 
removing young rice plants from seedbeds, preparation of the 
ridges of rice-field plots prior to seed transplants, and autumn 
reaping. Also, we must produce and supply more agricultural 
machines that are appropriate for mountainous areas and slopes. 
  We must all the more firmly maintain repair bases including 
tractor spare part plants and agricultural machine work sites, 
expand their capacities, systematically establish the 
agricultural management and operation system, and accelerate 
chemicalization so that the utilization of agricultural machines 
can be enhanced to the utmost. Also, efforts must be 
continuously made in the land readjustment work to provide a 
more favorable condition for the mechanization of agricultural 
work. 
  Under conditions in which our country's agricultural 
development is reaching a high stage, the largest reserve in 
agricultural production is to all the more realize 
chemicalization at a high stage for the rural economy. We must 
work so that the chemical fertilizer plants can strengthen their 
material and technological basis; produce and supply additional 
varieties of chemical fertilizers needed on farms; and work to 
guarantee [word indistinct] element fertilizer including silicon 
fertilizer, slightly burnt magnesia fertilizer, and boron in 
accordance with the assortment of fertilizers. We must actively 
promote and produce organic fertilizers including [word 
indistinct] fertilizer, human decomposed fertilizer, and 
nitrogenous fertilizer whose superiority was proven in recent 
new studies, and [words indistinct]. 
  The rural economy sector should properly carry out 
management of possession and maintenance of chemical fertilizer 
in conformity with its [word indistinct], widely introduce new 
manuring methods, and increase to the maximum the [word 
indistinct] of chemical fertilizer. At the same time, the rural 
economy sector should use more varieties of [word indistinct] 
agricultural chemicals, and herbicide to protect the crops from 
damage from blight and insects and to help weed fields. 
  Vigorously waging the rural cultural revolution on a 
continuous basis is an important task of the agricultural 
working people to enhance the level of their technological 
knowledge and culture and, thus, to build rural communities in a 
more civilized way. 
  We should strengthen education in agricultural colleges and 
agricultural technical schools that study agriculture. Also, we 
should meet the needs of the agricultural sector by training 
more talented personnel with technology by including as many 
cooperative farm members as possible in education institutions, 
like farm colleges, so agricultural working people can study 
while working. We should wage the work of spreading the 
knowledge on agricultural science and technology among the 
agricultural working people through agricultural science and 
technology propaganda rooms and should actively wage mass 
cultural work . Thus, we should enhance the agricultural working 
people's technological and cultural level so that they can lead 
their rural cultural life in a more varied ways. 
  Along with this, we should build more houses for peasants 
and 
make all rural villages more cultural and sanitary and a better 
place to live. 
  By thoroughly implementing the chuche farm method on the 
strength of the firm material and technological foundation of 
our agriculture and the agricultural working people's high 
technological and cultural level this year, when we greet the 
30th anniversary of the publication of the rural theses, we 
should effect another great upsurge in agricultural production 
and lift the development of our agriculture up to the highest 
level. [applause] 
  The rural economy sector should constantly increase the 
ranks 
of county with high yield crops by vigorously waging the 
movement to win the county with high yield crops and should see 
to it that a great upsurge is effected in all agricultural 
production units by waging the struggle to produce grain crops 
of more than 10 tonnes per chongbo [one chongbo is 2.451 acres]. 
  We should not only vigorously accelerate tideland 
reclamation 
work by concentrating all-nation and all-people efforts on it, 
but should also accelerate the projects of infrastructure nets 
so that farming can be properly carried out in already reclaimed 
tidelands. At the same time, we should actively wage the 
struggle to expand tilled land by cultivating hills and idle 
land. 
  The rural economy sector should assiduously manage tilled 
land in the same spirit that peasants displayed in the struggle 
during the arduous period of the fatherland liberation war, 
upholding the slogan of "Let us not leave even an inch of land 
uncultivated," and should see to it that all sectors and units 
strictly abide by the land law. The rural economy sector should 
concentrate all efforts on farming, should farm properly 
according to the demands of the chuche farm method, and should, 
thus, attain production goals for grain crops without fail. It 
should also further develop all sectors of agricultural 
production such as the sectors of vegetable, industrial crops, 
livestock, orchard, and sericulture. The present era is the era 
of science and technology, developing agricultural science is an 
urgent task to rapidly increase agricultural production. 
  All scientists and technicians in the agricultural sector 
should accelerate the green revolution based on already attained 
successes, and should actively pioneer basic sciences and new 
agricultural science, including biology, physiological 
chemistry, cytology, and genetic engineering. Thus, they should 
actively wage research activities to enhance the level of 
intensification, modernization, and scientification of 
agricultural production. 
  We should further strengthen the industrial management 
method 
of guidance to agricultural production and further enhance the 
level of planning and organizing management activities. We 
should thoroughly embody democratic principles in managing and 
operating cooperative farms and vigorously wage the struggle to 
increase production. At the same time, we should properly carry 
out the sub-work team management system and the work team bonus 
system, and further improve and strengthen the labor, property, 
and financial management by establishing the prime cost 
calculation system of agricultural production. 
  By firmly building the material and technological 
foundation of state enterprises serving the rural economy, by 
continuously enhancing the roles of material and technological 
means of state ownership in agricultural production, by 
constantly enhancing the guidance role of ownership by all the 
people over ownership by cooperative farms, and by taking 
measures to gradually convert cooperative farms into farms under 
the ownership system by all the people in the future, we should 
see to it that the ownership by all the people is firmly 
established. 
  Further strengthening rural party work in conformity with 
the 
developing realities is a firm guarantee for accelerating 
overall socialist rural construction. Rural party organizations 
should firmly grasp the party's overall agricultural policies, 
should enhance the responsibilites and awareness of 
administrative and economic functionaries, and, thus, should see 
to it that all the agricultural working people unanimously rise 
up as one in the struggle to implement the party's agricultural 
policies and the chuche farm method, giving priority to the 
party's political work, that is, work with men. 
  Party organizations in the rural economy sector should 
enhance the role of public organizations such as the 
Agricultural Workers Union and the Socialist Working Youth 
League and should wage the movement to win the red flag of the 
three revolutions and the movement to follow and emulate the 
model set by unheralded heros in close combination with the work 
to exalt beautiful communist virtues. Thus, party organizations 
in the rural economy sector should see to it that the 
agricultural working people can devotedly work for the party, 
for the revolution, for society, and for collectives as the 
masters of the socialist collectivist economy. 
  In particular, county party committees should properly 
manage 
counties and properly carry out party guidance so that the 
county's role can be further enhanced in socialist rural 
construction. 
  All functionaries of the rural economy sector should deeply 
cherish in their hearts the honorable mission for the party and 
the revolution and mingle with the peasant masses in accordance 
with the demands of the revolutionary slogan, "We serve the 
people." They should also take the lead in the implementation 
of the party's policies while smelling soil and compost together 
with the peasant masses. Thus, they should become genuine 
servants for the people who can skillfully organize and mobilize 
the masses. 
  Comrades: With the achievement of the great victory of the 
socialist rural theses under the wise leadership of the party 
and the leader [suryong] our country's socialist might has 
strengthened to be invincible, and we have come to have greater 
assets which enable us to guarantee the country's grandeur and 
development and the people's happy life. Our struggle has 
become more rewarding and mighty, and the future prospect of our 
country's socialism has become brighter. 
  The external situation of our revolution is still serious 
and 
complicated, and our people's struggle is difficult and arduous. 
However, because of the tested leadership of the great party and 
the might of the popular masses who have firmly united around 
the party and the leader as one ideological will, no imperialist 
reactionary forces can frustrate our people who are fighting 
with courage and firm faith in the correctness of our cause nor 
can they divest the independent and creative life of our people 
and the agricultural working people. 
  History shows that the struggle of the people who are 
advancing under the banner of the revolution, that is, the 
banner of socialism, while surmounting all sorts of trials and 
difficulties, will be victorious without fail and that their 
achievements will be glorified forever along with the 
development of the times. 
  We should effect a new great upsurge in all sectors of the 
revolution and construction with the great national dignity of 
being blessed with the leadership of our party which is firmly 
leading the eternal grandeur and prosperity of the country and 
the consummation of the chuche revolutionary cause to certain 
victory while shielding the destiny and future of our 
fatherland, our revolution, our people, and our future 
generations. Thus, we should brilliantly record the nineties, 
the last era of the 20th century, and should dash toward the 
21st century, a bright and hopeful new century. [applause] 
  Let us all firmly unite around the party Central Committee 
headed by the respected and beloved leader Comrade Kim Il-song 
and vigorously fight to expedite the completion of the socialist 
cause and the fatherland's reunification under the revolutionary 
banner of the chuche idea. [applause] 
  Long live Comrade Kim Il-song, the great leader of our party 
and our people. [applause and hurrah] 
  Long live the glorious Workers Party of Korea, the organizer 
and guide to all victories of the Korean people. [applause and 
hurrah] 
  Long live the 30th anniversary of the publication of the 
great socialist rural theses. [applause, hurrah, shouting of 
slogans] 

