Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interview with Nabil Sha'th, political adviser to </F>
PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat and head of Palestinian delegation to 
negotiations with Israel, by Muhammad 'Allam in Cairo; date not 
given] 
  [Text] Dr. Nabil Sha'th, political adviser to Palestinian 
President Yasir 'Arafat, has stated that the massacre of 
worshippers in al-Ibrahimi mosque "was not less serious than the 
Sarajevo massacre which put expressions of sadness on the lips 
of U.S. President Bill Clinton to the point of changing the 
course of events in Bosnia-Herzegovina." 
  In an interview with AL-HAYAH, Sha'th, who is the head of 
the 
Palestinian delegation to the Cairo negotiations with Israel on 
implementation of the interim autonomy agreement in Gaza and 
Jericho, criticized the U.S. reaction reflected in Clinton's 
call for the negotiations to be moved from Cairo to Washington. 
He asked: "After all that has happened, is the transfer of the 
negotiations the only reaction?" 
  Sha'th, who was today recalled to Tunis by Palestinian 
President Yasir 'Arafat for consultation, also asked: "Was the 
massacre caused by the fact that the negotiations were not being 
held in Washington?" He said: "The causes were the collusion 
between the Israeli Army and the settlers, who are armed to the 
teeth..., the fact that the Israeli Government did not open fire 
on the settlers as they were killing dozens of Palestinian 
people..., the settlement policy, and the arming of the 
settlers." 
  On what was required of the United States, Sha'th said that 
"the United States, Israel, and the international community 
should disarm the settlers, reconsider the settlement policy, 
and provide international guarantees for the Palestinian 
people.... That is what is required and that is what the 
reaction should be." He pointed out that "all these guarantees 
could be provided through the very same Oslo agreement." 
  He asked: "What if the situation was reversed?... What if a 
Palestinian broke into a Jewish synagogue, opened fire on the 
worshippers, and killed 90 people and wounded 300 others?... 
What would have happened in the world if that took place?" 
  On the suspension of the Cairo negotiations, which were 
supposed to be resumed tomorrow, he said: "The question now is 
what do we negotiate about? We must first know what guarantees 
the world can offer us." He added: "Why summon the negotiators 
to Washington? In Cairo we were making progress and were about 
to finish our work." He continued: "What is required is not a 
move to Washington but work to avoid a repetition of what has 
happened, particularly as this massacre was not the first. 
There were many massacres before." Sha'th said: "The world 
should now immediately identify the real criminal, namely the 
settlement policy." 
  He drew attention to the fact that "the Israeli negotiators 
had wasted two-thirds of the negotiation time discussing 
protection for the settlers. What happened at al-Ibrahim mosque 
shows that the Palestinians are the ones who need protection." 
He stressed that the massacre demonstrated to the world "who is 
more in need of protection than the other." 
  On the PLO's moves and responsibilities after the al-Ibrahim 
mosque massacre in Hebron, he said: "The PLO's responsibility 
now is to protect our people in the occupied territory." He 
warned that if no protection guarantees are given to the 
Palestinians, the peace process would suffer "and the region 
would drown in a sea of blood as soon as any agreement is 
signed." 
  Asked if there were any conditions for the resumption of the 
negotiations in Cairo or Washington, he said: "Our duty now is 
to protect the people." He added: "Who is to guarantee us that 
this would not be repeated in al-Aqsa mosque where about 20,000 
worshippers perform the dawn prayer every day; particularly as 
it has happened before when settlers, in cooperation with 
soldiers, stormed al-Aqsa mosque and opened fire on the 
worshippers, which could easily be repeated in the absence of 
guarantees?" 
  Sha'th ridiculed the Israeli Government's claims that the 
perpetrator of the massacre was mentally ill. He said: "The 
theory about a deranged butcher is an irrational and immoral way 
of absolving Israel of the responsibility from beginning to end." 
  Asked if the massacre would become an item on the agenda of 
the negotiations, if resumed, so that guarantees could be 
requested, Sha'th emphasized that "the Gaza-Jericho agreement 
has guarantees.... The Israelis procrastinated on the grounds 
that the settlers were not a problem and the claim that Hamas 
was the problem..., but it has now been proven that the opposite 
is true." 
  Sha'th accused the Israeli Army of collusion with the 
settlers in this massacre. He stressed that "this criminal act 
was not an isolated personal act. It was committed in an 
atmosphere of collusion." He pointed out that "worshipers in 
al-Ibrahimi mosque pray with the guns of Israeli soldiers over 
their heads.... Where was that army?" He affirmed that "eight 
of the martyrs were killed by occupation soldiers' fire at the 
door of the mosque." 

