pp 10-14 
<F P=103> 944Q0160A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow MIROVAYA EKONOMIKA I MEZHDUNARODNYYE 
OTNOSHENIYA </F>

 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by D. Malysheva: "Central Asia--Muslim Challenge to </F>
Russia?"] 
  [Text] The planning of foreign policy in Central Asia 
reflects many of the contradictions of the present stage of 
Russia's development. The necessary unity and civic consensus 
with regard to development priorities in Russia itself have not 
been achieved yet, and the debates over Russia's national 
interests and foreign policy in Central Asia reveal two mutually 
exclusive approaches. The supporters of the first advocate the 
gradual curtailment of the Russian presence in Central Asia to a 
minimum and eventual "withdrawal" from the region. The others 
believe that Russia should act as the direct successor to the 
USSR as a guarantor of peace and stability in Central Asia, 
which is being threatened by "creeping Islamization," conflicts, 
and other problems. It is obvious that the aims of Russia's 
Central Asian policy will depend ultimately on the development 
option it chooses: Either it will be able to escape the confines 
of the old great-power and isolationist thinking, or 
neoconservative efforts could result in the use of the country's 
resources for the restoration of the imperial structure. 
  While Russia's development priorities and the aims of its 
Central Asian policy are being debated, serious geopolitical 
changes are taking place in the Asian region. The collapse of 
the USSR was followed here by the transformation of old centers 
of influence and the emergence of new ones with connections to 
different parts of the former Soviet Union and by the elevation 
of national and religious consciousness, combined with the 
surviving potential for territorial and ethnic conflicts--these 
tragic corollaries of the emergence of national states. 
  Events in Central Asia can have the most direct effect on 
Russian interests. Russia has maintained its presence on the 
border between the European Christian world and the gigantic 
zone of Islamic civilization. The primary concerns are the 
maintenance of peace and stability in Central Asia, the security 
of CIS borders in this region, the protection of the Russian 
population's interests, and the creation of conditions excluding 
a spontaneous mass exodus of the Russians from the region. The 
realization of Russia's vital interests in Central Asia will 
depend largely on its ability to overcome the imperial syndrome 
and establish equitable and mutually beneficial relations with 
the former fraternal republics. This should not, however, 
exclude firm and consistent responses to any challenges 
constituting a threat to Russian security. The question of the 
real or imaginary aspects of the "Islamic threat" to our country 
and its interests in Central Asia is of fundamental significance 
in this connection. 
  Assessments of religious and political affairs in the 
Central 
Asian region have always been extremely contradictory. Many 
Western analysts, especially French researchers, created the 
image of Central Asia as part of the "Islamic world," as a group 
of Muslim territories subjected in recent years to the concerted 
influence of fundamentalist ideas from neighboring Iran and 
Afghanistan. Other experts assert that Central Asia is not in 
any sense an "Islamic land" (dar al Islam), but simply one of 
the regions of the "Russified Soviet subculture" that gave rise 
to the specific phenomenon of "homo Sovieticus." The view of the 
new independent states in Central Asia as "Muslim" territories 
has been denied vigorously on the official level, mainly with 
references (particularly in Kazakhstan) to the polyethnic and 
polyreligious nature of these young republics and to the 
separation of church and state in these republics. In addition, 
there are some researchers (I. Rotar, for example) who believe 
that the events in Central Asia after the collapse of the USSR 
were not a religious revolution, but the "legalization of 
religious institutions" that had existed here throughout the 
Soviet period, and that their influence should not be 
overestimated. 
  There is some truth in all of these points of view, but the 
facts are always more complex than any theories and ideas, even 
the most intriguing ones. The development of the Central Asian 
states in the last few years has provided conclusive proof that 
"homo Sovieticus" is a myth, and that the majority of people in 
Central Asia, just as in other parts of the former Soviet Union, 
are not indifferent to their ethnic and religious roots. The 
specific forms of ethnic nationalism and religious rebirth are a 
different matter, however, and so are the specific 
roles--stabilizing and destabilizing--they might play in the 
establishment of the national state. 
  The intensity of processes of religious and cultural rebirth 
in Central Asia would be difficult to deny. There are external 
signs of this in the new mosques, the rising number of religious 
pilgrims, and the many religious celebrations. Islamic 
influences are apparent in the most diverse spheres: in everyday 
life, where religion is serving as a source of comfort and a 
point of reference in a rapidly changing and anxiety-ridden 
world; on the cultural level, in the search for ethnic and 
religious cultural roots and "origins" and the acknowledgement 
of the historic role of the Islamic people of Central Asia in 
world civilization; on the political level, in the emergence of 
political religious movements, parties, and associations 
promoting the Islamic alternative and competing with communist, 
nationalist, and other ideologies. 
  In the new independent states of Central Asia, Islam is 
turning into a force that cannot be ignored by the government. 
This is why the references to Islamic values by the heads of all 
Central Asian states, regardless of their political aims, are 
primarily intended to mobilize public opinion, impart a certain 
degree of legitimacy to the authority of the new "national 
fathers," and win as much diplomatic and financial support as 
possible from the leading states in the Islamic world. 
  In itself, Islam does not constitute a threat to security 
and 
stability. Its more important role in the life of the new 
independent states in Central Asia reflects the natural and 
legitimate desire of people belonging to the same religion and 
having the same cultural heritage, sanctified by this religion, 
to return to their traditions and roots and establish regular 
dialogue and communication with others of this religion 
throughout the former USSR and beyond its boundaries. The 
politicized form of Islam is a different matter, however, 
because it is capable of creating tension in the society and 
provoking religious and ethnic conflicts, turmoil, and 
confrontations. 
  The origins and foundation of political Islam, or Islamism, 
in Central Asia are virtually the same as in the Muslim states 
of the Third World. They are economic stagnation, the 
marginalization of society, growing unemployment (particularly 
among youth), the absence of democratic traditions, the 
prevalence of ethnic, clan, and national factors in politics, 
and the growing influence of extremist ideas, accompanied by the 
harassment of weak and isolated democratic parties and movements. 
  In addition to this, all of the talk about the threat of 
Islamic fundamentalism probably conceals completely perceptible 
interests and specific political goals. It has been convenient 
for government officials in the majority of Central Asian states 
to portray the whole opposition, including its secular segments, 
as Islamic fanatics and to promote authoritarianism as an 
alternative to fundamentalist expansion. The neocommunists in 
Tajikistan resorted to force without hesitation, starting a 
civil war as soon as the opposition, promptly labeled 
"Islamists" (or "Wahhabists"), made a bid for power. The most 
diverse political forces have played the "Islamic card" with 
some success--from members of the local elite, clans, and 
special services to nationalist and political groups and 
movements. It is no secret that the "Russian speakers," who were 
in a particularly difficult position after the collapse of the 
USSR, were caught in the trap of anti-Islamic propaganda. It is 
difficult for them to give up the stereotypes of imperial 
thinking and to make the necessary psychological adjustments to 
their new self-image as an ethnic minority. In addition, the 
local nationalist movements speculating on tradition and the 
strong commitment to Islam have alienated even the democratic 
segment of the "foreign" population. 
  Nevertheless, "political Islam" is still incapable of 
playing 
a major mobilizing role in this region. There are no influential 
and well-organized Muslim parties and movements in the region 
with traditions of political struggle, and there are no 
charismatic leaders capable of compensating for the lack of 
political organizations and rallying the other Muslims. Islamism 
is opposed by the still monolithic and rigid regime in the 
region. 
  Russia and its Central Asian neighbors in the CIS have an 
interest in stable and predictable development and the exclusion 
of the possibility of confrontations. All of the efforts to 
arouse fear of the Islamic threat and the dangers represented by 
Islamic fundamentalism, as well as the emotional statements 
about Russia's role in the protection of Western civilization 
from the "creeping Islamic threat," however, are compounding 
Russia's own domestic problems because of the country's 
polyreligious nature. Besides this, the fueling of Islamophobia 
has made Russian policy suspect in states with a primarily 
Muslim population in the CIS and the Third World. 
  The participation of the Russian military in internal 
conflicts on the side of forces announcing their intention to 
"put an end to the Islamic (and democratic) epidemic," as in the 
case of the civil war in Tajikistan, is probably setting an 
extremely dangerous precedent, regardless of the arguments that 
are being used to justify these actions (the protection of 
ethnic Russians, the defense of borders, etc.). This puts 
citizens of the Russian nationality in the position of potential 
refugees, because the mistrust in them as "infidels" or as a 
"fifth column" could be fueled by Islamist propaganda. 
Furthermore, Russian military support of one side in this kind 
of conflict could draw the country into another war like the 
Afghan one. 
  Russia's interests are unlikely to be served by the creation 
of some form of "union of the cross and crescent," not to 
mention membership in official military-political blocs with 
Central Asian members of the CIS. The idea of endowing Russia 
with the power to serve as a "bridge" or "relay" between East 
and West also sounds impractical, because today's states prefer 
to forge their bilateral relations directly, without any 
intermediaries. 
  Religious and political affairs in Central Asia, in spite of 
the differences between the states of the region, suggest that 
militant Islam and confrontation with neighboring states are not 
the prevailing tendency in politics. Are the "distant Islamic 
foreign countries" capable of influencing Central Asian policy 
in ways detrimental to Russian interests? 
  Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and Afghanistan would seem to have 
the greatest chances of doing this. They all support, to some 
extent, the idea of a broad association of Muslim states, which 
would include the Central Asian republics of the former Soviet 
Union. The leaders of some political parties and movements in 
Third World states are also known to be willing to assist in the 
more vigorous introduction of the Islamic alternative into 
politics in the new independent states of Central Asia and are 
urging the governments of their countries to offer more 
effective support to the Islamic opposition in Tajikistan, 
Uzbekistan, and other republics. The leaders of the states 
bordering on Central Asia have avoided involvement in the 
internal political struggle in the former CIS republics thus 
far, and they do not support the territorial repartition of the 
region, because they are aware of the adverse security 
implications of this process. 
  Russia's waning influence in Central Asia and the 
possibility 
of its total withdrawal from the region could kindle the 
political ambitions of neighboring states and intensify the 
struggle for spheres of influence in this region. Russia does 
not want the balance of power in the region to be disrupted in 
favor of the states with a primarily Muslim population, and 
neither does China or India. Nevertheless, Russia is in no 
position to impede the inevitable shift of the Central Asian 
republics toward the "Islamic world." Because the hypothetical 
community of Central Asian states will not necessarily become an 
automatic enemy of Russia, Moscow has to display maximum concern 
for their national and religious feelings, as well as the 
traditions based on the political and cultural unity of the 
region in the past, before it was divided by the tsarist 
conquests, especially at this time, while militant Islam still 
occupies only an insignificant place in the spectrum of the 
whole Islamic movement in Central Asia, and while moderate 
Muslim currents still want to preserve the historic ties with 
Russia. 
  COPYRIGHT: Rossiyskaya Akademiya Nauk Institut mirovoy 
ekonomiki i mezhdunarodnykh otnosheniy RAN, 1993 

