CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Peter Ziller: "Market Forces Guide </F>
Everything--Even Ministers: Currently Guenter Rexrodt's Stock Is 
Not Particularly High With Entrepreneurs and His Own Party 
Colleagues"] 
  [Text] Privatization, less government, liberalization, free 
trade--even on his visit to faraway Cairo Guenter Rexrodt holds 
to these well-known articles of faith, assuring the Egyptian 
journalists who view their own country and the Third World as 
losers of the most recent GATT round that everyone stands to 
gain from the new agreement on world trade. 
  In the luxurious conference room of the Marriott Hotel 
distinctions tend to become blurred. Business school graduate 
Rexrodt offers the same therapy for joblessness in giant export 
nation Germany as for mass unemployment in the developing 
countries: increase productivity, reduce competitive 
disadvantages, conquer new markets. That's all there is to it. 
The way Rexrodt looks at it there are only winners. And yet, the 
prescriptions he offers, sometimes persuasively and sometimes 
didactically, do not impress his Egyptian listeners whose 
experiences tell them otherwise. 
  As far as Rexrodt is concerned, market forces can fix 
anything. And now they are fixing his wagon as well. Powerful 
industrialists are at odds with him. The Free Democrats (FDP), 
the entrepreneurs' party, which was booted out of two regional 
assemblies within the past few months is reacting nervously. 
After the party's debacle in Lower Saxony, honorary party 
chairman Hans-Dietrich Genscher complained that Rexrodt is 
running the economy like a lab experiment and called for a 
change of course; for new ideas in place of "entrepreneurial 
populism." 
  For one thing Rexrodt's deregulation campaign against 
discount legislation and binding store closing hours has angered 
the Association of German Retailers (HDE). Hermann Franzen, the 
association's president, has publicly and quite openly 
threatened to get back at the minister. "The retailers and their 
employees should not be put off unnecessarily," he said. "The 
whole thing might just backfire." The Association of 
Medium-Sized and Large Concerns (BAG) is unhappy about the idea 
that customers would bargain at department store registers as if 
they were in a bazaar. 
  The anger of the big shots is primarily directed against 
Rexrodt. Johann Hellwege, the BAG general secretary, says that 
both the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social Union 
(CDU/CSU) and the chancellor himself are not to blame. Their 
agreement was obtained on the basis of the (faulty) argument 
that freeing discount competition was part of the united Europe 
code. On this issue the FDP also faces opposition by the 
newspaper publishers and the Federation of Chambers of German 
Industry and Commerce (DIHT). Rexrodt, however, says he will 
stand his ground. "We are doing this on the basis of a 
government decision." The legislation will be passed unless "the 
political parties represented in the Bundestag leave me in the 
lurch." That proviso of Rexrodt's seems to indicate he does not 
feel as sure of himself as he makes out. 
  Rexrodt also is at odds with the gas and electric power 
industries. An amendment to energy legislation would force them 
to open up pipelines and power grids to competition. But the 
electric companies and the communities allied with them want to 
hold on to their profitable "monopoly." That does not augur well 
for Rexrodt and the legislation proposed by him. And as he 
vainly points out that the government promised to introduce more 
competition in the gas and electricity fields in its economic 
report last fall the chancellor's office has said it would 
prefer to let things be. No new fronts are to be opened prior to 
the 16 October Bundestag election. 
  Rexrodt admits that even some members of his own party are 
keeping their distance now that he has picked a fight with some 
sectors of the business community. "Leave well enough alone! 
That is what individual members of the Bundestag caucus are 
saying." Rexrodt refuses to accept their advice because he feels 
it undermines his credibility. After all, the resolutions 
adopted by the FDP party convention call for the very 
initiatives he is trying to implement. He says he is "not 
stupid"; he could see resistance against the "legislation of the 
century" coming. He also knew that the energy legislation would 
not pass during this legislative session. Still, Rexrodt would 
have liked to see the cabinet decide to "get this thing moving, 
for the sake of credibility." 
  He felt that some "good battalions," i.e. small business 
interested in lower energy costs, the processing sector and the 
consumer associations were on his side. "But if you are left out 
in the cold," he says, letting his head hang momentarily. Almost 
instantly, however, the slackness is gone as he consoles himself 
by empasizing that the number of vacillators is limited to just 
"a few individuals." But the question is whether one can really 
refer to Genscher, Irmgard Schwaetzer, the regional planning 
minister, Juergen Moellemann, Rexrodt's predecessor and 
parliamentary party chairman Otto Solms as "just a few 
individuals." 
  The number of his critics and their intentions worry Rexrodt 
a good deal more than he is willing to admit. After all, the 
party decided just a short time ago to feature Rexrodt alongside 
Klaus Kinkel in its publicity campaign leading up to the 
election. Why then did Genscher single Rexrodt out for criticism 
at the meeting of the party presidium following the FDP's 
setback in Lower Saxony? Only because he was not there but at 
the job summit in Detroit? Could it be, his advisers speculate, 
that the critics were not aiming at Rexrodt at all but at the 
party's Number One? 
  Rexrodt says he "was not at all happy" about the fact that 
wide-ranging though the critique was at the time, only the harsh 
words aimed at him reached the public. He feels that the party 
should discuss its problems behind closed doors. Wishing to 
uphold his credibility, he is in no mood to contribute to the 
party's self-destruction. "Otherwise I would act in the very way 
we ought not to act." The only thing is: who is to say that 
success counts for more than honesty in the FDP's struggle for 
survival? 
  Just the same, Rexrodt is not taking Genscher's charge of 
entrepreneurial populism lying down. To be sure, Berlin's former 
finance senator never thought of himself as the champion of the 
lower classes. As soon as he took over his post in Bonn, he let 
it be known that as far as he was concerned the only way to 
overcome the serious economic crisis was to improve production 
conditions for business, to lower wages, and to institute tax 
cuts for high earners and investors. The critique of Rexrodt's 
policies by the Social Democratic Party (SPD) which alternately 
accuses him of "deregulation mania" and of being "on the wrong 
economic policy track" does not faze the self-confidently 
smiling Rexrodt one bit. But the attack from his own camp 
rattles him. Rexrodt thinks of himself as a "minister for the 
business community." But in his view that has nothing to do with 
entrepreneurial populism. 
  He also believes that a large segment of the population 
understands that. "I cannot simply distribute welfare among the 
people," he says. There is not enough money for it. "The people 
expect to be told the truth." And under those circumstances they 
can also be asked to make some sacrifices. 
  Rexrodt does not wish to be a populist but the blond, 
somewhat boyish-looking politician would like to be liked just 
the same. This attitude leads him to make hasty promises--big 
and small. A case in point: he is blithely promising tax cuts to 
high earners and entrepreneurs as early as 1996, although the 
cupboard in Bonn is bare. Rexrodt, who grew up in Thuringia, is 
equally generous on trips to foreign countries, e.g. promising 
Egypt's minister of tourism that he will do his best to work for 
fair and dispassionate coverage of the security situation along 
the Nile. A delicate undertaking in view of the fact that 
terrorists have killed four tourists and threatened additional 
attacks. Under the circumstances Rexrodt has been unable to 
deliver on his promise. 
  That is the minister's principal weakness: a great many 
words 
are followed by few deeds--which is attributable not only to the 
man himself but also to the limitations of his office. His 
ministry can draw up legislation solely on energy policy. Bluem 
is responsible for labor and social policy; Waigel is 
responsible for the treasury; protection of consumers and 
business regulations are part of the Justice Ministry's 
responsibilities. 
  In many instances Rexrodt's role is limited to proposing, 
remembering, urging, and insisting. His penchant for getting 
involved in several issues at a time increases the danger of 
failure. Rexrodt has the right issues, the DIHT says, but is 
unable to do much about them. A genuine "political heavyweight" 
he is not. 
  The main criticism leveled at Rexrodt by industry is that he 
failed to keep the cost-sharing provision for private-nursing 
insurance from passing. But Rexrodt does not accept 
responsibility for that. By the time he joined the cabinet in 
January 1993, he says, all "the bigwigs," including Count 
Lambsdorff, had already agreed to the bill. 

