Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Nabih Birri, speaker of the Lebanese Chamber of </F>
Deputies, in al-Qardahah, Syria--live] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] Your Excellency President great 
brother struggler Hafiz al-Asad; Your Excellency President Ilyas 
al-Hirawi; gentlemen: While trying to mend our broken hearts, 
allow me to depart from the realm of emotions to the realm of 
politics for a while. 
  On 4 March 1984, an Israeli explosive device went off at the 
al-Husayni Club in Ma'rakah in southern Lebanon, killing a crowd 
of people and a group of resistance men. On that day, Muhammad 
Sa'd and Khalil Jiradi, two resistance leaders, closed their 
eyes for the last time, fully aware that lofty southern Lebanon 
will persist with its resistance activities, that it will bow to 
nobody except God, and that it will shed no tears, except when 
it beseeches God, imploring Him for mercy. 
  Now, 10 years after the Israeli crime against a house of 
faith and resistance, and only a few days before the anniversary 
of that event, Israel, using sinful hands, has perpetrated a new 
crime against a house of God in the heart of Lebanon. Had it 
not been for God's grace and providence, this criminal massacre 
would have assumed monstrous proportions. It is no coincidence 
that only 50 hours separated the two crimes committed against 
peace in both Lebanon and the region. One of these crimes 
targeted faithful people and the Church in Lebanon, while the 
other targeted faithful people and the holy Ibrahimi Mosque in 
Hebron. 
  This month, approximately two weeks before the two massacres 
took place, I said that we would face real terrorism that could 
revive the terrorism of the Stern Gang and Haganah. I 
elaborated, saying that daily events show that Israel is 
upgrading its combat capabilities and staging maneuvers, the 
last of which was staged in the Golan on 9 February 1994. All 
these developments show that Israel is heading for war, rather 
than peace. I also said then, and I reiterate this right now, 
that I would not be making any miscalculations when I say that 
Israel is incapable of walking the path of settlement, and of 
paying a price for peace. This is because the Palestinian, 
Syrian, and Lebanese experience with Israel has revealed the 
dark shadows of an Israeli belligerence and occupation that 
cannot be removed by an unrequited peace. 
  The bloodbaths in the holy lands of Palestine and Lebanon 
are 
the best evidence that Israel is incapable of making peace. The 
new Israeli massacres are carbon copies of the massacres 
committed in Dayr Yasin, Qibyah, Bahr al-Baqar, Hula, al-Khiyam, 
Bint Jubayl, al-'Abbasiyah, al-Zurayriyah, and Ma'rakah. 
  Despite this bloody Israeli record, we still feel that 
Israel 
is granted immunity by the international community. It is 
allowed to act as it wishes, depending on the veto right, which 
is preventing the passage of firm international resolutions and 
the implementation of the provisions enshrined in Chapter 7 of 
the UN Charter against it. This renders the killing of our 
peoples, as is happening at present, a condonable crime, and the 
killing of a single Israeli settler or soldier on our occupied 
territories an unforgivable crime. Their occupation of our 
territories is justified, whereas our resistance on our own 
national soil is deemed terrorism. 
  At any rate, and in the aftermath of the bloodbaths the 
international community has seen with its naked eye, is there 
any longer anybody who believes in the attainability of peace on 
Israeli terms, when the places of worship have become targets of 
outrageous Israeli attacks? This is not indicative of a change 
in our options. For, in the first place, Syria and Lebanon, 
which share a common history, geography, destiny, and future, 
have adopted just and comprehensive peace as a strategic option. 
Such peace must liberate the territories and guarantee the 
restoration of rights upheld by international resolutions. 
  Hence, His Excellency President Hafiz al-Asad has 
characterized the peace we are striving to achieve as the peace 
of the brave. This peace is grounded in the option of 
resistance, struggle, and intifadah against the occupation. 
This is because these things are an indivisible part of our 
ancestry, heritage, Arabism, and creed, and also because they 
reflect rights enshrined in the UN Charter and international 
legitimacy. The confrontation of occupation is upheld by the UN 
Charter and international legitimacy. [passage omitted] 

