Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Luiz Orlando Carneiro] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia--Brazil could gain seven more states and 
three new territories with the stroke of a pen. All that would 
have to happen is for the various proposals to create new units 
in the federation to be approved during the constitutional 
revision. Intended for insertion in the final section of the 
Constitution--the so-called Transitory Constitutional Provisions 
Act--these amendments are designed to circumvent the limits 
imposed earlier, in Article 18, as was done in 1988, when the 
state of Tocantins was created. Added to the map of Brazil would 
be names of states like Iguacu, Tapajos, Triangulo, Carajas, 
Aripuana, Piratini, and Sao Paulo do Sul, and territories like 
Jurua, Alto Solimoes, and Araguaia. 
  Although the proposals for new states and territories have 
strong support in Congress, the trend among the rapporteurs of 
the revision (as acknowledged by one of them, Pernambuco Deputy 
Gustavo Krause of the PMDB [Brazilian Democratic Movement 
Party]) is to prevent them from being created under the umbrella 
of the Transitory Provisions. Deputy Nelson Jobim (PMDB, Rio 
Grande do Sul), the rapporteur-general, has already published an 
opinion that would modify Article 18 to make it harder to create 
new states or territories. The process would have to begin "at 
the bottom and work up to the top," with proposals originating 
with the state legislatures instead of the national Congress. 
The requirement for a plebiscite and enactment of a 
complementary law to regulate the subject are retained. 
  This is not the first we have heard of attempts to create 
the 
states of Triangulo (from Uberlandia, Uberaba, and other cities 
in the Minas Triangle) and Iguacu. The lobby [preceding word in 
English] is back in action now because of the constitutional 
revision, and it has the support of legislators from the North 
and West Central regions who want to add the states of Tapajos, 
Carajas, and Aripuana to the map. This would mean that on 3 
October they could elect governors, senators, and federal and 
state deputies. If seven states were created, the Chamber would 
have 57 more deputies and the Senate 21 more members. 
<H5>  Reconfiguration </H5>
  Deputy Hilario Coimbra (PTB-PA) [Brazilian Labor Party, Para 
State], author of one of the amendments to create the state of 
Tapajos, speaks of the "unquestionable need" to reconfigure the 
area known as the Legal Amazon. He points out that the 
Commission on Territorial Studies, instituted in the Congress in 
1989 in compliance with the Transitory Provisions of the 
Constitution, favored having more federated units in the region, 
among them the state of Tapajos, "as an effective requisite for 
promoting a stronger regional economy." Tapajos would be carved 
out of Para. Its capital would be Santarem and it would have 18 
municipalities, including Itaituba, in the gold-mining area. 
  The same economics-based arguments are cited to justify the 
creation of Carajas (incorporating 32 municipalities from Para, 
including Tucurui, Sao Felix do Xingu, and Sao Domingos do 
Araguaia) and Aripuana (taking 14 municipalities from Rondonia 
and Mato Grosso, including Aripuana, Vilhena, and Alta Floresta 
D'Oeste). 
  The state of Triangulo, were it to be created, would absorb 
79 Minas municipalities, some of them--like Uberaba, Uberlandia, 
Araxa, and Araguari--being among the wealthiest in the state. By 
including Paracatu and Joao Pinheiro, the new state would come 
close to Brasilia. 
  More than 150 municipalities would be detached from 
southwestern Parana and northwestern Santa Catarina states to 
form the state of Iguacu, whose leading cities would be Foz do 
Iguacu, Cascavel, and Guaira. The new state would steal from 
Parana the town of Sete Quedas and the busiest part of the 
border with Paraguay. 
  The proposal to create the state of Piratini sprouted from a 
people's amendment. The state would share borders with Uruguay, 
Argentina, and the southern municipalities of Sao Borja, 
Cachoeira do Sul, and Rio Pardo, among others. The number of 
municipalities in the new state has not yet been determined, but 
some of the most important cities in Rio Grande do Sul 
State--such as Pelotas, Santa Maria, and Bage--would be among 
them, as would almost all of Lagoa dos Patos. 
  The southern cone of what is now Sao Paulo State would 
become 
Sao Paulo do Sul. The subject of an amendment submitted by the 
PSD [Democratic Social Party], it would have as boundaries the 
municipalities of Peruibe, Parapanema, and Piraju. The current 
boundaries of Sao Paulo State with Parana State and the Atlantic 
ocean would be preserved. Among the municipalities in the new 
state would be Cananeia, Iguape, and Ribeira. The state's 
Atlantic coast would extend from Peruibe to Cananeia. 
<H5>  Territories </H5>
  Conversion of the former territories of Amapa and Roraima 
into states and reincorporation of Fernando de Noronha into 
Pernambuco would leave Brazil with no territories. Three 
proposals to reinvent territories have been made as part of the 
constitutional revision A "people's proposal" favors creation of 
the territory of Alto Solimoes; another suggestion, from Senator 
Louremberg Nunes Rocha (PPR-MT) [Progressive Renewal Party, Mato 
Grosso], would set up the territory of Araguaia; a third, from 
Deputy Pauderney Avelino (PPR, Amazonas), institutes the 
territory of Jurua. 
  All the proposals cite as justification the tremendous size 
of the Amazon area, its sparse population, and the need for 
effective settlement of the region "from the strategic 
standpoint." 
  Jurua would be cut from Acre State (Cruzeiro do Sul) and 13 
municipalities from Amazonas. Alto Solimoes would have Peru and 
Colombia as its boundaries, in addition to Amazonian 
municipalities. The territory of Araguaia would be comprised of 
a significant part of the valley of the river of the same name, 
and Para State would form its northern boundary. 

