BFN 

  TURKISH-ROMANIAN BANK INAUGURATED: The Turkish-Romanian 
Bank was inaugurated in Bucharest on 24 March in the presence of 
the Romanian and Turkish presidents. The new bank, which will 
shortly start operations, has a registered capital of 8 billion 
lei, with shares held by Bayindir Holding A.S. 77 percent, the 
Romanian Commercial Bank S.A. 20 percent, Bayindir 
Constructions, Tourism, Commerce and Industry A.S. 1 percent, 
Baysan Constructions, Industry A.S. 1 percent and Bayindir 
Insurance A.H. 1 percent. President Ion Iliescu of Romania and 
President Suleyman Demirel of Turkey spoke of the importance of 
the new institution and its contribution to the promotion of the 
bilateral cooperation. The Turkish-Romanian Bank will give 
credits in lei and hard currency for various investments in 
Romania and for foreign trade operations. Branches will be 
opened in Romania and Turkey, at Constanta, Istanbul, and Ankara 
and insurance and leasing companies will be set up. The 
presidents of Romania and Turkey symbolically opened an account 
at the Turkish-Romanian Bank. Bayindir Holding A.S. is the 
biggest Turkish investor in Romania. (Bucharest ROMPRES in 
English 1816 GMT 24 Mar 94) 
  BAC 1-11 MODERNIZATION: The Romanian Government has approved 
a memorandum on the modernization of the BAC 1-11 aircraft. In 
1980, the respective aircraft enterprise -- which turned into 
the commercial company "ROMAERO S.A." after 1989 -- began to 
produce, under a British Aerospace license, short-, long-, and 
medium-range BAC 1-11, series 500 and 475, airplanes. The 
aircraft must be modernized now, in order to meet the noise and 
chemical pollution norms imposed by the International Civil 
Aviation Organisation. The ROMAERO S.A. company initiated a 
program for the BAC 1-11 development, with the participation of 
British Aerospace, Rolls Royce, Alenia, Aim, Honeywell, and 
other firms and it found out a foreign customer, the U.S. 
company Kiwi International Airlines, with which it has concluded 
a contract for the sale of 11 modernized BAC 1-11 planes, with 
an option for another five planes. Some other segments of the 
market have been singled out, such as Argentina, Colombia, 
Chile, Mexico, Great Britain, the Republic of Ireland, Iran, 
Nigeria, the Philippines, the People's Republic of China, and 
Malaysia, which can become active after the first modernized 
plane proves its qualities. The Romanian companies TAROM SA and 
ROMAVIA RA together have 14 BAC 1-11 series 500 planes, that 
have to have their engines changed. A program has been drafted 
for the modernization and manufacturing of a BAC 1-11 series 
2,500 model, to whose research and development the Romanian 
specialists have made a contribution. The new BAC will inherit 
from the BAC 1-11 series 50 plane only the structure, which is 
considered to be among the best in the world. (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 1055 GMT 25 Mar 94) 
  TEXTILE EXPORTS TO NORTH AMERICA: Romanian exports of 
textiles and clothing to the United States and Canada have grown 
over the January-February 1994 period by 50 percent, compared to 
the same period of 1993. The conclusion of a recent meeting 
between experts of the Ministry of Trade and Romanian textiles 
and garment producers and exporters was that such exports could 
exceed $150 million, under the textile agreements regulating 
Romanian exports to the United States and Canada. (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 1259 GMT 26 Mar 94) 
  BALANCE OF TRADE WITH TUNISIA -- The 1993 trade balance 
between Tunisia and Romania was positive for Tunisia, with 
Tunisian exports to Romania accounting for $2,458,269, while 
Romania only exported goods worth $1,268,553 to that country. 
In direct trade relations, Romania imported edibles for 
children, coffee, phosphates, cosmetics, and cotton clothing and 
it exported sodium silicates, rolled goods, household 
appliances, drilling equipment, rolling bearings, and tractors. 
A new direct airline link will provide weekly flights between 
the capitals of the two countries. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
1103 GMT 28 Mar 94) 
  TRADE WITH GREECE -- There are 828 Greek companies presently 
operating in Romania, placing Greece 14th in rank from the 
viewpoint of the number of foreign companies active in Romania, 
while in terms of investments, Greece ranks 13th, with a 
contribution of $15.2 million. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
0631 GMT 29 Mar 94) 
  EXPORTS INCREASE: In the first two months of this year, 
Romania's exports grew 24 percent against the corresponding 
period of last year. At the same time, imports dropped over 20 
percent, said Mihai Berinde, head of the Foreign Trade 
Department at the Ministry of Trade. He said that was an 
outcome of the year 1993, marked by a shift in tendency, namely, 
for the first time after 1989, the deficit of Romanian foreign 
trade declined by $250 million as compared with the previous 
year. And, something that is even more significant, the deficit 
was curbed not on account of an import decline, but on account 
of an export rise. The shift of tendency was possible also as a 
result of the growing share of the private sector that has 
become the most dynamic element in the foreign trade activity, 
the official noted. Berinde said that the favorable condition 
of foreign trade last year was not conjunctural. It was 
explained both by the measures to encourage exports and by the 
new outlets gained for Romanian products following the 
conclusion of agreements with the European Union, the European 
Free Trade Association and with the United States. "The world's 
biggest markets have opened to our products and we will have to 
turn to our best advantage the facilities thus offered to us," 
said Berinde, adding that exports were expected to grow 15-20 
percent in 1994. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0809 GMT 31 Mar 
94) 
  PULP, PAPER INDUSTRY: The Ministry of Industries has been 
examining two projects on the restructuring strategy of the pulp 
and paper industry and the processing of chemical fertilizers. 
"The equipment of the two branches is out-of-date, some of the 
installations in the pulp and paper industry, for instance, are 
more than 100 years old, devices produced 30-40 years ago are 
still in use in the chemical fertilizer industry, Dumitru 
Popescu, minister of industries, told ROMPRES. The main goal is 
therefore, in the next seven years, to introduce technologies 
able to substantially cut energy and raw material consumption. 
The two branches have sure outlets at present, what we want is 
to meet domestic demand. Paper consumption is 10-15 times lower 
in Romania now than in other countries. Last year's production 
of chemical fertilizers was of 265 kgs/ha, while the European 
level is of 300 kgs/ha, added the minister. Two studies, to be 
forwarded to the government, refer among other things to the 
modernization and re-equipping of viable units and the 
dismounting of old installations. As for the staff, only a 
slight reduction is expected, as the two branches will develop 
in future, added Dumitru Popescu. Commercial Companies will 
finance their own modernization, they have to create resources 
to pay domestic and foreign credits, the minister also said. 
(Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0832 GMT 4 Apr 94) 
  IRRIGATION SYSTEM: "The drought came unexpectedly and we 
were not prepared for putting the irrigation systems into 
operation," said Vasile Berbeci, state secretary with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Food and head of the Land 
Melioration Department. He mentioned that "this year, 
irrigation work on 2 million hectares is envisaged, taking into 
account the structure of crops, and especially taking into 
consideration the existing equipment. Some 1 million hectares 
cannot be covered with the existing equipment." So far, some 70 
per cent of the pumping aggregates were put into operation. 
"The shortcomings are due to the failure to ensure financial 
resources at the needed level and a delay in the allotment of 
budget subsidies," according to Vasile Berbeci. "To cover all 
our needs, a monthly amount of 12 billion lei must be allotted 
in April and May." "Irrigation work is now performed under 
contracts signed with farm producers. Until 25 march, contracts 
were concluded for 910,000 hectares of which 350,000 are 
hectares with private farmers. This year, the government will 
allot funds to cover the expenses for energy consumption. The 
rest is to be covered by our beneficiaries," State Secretary 
Vasile Berbeci said. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0900 GMT 4 
Apr 94) 
  ROMANIAN COMMERCIAL BANK: The Romanian Commercial Bank S.A. 
(limited company) joined the club of the first 1,000 banks of 
the world in terms of capital size and profit, the Romanian bank 
being in 801st place. The Romanian Commercial Bank S.A. was 
ranked 348th among the European banks and 3d among the banks in 
Central and Eastern Europe, after two Czech banks. (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 1103 GMT 4 Apr 94) 
  COOPERATION WITH EL SALVADOR: Mutual interest in developing 
bilateral relations allow for the fast establishment of the 
legal basis required for cooperation between Romania and El 
Salvador, said Premier Nicolae Vacaroiu during talks he held 
with the Salvadorean foreign minister in Bucharest on 5 April. 
The guest proposed an initial cooperation project in the 
textile and ready-mades industry, a sector in which both 
countries were competitive. Welcoming the proposal, the 
Romanian prime minister assessed that the products could be 
better promoted in various markets through joint ventures. The 
international fair due in San Salvador in November is considered 
an opportunity to identify other domains of cooperation by the 
parties. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1303 GMT 5 Apr 94) 
  MONETARY SYSTEM `NORMALITY': Romania's money supply 
increased in February 1994 by 7.6 percent compared with January, 
Eugen Radulescu, director of the National Romanian Bank (BNR), 
said in an interview with the government daily VOCEA ROMANIEI. 
Meanwhile convertible hard currency deposits in Romanian banks 
have shown a tendency to drop -- which has not happened in a 
long time -- from $1,045,000,000 in January to $1,027,000,000 
in February, with $1 billion still in accounts opened with these 
banks, added the BNR director. Non-governmental loans have 
grown by 5.7 percent (such as the ones granted by banks to 
economic units and individuals,) thus nearing the rate of 
inflation in February, namely 5.7 percent, while the inflation 
rate stood at 5.9 percent. According to Radulescu, another sign 
of normality is a slight rise in international reserves, from 
$267 million to $284 million. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0716 
GMT 7 Apr 94) 
  FACTORY RECOVERING: The Rulmentul ball- bearings-producing 
company of Brasov, which went through a dramatic decline of 
production and exports after December 1989, made a notable 
recovery in 1993, a tendency expected to continue in 1994 owing 
to the regaining of markets such as the U.S. one. "While in 
1993 it produced 23.6 million bearings, reporting a 25 percent 
growth over the previous year, this year the production of a 
number of 27 million bearings is planned, DIMINEATA reports. 
Export contracts for 13 million bearings have been concluded. 
Since negotiations are under way for new contracts with 
partners on all continents, exports are expected to account for 
80 percent of total production. This is far more than in the 
best years before 1989, when exports covered 55 percent of total 
production. The company's full capacity is 32 million bearings 
a year, but Romanian companies alone do not order large 
quantities of the product and, besides, Rulmentul is facing 
acute financial difficulties. The managers hope the government 
will deal with this, first by granting loans at preferential 
interest rates. As for the importance of the U.S. market after 
Romania was given back most-favored-nation status, which 
resulted in customs duties falling from 67 percent to 7 percent, 
the company's general manager, Sergiu Gherasim, said: "I left 
for the U.S. on 8 November last year, right after the most- 
favored-nation status was announced. I contacted old partners 
and as early as December last year we were able to dispatch the 
first two containers of bearings. We concluded contracts not 
only for 1993 but also for 1994, getting fine profits and 
estimating even better ones, so that our exports to the North 
American market should hold the first place, with at least 15 
million bearings". The company has moved fast to other markets 
as well in Europe, Asia, and Latin America, which will amount to 
an estimated value of $6 million worth of exported bearings this 
year. This ensures the Brasov factory a sound position in the 
world, ranking seventh or eighth, and in Europe, ranking third 
or fourth. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0925 GMT 7 Apr 94) 
  RUSSIANS KEEPING PALLETS: Highly appreciated on markets 
abroad, Romanian furniture cannot reach CIS importers because 
the National Railroad Company's pallet boxes used to transport 
it are not being returned to Romania. They find a most bizarre 
employment: They are turned into sales stands. The fact that 
Romanian furniture is in demand in the former Soviet Union is 
also reflected by the dozens of contracts concluded with 
partners from several CIS republics, as well as by the recent 
results of a specialized fair in Moscow, according to ADEVARUL. 
"At a certain moment, there were some 3,500 empty pallet boxes 
on CIS territory that were not returned to Romania. Part of 
them were then returned, but a number of others (almost 1,500, 
according to the National Railroad Company) are not likely to be 
returned soon or at all," reads the article. It is a fact that 
the Romanian National Railroad Company did not stipulate any 
provisions to avoid such a situation and therefore over the past 
two months not even a single pallet box sent to Moscow with 
furniture has been returned." (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1010 
GMT 8 Apr 94) 
  COOPERATION WITH GREECE PLANNED: The talks held in Athens 
over 6-7 April during the 13th session of the joint 
Romanian-Greek Governmental Commission revealed Greece's 
interest in stepping up investments in Romania, especially in 
the food and clothing manufacturing sectors, in trade, in the 
planning and building of several bridges across the Danube, as 
well as in the modernization of transit and transportation 
systems, reads a press communique released by the Romanian 
Ministry of Trade. The main fields in which Romania is ready to 
invest in Greece are the development and modernization of the 
railroad system, the planning and building of the Salonika 
subway, the building of a rolling stock factory in Triasion, as 
well as promoting telecommunications in the economic area 
covered by the Black Sea Cooperation Agreement. They also plan 
to build and repair ships, manufacture cigarettes under Greek 
licenses, and create several new joint ventures in the food and 
catering sector and in civil engineering. During the session of 
the joint commission stress was laid on the importance of 
expanding bilateral cooperation in the financial and banking 
sectors and intensifying direct contacts between economic agents 
of both countries. Common fields of interest have been 
articulated in a protocol signed by Mihai Berinde, head of the 
Foreign Trade Department at the Romanian Ministry of Trade, and 
by Yannis Papantonios, deputy minister in the National Economy 
Ministry of Greece. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0953 GMT 11 
Apr 94) 
  TELECOMMUNICATIONS MODERNIZED: Two digital telephone 
exchanges have recently been commissioned in Bucharest, with an 
aggregate capacity of 20,000 lines. They are equipped with 
Alcatel and Siemens equipment, which allows for connection with 
international networks of optic fiber cables. The Romanian 
telecommunications system has acquired, as Communications 
Minister Andrei Chirica said in an interview for VOCEA ROMANIEI, 
"consistency" in its development schemes. Various branches of 
Romanian industry have concurred in the modernization of the 
telecommunications system, and foreign capital in relevant joint 
ventures has also provided for the production of equipment in 
accordance with the latest technologies. In the coming years 
most efforts will be directed to the development of the 
telecommunications infrastructure, with priority given to 
services open to competition, such as mobile telecommunication, 
cellular telephones, data transmission, and private radio and 
television networks. Intended to help the computerization 
program of the entire Romanian society elaborated by the 
Romanian National Board of Informatics, the Ministry of 
Communications has already issued the license for two private 
companies: One dealing in data transmission, set up by 
Romtelecom with a French firm, and the other established with an 
U.S. partner. Subscribers will soon have access to the 
international networks of Euronet, Internet, and to important 
data bases, the minister said. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
1720 GMT 12 Apr) 
  SOUTH KOREAN ENVOY: In a recent press interview, the South 
Korean ambassador stressed that his country's relations with 
Romania are excellent, despite the fact that diplomatic 
relations were established only in 1990. He also recalled the 
fact that South Korea supplied $15-million worth of aid for the 
development of the telecommunication network in the Prahova 
County area, to expand collaboration in trade, the car 
manufacturing industry, and in the manufacturing of medical 
equipment. Approaching the issue of investments, the South 
Korean ambassador said that "things are somehow going slow, even 
though the South Korean businessmen's interest is high. They 
believe that Romania is a country with a major potential, with 
natural resources, skilled labor force, and an ideal 
geographical location. I also consider that once the situation 
stabilizes and a more attractive legislative framework is 
adopted, the South Korean companies will have greater incentives 
to invest in Romania." (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0650 GMT 
15 Apr 94) 
  CORPORATION RESTRUCTURING: A report on the restructuring of 
national and local corporations was presented at the weekly 
cabinet meeting of 15 April. Some 79 companies are involved, 
that is 1.2 percent of all the state-owned companies, belonging 
to five ministries -- industry, agriculture, transport, 
communications, and environment. The idea is to turn them into 
commercial companies. Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu said 
that, in his opinion, there should be seven or eight national 
corporations in Romania. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1427 GMT 
16 Apr 94) 
  CAR SALES CENTER: A modern national "Dacia" car sales center 
opened in the town of Pitesti, 100 km northwest of Bucharest. 
Designed after similar centers abroad, the automobile "Dacia" 
S.A. company has set up this center in order to sell its 
products -- cars and spare parts -- through a unitary system. 
"The center is a flexible, modern commercial structure, headed 
by an elite team that attaches great importance to the image of 
the Dacia car builder," Constantin Stroe, general manager of the 
plant, told the press. The center's priority is "to fully 
satisfy buyers" and eliminate brokerage firms, which are "keen 
on making maximum revenues at the expense of the customers." 
The company, which can supply 230 cars every day, will direct 
the sales flow of the entire "Dacia" car and spare parts 
production. A computer network has been designed for the 
delivery of cars, sub-assemblies, and spare parts to individual 
buyers and firms on request. Cooperation contracts will be 
signed with 48 leasing units based in all large Romanian towns 
and the Bucharest municipality. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
1709 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
  AGRICULTURE MINISTER COMMENTS: According to Agriculture 
Minister Ion Oancea, "the only chance for Romania to develop its 
farming sector so as to be able to compete on international 
markets is to make full use of the country's economic and 
natural assets." He also said that "we can and must become the 
country with the highest agricultural potential in this part of 
Europe," adding that 40 percent of Romania's 9.4 million 
hectares -- approximately 23 million acres of arable land -- are 
located in plains of unsurpassed fertility in Europe, which also 
boast irrigation systems for some 3 million hectares; if duly 
operated, these resources alone could meet the nation's food 
requirements, under the worst weather conditions. Minister 
Oancea also said that Romania was the first European country 
that introduced and extended the crops of hybrid maize 
nationwide and that the Fundulea Research Station labs, situated 
near Bucharest, are among the best in the world in the 
development of a sunflower hybrid, which is exported all over 
the world. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0828 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
  COOPERATION WITH CROATIA: Branko Jeren, minister of science 
and technology of Croatia, and Doru Dumitru Palade, Romanian 
minister of research and technology, signed a protocol of 
technological and scientific cooperation on April 19 in 
Bucharest meant to ease the work on some common objectives of 
major interest in the transition period. The protocol provides 
for cooperation in certain joint research and development 
projects, the joint use of research-development facilities and 
scientific equipment, improvement of know-how transfers, and 
mutual assistance in the creation of an information system in 
the relevant fields. A joint commission will be set up to 
implement the provisions of the protocol. (Bucharest ROMPRES in 
English 1651 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
  LEU FLOATS: The latest Inter Bank auction session registered 
a novel turn in such transactions: The supply of convertible 
currency exceeded the demand for it -- that is, $4.27 million 
were available against $4.17 million on demand, as of 18 April. 
At the beginning, the news that supply was greater than demand 
came as a surprise, tinged with distrust as to its credibility. 
And yet, this tendency has stayed to this very day, so that the 
National Bank of Romania (BNR) was able to issue a statement, 
which reads as follows: "The leu is floating freely now. As a 
result of the course of the currency market, the value has 
modified insignificantly." However, the same statement then 
cautions: "For these favorable conditions to remain constant, 
it is necessary to encourage profitable enterprises -- that is, 
those which produce for export -- because, by the rules of the 
economic laws, the devaluation of the national currency usually 
follows the rate of inflation." The "interpretation" given to 
this text by BNR Governor Mugur Isarescu in a recent interview 
is much more practical: "The government, the State Ownership 
Fund, and the Private Ownership Funds must take steps toward 
restructuring and privatization. We need foreign crediting." 
According to Eugen Radulescu, BNR director for monetary 
policies, the leu's liberalization is an accomplished fact. He 
said that "for a long time the National Bank purchased hard 
currency, forced by the need to make current payments, which was 
one of the reasons why it could not achieve an equilibrium on 
the market. At the moment, the National Bank has reserves of 
some $100 million, compared to only about $20 million earlier 
this year. The payments we have to make are much below this 
sum, so that we are no longer struggling with the same 
problems." Mr. Radulescu also said that the currency supply is 
provided by the resident currency owners, who have about $1 
billion deposited in their accounts in Romania. "Corporate and 
individual hard currency owners are beginning to sell just 
because they feel that the rate set by the BNR is the real rate 
of the market," he said. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 0925 GMT 
20 Apr 94) 
  COMPANIES AT HANNOVER FAIR: Beginning on 20 April, Romania 
will be represented by 16 state-owned and private companies at 
the greatest technical fair of the world "Hannover '94." The 
Romanian firms at the fair are presenting on a 75-square meter 
area gauging and adjustment apparatuses, steel samples, complex 
mechanisms, boilers and heating systems, semi-conductors, and 
technical specifications for Romanian-made electric and 
electronic goods. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1127 GMT 20 Apr 
94) 
  NEW BANK: The Industrial and Commercial Credit Bank S.A. was 
officially opened in Bucharest on Wednesday, April 20. The new 
bank funded with U.S. and Romanian capital worth 2 billion lei 
has tight cooperation relations with two big Israeli banks, 
Hapoalim and American Israel Bank, and enjoys a joint Romanian- 
Israeli management team. (Bucharest ROMPRES 1151 GMT 20 Apr 94) 
  NEW BUILDING MATERIAL: Already commissioned in Bucharest is 
a factory manufacturing a new building material, so-called 
durref, the invention of the Romanian engineer Andrei Holodi. 
This stupendous stuff is a mixture of natural wastes compacted 
through the change of their molecular structure, a process that 
makes it the best substitute for wood yet known. It is fire- 
proof, non-toxic, non-polluting, and gamma-ray-resistant; it 
wears better than wood in water, can imitate marble, 
pattern-work, and wood veneer. Pieces of durref can be joined 
together with glue, making nails unnecessary. Durref can be 
used for houses, furniture, and floorings. The raw material 
used for its manufacturing comes from litter bins or rubbish 
dumps provided that it is natural or has natural fiber in its 
composition: wood wastes, straw, stems, leaves, weeds, 
thistles, willow, paper wastes, wastes from vegetable-fiber 
fabrics, animal hair and skin, and vegetable and fruit wastes. 
Durref can be used in civil and industrial engineering, in the 
consumer goods industry, in the aeronautical and shipbuilding 
industries and the electronic industry. According to the 
inventor, three quarters of durref products are water-proof. 
Durref is gamma-ray resistant and bulletproof. After 25 
freezing and defreezing cycles the material did not show any 
sign of degradation. The durref industry has the quality of 
endlessly recycling its own wastes. The most spectacular field 
in which durref can be used, according to its inventor, is that 
of civil engineering. According to a study, a 100 square meter 
house built with durref and possibly decorated with durref 
furniture, costs up to $8,000 (40 per cent lower than the cost 
of a house built with convectional material). In a statement 
made to the Swedish review AFAERER AND FORETAG (Business and 
Societies), which recently published an article on durref, 
Andrei Hododi said: "to manufacture durref from waste products 
could become a hobby of the future". The invention has been 
licensed in 31 of the most industrialized countries of the 
world. After the December 1989 revolution, Andrei Holodi 
established his own company starting with a nominal capital of 
100,000 lei. On 22 April 1994, the first durref factory was set 
up near Bucharest. The factory currently employs some 500 
workers in three shifts, with a monthly output worth 1.6 billion 
lei. According to the owner of the durref company, some 100,000 
workers will be employed in such activity in the future. 
(Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1657 GMT 25 Apr 94) 
  NEW FREE TRADE ZONE: The Romanian Government approved the 
establishment of a new free trade zone at Galati, port on the 
Danube. The new zone joins the club of the free zones of Sulina 
(at the mouth of the Danube) and Constanta Sud-Agigea (a Black 
Sea port). The legal framework for creating free zones was 
worked out in the summer of 1992. The rationale was for 
stimulation to improve management and marketing, that foreign 
investment would be attracted, high quality services would 
develop, state and local administration income would surge, and 
joint ventures would emerge through foreign capital and 
technology. The land and the buildings included by the free 
zone can be subject to lease and concession to persons, be they 
natural or juristic, Romanian or foreign, for terms as long as 
50 years according to the kind of activity and value of the 
investment. The commodities to come from foreign countries or 
to be sent to foreign countries, entering or leaving the free 
zones, are exempted from tariff or tax duties. The economic 
agents operating in the free zones are exempted from excise 
duty, income tax, and value-added tax for the whole duration of 
their activities in the free zones. Romanian goods used for 
constructing, repairing, and maintaining objects in the interior 
of the free zones are exempted from tariffs. Goods can be moved 
between the free zones without incurring tariffs. Other free 
zones are planned for Braila, Curtici, Cristesti, Oradea, Satu 
Mare, Giurgiu, Turnu Magurele, Turnu Severin, and Basarabi. 
(Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1049 GMT 26 Apr 94) 
  BUSINESS REVIEW: FOCUS ROMANIA, the first international 
business review devoted exclusively to Romania is being issued 
by the publishing company Group 24 Publishing Ltd. It was 
launched at the recent Bucharest meeting of the Crans Montana 
Forum on emerging markets. In English, the review contains 
data, studies, and commentaries on business opportunities in 
Romania and is expected to be distributed to major companies, 
individuals, and organizations in the G-24 and in Romania. The 
first issue of FOCUS ROMANIA came out in April in Bucharest and 
mass circulation is to start in August 1994. The manager of 
Group 24 Publishing Ltd. was quoted by the daily ROMANIA LIBERA 
as saying that the review would be free of any political or 
commercial interest. The launching of the review was attended 
by Niall Barrett, Ray Karam, and Hashi Syedain, on behalf of the 
publisher, and for the Romanian side, by presidential adviser 
Misu Negritoiu and State Secretary Napoleon Pop. (Bucharest 
ROMPRES in English 0814 GMT 27 Apr 94) 
  MERCEDES SERVICE CENTER OPENS: With President Ion Iliescu 
and other officials in attendance, Mercedes Benz Auto- Rom 
Service Center was inaugurated on Wednesday, 27 April, in 
Bucharest, one of the largest and most modern servicing units in 
Europe. This and seven other similar service shops in Romania 
will provide maintenance for Mercedes cars in Romania. Speaking 
at the opening, President Ion Iliescu hoped that the company 
would open an assembly line in Romania for Mercedes buses. 
Peter K.M. Fietzek, member of the Mercedes-Benz Board of 
Directors, illustrated the development of the Romanian market by 
recalling that "the general agency of the Mercedes-Benz Auto-Rom 
was established in June 1990, and, compared with other Eastern 
European countries, Auto-Rom has reached a very high standard. 
In our view, Auto-Rom and Mercedes- Benz are capable of 
satisfying the demands of the Romanian market, an assessment 
confirmed by the car sales in 1993." Mercedes-Benz, he said, 
was lucky to find a partner like the Romanian Ion Tiriac (the 
former tennis player), who has made remarkable investment and 
had this center built in Bucharest, which can serve as a model 
for all Eastern Europe and complies with the Western European 
standard of the German Company." (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 
1455 GMT 27 Apr 94) 
  LOAN INSTALLMENTS RELEASED: The Romanian Ministry of Finance 
has announced that the World Bank has decided to release the 
second part of the structural adjustment loan to Romania, worth 
$150 million. In addition to this amount there will be Japan's 
Eximbank's contribution of $37.5 million, and a $7.5-million 
share from the Dutch Government. The aggregate amount of $195 
million is meant to help Romania's balance of payments. The 
first part of the structural adjustment loan, that is $250 
million, was granted to Romania in June 1992. The release means 
the deblocking of external financing for Romania after more than 
a year and a half. This course is to continue once approval is 
given in early May to the standby agreement with the 
International Monetary Fund and the financial aid approved by 
G-24 becomes effective. (Bucharest ROMPRES in English 1545 GMT 
27 Apr 94) 

