Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Boris Paton, president, Ukrainian Academy of </F>
Sciences: ``Science Serves the Ukraine''] 
  [Text] The First (Founding) General Meeting of the Academy 
of Sciences was held on 27 November 1918 at Kiev under the 
highly difficult conditions of the Civil War. This was an event 
of enormous importance for the Ukraine and its culture. With the 
appearance of the Academy the long-held dream of the progressive 
Ukrainian intelligentsia for the creation of such a scientific 
center in the Ukraine which would organize and bring together 
the creative activity of its scientists and put scientific 
advances in the service of the people was realized. 
  The activity of the Academy of Sciences began from three 
institutes, individual departments, offices, commissions, and 
committees. Only 140 specialists worked in all these 
institutions, and among them there were 12 academicians. 
  Now the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences consists of more than 
170 scientific institutions, including 4 international 
institutions, at which more than 75,000 persons work. It 
consists of 194 academicians and 268 corresponding members, as 
well as 53 foreign members from 16 countries. 
  During the years of existence of the Academy numerous 
scientific schools were formed within its walls. Our Academy is 
among the leading scientific centers of East Europe and in many 
fields occupies leading positions in world science. In its 
creative treasury there are more than 30 discoveries and more 
than a few other attainments in natural science, engineering, as 
well as very significant research in the humanities. 
  Among the most significant achievements of the 1920's-1940's 
was the realization of an artificial nuclear reaction with the 
splitting of lithium atoms and the discovery of a stable isotope 
of lithium, the construction of charged particle accelerators, 
the largest for that time in Europe and the USSR, the 
development of a three-coordinate radar operating in the 
decimeter range, production of indium, liquid hydrogen and 
helium, heavy water, concentrations of ``heavy'' oxygen and 
nitrogen. At the same time superconductors of the second kind 
were discovered, the first experimental confirmation of the 
neutrino hypothesis was obtained and the fundamental possibility 
of direct thermoemission transformation of thermal energy into 
electric energy was demonstrated. 
  In addition, Ukrainian scientists have proposed highly 
productive flux welding and its industrial technology, a 
beginning has been laid for developing molecular spectroscopy 
and electrochemistry, the principles of the theory of 
electrolytes, the phytohormonal theory of tropisms and the 
general biological law of growth of organisms have been 
formulated. During the years of the Great Fatherland War the 
automatic flux welding of the bodies of tanks and artillery 
systems was organized, making possible a substantial improvement 
in their combat qualities and a considerable increase in 
production. 
  During the postwar period the cybernetics specialists of the 
Academy, under the direction of S. Lebedev, created the first 
electronic computer in continental Europe. Ukrainian scientists, 
headed by Academician V. Glushkov, formulated a theory of 
digital automatic devices, serving as a scientific basis for the 
development of new-generation computers. 
  Much has recently been done for the development of a number 
of scientific fields. An example of a major complex piece of 
development work carried out by scientists in different fields 
of specialization -- in information science, physics, materials 
science and chemistry -- is the world's first laser accumulator 
of data on optical cylinders using the optical immersion 
principle. The results of research defining the conditions for 
the formation of diamond-like carbon, hexagonal graphite and 
their mixtures, obtained by the method of high-velocity electron 
beam evaporation and condensation of graphite in a vacuum, are 
the first such results obtained anywhere. 
  The formulation of the theoretical principles of precision 
soldering of silicon nitride ceramics is of great importance for 
machine building. Soldered connections of steel and ceramics in 
the parts of internal combustion and gas turbine engines have 
already been obtained. 
  Professional physicists have established the presence of 
photoinduced light absorption and macroscopic quantum 
interference in high-temperature superconductors. 
  In the molecular biology field the capability of cells to 
change the rate of synthesis of individual _g_-RNA was 
detected, 
which may find application in bioengineering, diagnosis and 
treatment of oncologic and genetic diseases. Academy 
physiologists have developed new methods for studying the 
functions of vitally important macromolecules in nerve and 
muscle cells, have investigated calcium conductivity and other 
properties of the membranes of nerve cells. 
  New trends are characteristic for the development of 
research 
in the social sciences and humanities. The efforts of 
economists, jurists and sociologists have been concentrated on 
carrying out economic reforms and the development of the 
scientific principles of the structural-investment and 
innovative policy of the Ukraine corresponding to governmental 
and juridical acts. 
  Historians, archeologists and archeological historians are 
carrying out major work in restoring the material and spiritual 
monuments of the past and in setting up a national ``Ukrainian 
archival and manuscript bank.'' Philological science has been 
enriched by research on the ancient history of the Slavic 
languages. 
  It must be noted that now, under conditions of an increasing 
economic crisis, Ukrainian science is being inflicted losses 
from which it will be difficult to recover. This is fraught with 
the most severe consequences for the intellectual potential of 
the people. Creative groups and the traditional bonds created 
through the efforts of scientists of several generations are 
being destroyed. The scales of fundamental research in the most 
promising, vitally important directions are being cut back. This 
is accompanied by a reduction in the general level of scientific 
research, is being expressed in the quality of training of 
scientific and scientific-technical specialists and is causing 
irreversible consequences in the entire educational system. The 
shortage of foreign exchange is contributing to the isolation of 
our scientists. Hence the massive brain drain. The most 
promising scientists are going far from the scientific sphere 
and are departing for abroad. All this constitutes an 
unquestionable threat to the national interests of the country. 
  The need for immediate specific steps at the governmental 
level is evident. To be sure, today the sovereign Ukraine for 
objective reasons cannot support the level of science funding 
characteristic of economically well-developed countries. 
However, it must be remembered that precisely the work of 
scientists in many respects favored the economic and social 
progress of these countries. Accordingly, under the present-day 
difficult conditions in order to get through the critical 
situation it is necessary to use the entire creative potential 
of the Academy of Sciences, providing it maximum support. 
  For us work in the interests of the Ukraine is 
high-priority. 
The most acute problem is in the fuel and energy field. Our 
scientists have made a detailed study of needs and our own 
resources and long-term scientific and technical solutions and 
possible directions for development have been defined. Only 
recently were proposals on incorporation of small deposits of 
oil and gas, the use of gas hydrates, mine methane, low-grade 
coal and combustible shales into the energy balance of the 
Ukraine prepared and sent to the government. Multisided research 
is being carried out on the problems involved in energy 
conservation, the use of nontraditional and renewable energy 
sources. Work is being done which is related to broadening of 
the search for and production of oil and gas, the conversion of 
transportation to natural gas and other alternative types of 
fuel. 
  An exceedingly important direction in Academy activity is 
elimination of the consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl 
nuclear power station, in particular, research on the 
propagation of radionuclides over the territory of the Ukraine, 
solution of the problem of multiyear influence of low radiation 
doses on biological objects and man. 
  The Academy also is working out proposals on the development 
of a gold- producing industry in the Ukraine and the draft of a 
program for the mining and processing of precious metals and 
stones. We have the capabilities and in some cases also specific 
goals for meeting needs for new materials, as well as for 
maintaining and further developing research in the interests of 
the defense industry, and also a space program, including as a 
source of new high technologies for the economy. The Academy 
recently signed an agreement on cooperation with the city 
administration of Kiev for the speediest possible resolution of 
city management, the introduction of finalized scientific 
developments into production and on their basis production of 
competitive products with a heavy scientific input. The 
principal fields of cooperation are ecology, energy 
conservation, health protection and cultural and spiritual 
development of the capital. 
  An important aspect of the activity of the Academy of 
Sciences is the maintenance of existing scientific links, the 
broadening of its participation in the international scientific 
community in both bilateral and multilateral arrangements. I 
would like, in particular, to mention the high level of 
cooperation of the work of scientists of the Ukraine and Russia. 
Their productive activity has brought about more than a few 
outstanding achievements and discoveries in world science. These 
contacts must be maintained and strengthened for the well-being 
of our peoples. 
  Our Academy has been received in the International Council 
of 
Scientific Unions with the rights of a national member. In 
September, on the initiative of the Ukrainian Academy of 
Sciences in Kiev, the Academies of Sciences of fifteen countries 
signed an agreement on establishing an International Association 
of Academies of Sciences for strengthening the bonds between 
scientists of the East and West, North and South. 
  In conclusion I want to emphasize that the time-tested 
principle in accordance with which our Academy is simultaneously 
constructing both a community of scientists and an association 
of scientific research institutes has justified itself and must 
be safeguarded. Without maintaining traditions and a certain 
conservatism, characteristic for all authoritative academies in 
the world, neither the survival of science in these difficult 
times nor its development in the future will be possible. 

