Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by G.A. Sukhanova, G.V. Potapova, S.A. Narbutovich, </F>
Tomsk Medical Institute; UDC 616.438-008.931-02:615.225.2]-07] 
  [Abstract] The catalytic activity of 5'-nucleotidase 
(5'-ribonucleotide phosphohydrolase), a lipid-dependent enzyme 
of the cell plasmatic membrane, which is manifested in 
hydrolyzing extracellular AMP and the formation of extracellular 
adenosine, and the properties of bradykinin--a vasoactive 
peptide capable of stimulating the thymus cell division and 
inhibiting the thymocyte membrane lipid peroxidation--whose 
effect on the state of tumor cells is relatively unknown 
prompted an investigation into the activity of the thymus and 
tumor cell 5'-nucleotidase after bradykinin injection to mice 
during the development of allogenic and syngenic transplanted 
tumors with different proliferation stimulant effects. To this 
end, BALB/c and noninbred 18-22 g mice were used in the 
experiment. The former mice were inoculated with P-815 
macrocytoma (syngenic for the H-2D hystocompatibility complex) 
while the latter were subcutaneously injected with allogenic 
Crocker sarcoma. Bradykinin triacetate was administered 
intravenously after seven days to both groups. The 
5'-nucleotidase activity was measured by the inorganic phosphate 
formation as a result of the 5'-AMP hydrolysis. The experimental 
procedure is outlined. The 5'-nucleotidase activity in the mice 
thymus after the bradykinin injection and the number of tumoral 
node cells after the bradykinin injection at the tumor 
development stage are summarized, and the activity of thymus and 
tumor cell 5'-nucleotidase after the bradykinin injection to 
tumor-bearing mice is plotted. Bradykinin injection to intact 
mice leads to a considerable increase in the thymus cell 
5'-nucleotidase activity, peaking after 6 h; the effect of the 
bradykinin injection on the allogenic and syngenic tumors 
differed. The study shows that bradykinin stimulates the 
5'-nucleotidase activity in the thymus of tumor-bearing mice 
while the effect of bradykinin on the tumor cell enzyme activity 
is less marked, especially under syngenic conditions. It is 
noted that the 5'-nucleotidase activity is a rather informative 
indicator of the thymus cell status which characterizes the 
tumor cell sensitivity to bradykinin. The study of the 
5'-nucleotidase activity may be used for assessing the effect of 
antitumoral preparations under experimental conditions. Figures 
1; tables 1; references 6: 4 Russian, 2 Western. 


