Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Text, under the rubric "Living Environment," of excerpts </F>
from the Green Peace Report "Russia: A Dump for Western Wastes. 
1987-1993"; with commentary by Ye. Subbotina] 
  [Text] "Russia: A Dump for Western Wastes. 
1987-1993." That is what the special report of Greenpeace of 
Russia is called. Its purpose is to make public transactions 
involving trade in wastes and their disposal in Russia. 
MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA decided to publish excerpts from this 
report. 
  As Greenpeace has found out, in the period from 1987 through 
November 1993, 95 firms made 86 attempts to export 34 million 
tonnes of dangerous waste from Western Europe to Russia's 
territory. Most of the proposals originated in Germany, but 
export attempts were also made by Switzerland, Austria, the 
United States, Italy, France, Belgium, Canada, Spain, Finland, 
Portugal, and Sweden. More than half the attempts were made by 
German firms and 80 percent of the waste (28 million tonnes) was 
produced in Germany. 
  Waste dealers most often use the pretext of "processing" or 
"recycling" to justify exports and take advantage of loopholes 
in laws which allow export for the purpose of processing with a 
minimum of monitoring. These proposals on processing presuppose 
either operations presented in an altogether false light or 
extremely dirty ones which would be illegal in the exporting 
country. 
  In this report alone, 90 percent of the schemes for 
exporting 
radioactive waste, whose future fate is well-known, were 
implemented under the pretext of "recycling." Greenpeace asserts 
that the economic incentive for exporting waste to less 
developed countries is so great that if a justification such as 
"processing" is the only way to export waste, all the waste 
dealers will become "processing specialists." 
  In fact, of the 96 proposals for importing waste made to 
Russia, 13 deal with garbage burning plants and "processing" 
enterprises. 
  Among the proposed wastes were 12 million tonnes of waste 
water sludge and contaminated soil, 10 million tonnes of slag 
and ashes from garbage burning plants, more than 700,000 tonnes 
of metallurgical waste, cable fragments, filtered dust, old 
paint, pesticides, chemicals, used tires, and plastic and 
radioactive waste. 
  There were 4,000 tonnes of waste successfully transported 
and 
disposed of on Russia's territory, including radioactive waste, 
used catalytic converters, mercury waste, copper slag, old 
pesticides, paint, chemicals, plastic, and 7,500 old tires. 
  In the opinion of Greenpeace, the figures cited give an idea 
of merely the tip of the iceberg of waste which is more and more 
regularly imported to Russia's territory. Greenpeace is afraid 
that present conditions will merely help turn Russia into a 
colony for dumping waste from Western Europe if the export and 
import of waste is not immediately banned. 
  These conditions are developing from the lack of bans on 
exports in the Western exporting countries and the crisis 
situation in Russia's economy, where the desire to obtain hard 
currency and the predominance among new entrepreneurs of a 
mentality which can be described as "take everything while you 
still can," as well as the lack of clarity in legislative and 
administrative structures, corruption on all levels, and our 
vast territory promote the export of waste to our country. 
  A provision completely banning the export of dangerous 
waste, 
including waste intended for "processing," from the OECD 
[Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development] 
countries to countries which are not OECD members must be 
included in the laws of Germany and the European Economic 
Community and in the Basel Convention. 
  Moreover, many Western countries are more prepared to impose 
a ban on the export of waste to the developing countries than on 
the export of waste to the countries of the former Eastern Bloc, 
which are not considered developing countries. Such a choice, 
which makes it possible to turn a country such as Russia, which 
is undergoing a serious economic and ecological crisis, into a 
dump, is immoral. Russia has enough of its own ecological 
problems. Aggravating them with waste from the West means 
sacrificing Russia as an international dump. That, moreover, 
frees the West of the need to introduce clean production instead 
of toxic technologies which promote the production of harmful 
wastes. Political intervention is now needed to set up a ban on 
trade in wastes. 
<H5>  Dirty Business </H5>
  Waste elimination has become an extremely profitable sector 
of the economy, and new regulations combined with the rapid 
reduction in capacities to eliminate waste merely promote higher 
prices. In order to avoid expenditures, a whole army of 
consultants, brokers, and waste-shipping companies has created a 
developed industry for handling waste which is called the "waste 
trade." This is the principle of its operation: the broker 
proposes to a company to remove dangerous waste at prices lower 
that existing ones for eliminating waste. Next the broker places 
the waste in a rented warehouse. Then he begins to look for 
somewhere to put the waste in another state whose government 
consents to it and where it can be done free of charge or at 
nominal cost. Very often officials receive bribes to do this. 
  Frequently the middlemen try to sell the importing country 
equipment to eliminate the waste -- a garbage burning plant or 
facility for disposing of the waste which supposedly meets 
Western standards. 
  Waste exporters prefer to do business with countries where 
the ecology movement is less influential, the laws less strict, 
and the leadership and executive branch of power have a shortage 
of resources as a result of lower development and sometimes even 
a crisis in the economy. 
<H5>  Disposal Under a Different Name </H5>
  In the 1980's most waste dealers did not attempt to hide the 
main purpose of their operations -- to get rid of dangerous 
waste. Now, however, "processing" or "recycling" is almost 
always mentioned as a pretext for transporting waste from 
countries with a more developed economy to countries with a less 
developed economy. Greenpeace has been a witness to innumerable 
justifications for the waste trade done under the guise of 
"processing," "humanitarian aid," "energy reduction," and 
"transfer of technology." Many of those who are involved in 
"processing" receive most of the profits from the very act of 
accepting waste for its "removal." "Processing" specialists 
receive money for accepting waste, since it is well known that 
waste is dangerous. Inasmuch as it is prohibited to discharge or 
burn an ever-increasing number of types of waste, the processing 
procedures are considered a new means to get rid of waste in 
industry. 
  Instead of preventing the production of dangerous waste, it 
is processed. When harmful waste is processed, it remains, 
damaging human health. 
<H5>  First Africa, Then Eastern Europe </H5>
  In the 1980's the African continent became the first victim 
of the trade in toxins. In 1988 dozens of cases of such exports 
became known and appeared in the headlines of the world press. 
As a result, the African countries condemned the import of waste 
and imposed a ban on it. When it became clear to the waste 
dealers that Africa was under control, they left to seek other 
large areas in order to dispose of the waste. 
  In Eastern Europe Poland became the first country to suffer: 
Poland was the first to open up her borders to the independent 
activity of Western firms. In 1989 the leaders of Solidarity 
adopted legislation which prohibited the import of any waste. 
The Polish government managed to bring the problem under 
control. According to Greenpeace data, starting in 1991 the 
waste brought to Poland has been transferred to the Baltic 
states, Romania, Georgia, Slovenia, Croatia, Albania, Ukraine, 
and, quite recently, Russia. 
  It is now clear that the countries of Western Europe intend 
to use the states of Eastern Europe as colonies where waste and 
dangerous materials are sent for "processing." 
<H5>  The Victim Is Russia </H5>
  The Russian market is extremely attractive to Western 
middlemen because of the difference in prices for removing waste 
from the West and to Russia. Because of this difference, 
enormous profits may be obtained. The privatization of former 
state enterprises and the lack of efficient official monitoring 
have led to an unchecked desire to obtain profits at any cost, 
without thinking of society or the environment. In post-Soviet 
society, after they lost official power, the former power 
structures began to seek new ways to support a high standard of 
living using completely self-centered and at times even criminal 
methods. 
  Another problem is related to the political decentralization 
of the decision making process. As a result decisions are made 
by people who do not have a clear idea of the political and 
global ecological consequences of such decisions. 
<H5>  The Import of Waste to Russia -- the Tip of the Iceberg </H5>
  Greenpeace took the material for this report from German, 
Russian, and other international sources. There is no doubt of 
the fact that the attempts to import waste presented in the 
report are merely the tip of the iceberg of what is called the 
"import of waste," and a large number of the precedents have not 
been publicized. 
  Not one country, with the exception of Poland (in Central 
and 
Eastern Europe), offers data on the waste trade. 
  Representatives of "power" structures like the KGB and of 
the 
criminal world often work on the staff of firms involved in the 
waste trade. 
  Because of Russia's disastrous financial condition, the 
danger arises that an increasing number of waste dealers will 
rush to this region in search of new markets for their dirty 
business. This danger can be averted by imposing a ban on the 
waste trade in the exporting countries and in Russia. 
<H5>  Commentary by Ye. Subbotina </H5>
  The Greenpeace report speaks of terrible things. Africa has 
rebuffed those who wanted to turn the continent into a poisonous 
dump. Russia has offered up its neck and the international mafia 
of waste dealers is making the noose tighter and tighter. A 
big-time game is being played with the difference in prices: in 
Germany eliminating 1 tonne of household waste costs 300 German 
marks, 1 tonne of solvents -- 1,200, and 1 tonne of pesticides 
-- 11,000 German marks, while burying them in Russia costs 35 
marks a tonne! And when there is the smell of such large amounts 
of money... 
  Waste comes to Russia by rail and by sea and ocean. Plastic 
waste from the United States arrived in St. Petersburg in 
November of the year before last. The garbage was shipped to the 
Intertreyd firm (a Russian firm) which is no longer in 
existence. The fire in Orekhovo-Zuyevo received a great deal of 
publicity when the inhabitants of that city in the Moscow region 
began to choke from the acrid smoke. Very labored breathing, 
headaches, and vomiting were caused by the waste which was 
scattered about the grounds of one of the enterprises. These 
items came from Germany to the Moscow scientific production 
association Plastik and the limited partnership Sirin in 
December 1992. The waste was cellulose and the plastic contained 
lethal components -- arsenic, mercury, cadmium, and lead. It is 
noteworthy that another 100 tonnes of this same waste found 
refuge in Chelyabinsk. It has not yet caught fire there. 
  And how costly just one offer to dump 12 million tonnes of 
waste water sludge in Russia is! Those who imagine that we have 
little of our own sludge should just take a drive to Maryino: a 
"deposit" of 20 million tonnes is located there in very close 
proximity to residential dwellings. Moscow has been racking its 
brains for a long time over what to do with it. The poison is 
terrible and there is simply nowhere to take it. 
  It is clear that to avoid becoming a world dump, Russia must 
stand up for its vital interests in the most decisive way. No 
considerations of financial benefit can be taken into account: 
ultimately it will have to be paid for in human lives. Of 
course, this will be a blow to the hairy paws of the mafia, but 
we have no other choice. Consequently, we need a program of 
tough measures by law enforcement organs. Laws to prevent the 
penetration of any waste across the border must be passed and, 
of course, we must try to insert a provision into the Basel 
Convention completely banning the import of poison to Russia. 

