Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The New U.S. Antidrug Strategy"] </F>
  [Text] The speech in which President Bill Clinton announced 
his new antidrug program will surely go down in history as one 
of the most outstanding and dramatic testimonies of the damage 
that drugs have produced within U.S. society. It is not by 
chance that he has decreed a full mobilization of the government 
and of citizens. 
  To learn that in the United States drug addiction is growing 
despite the efforts that have been made, that it has invaded 
schools and workplaces, that it has made the streets of small 
and big cities dangerous, and that many sick people who report 
to hospitals cannot be admitted because "emergency rooms are 
full of people who have been stabbed or shot," is a way of 
becoming familiar with a distant yet formidable tragedy. 
  Those who want to imitate consumerism could hardly believe 
Mr. Clinton when he said that people are afraid of going onto 
the streets because of the violence prevailing there, and that 
the new law against crime states that the streets will be 
patrolled by an additional 100,000 policemen. This shows that 
the drug issue in the United States is really serious. 
  Consequently, we should not be surprised that part of the 
new 
effort -- which will have repercussions in our country -- will 
include restrictions on the offer of drugs. The U.S. President 
has proposed that rather than "hunting" traffickers as they 
enter the United States, it is better "to stir up the hornet's 
nest." This means that the struggle in the countries that 
produce raw materials or drugs will be much harsher. 
  Clinton said this will be "part of the U.S. foreign policy 
in 
the main countries where drugs originate or which are used for 
transit." This is nothing new for us: Since the 1970's, the U.S. 
policy in Bolivia and other Andean nations has centered around 
drugs. Yet this time it has been made clear that the strategy 
will not seek to merely intercept shipments, it will seek to 
destroy the cartels that produce and sell drugs "using better 
technology and more ingenious methods." Besides, the United 
States now expects these countries to show their "full political 
will to persecute the drug-trafficking bosses." 
  Clinton has asked the U.S. Congress to increase by $76 
million -- to a total of $427 million -- funding for this 
activity in 1995, without specifying the use of the funds. In 
the case of Bolivia, we know how important alternative 
development programs are for giving Chapare peasants other 
sources of income. 
  Even though militarization -- which was so dear to the Bush 
administration -- has been finally eliminated from the bilateral 
agenda, police interdiction work, with DEA help, has increased 
without the activities of that agency having been regulated. 
  The Bolivian Government should obviously support the all-out 
struggle that the United States and the international community 
are waging against the fearsome world of drugs. Provisions are 
necessary, however, to wage this fight within the framework of 
institutional democracy, preventing the justifiable U.S. zeal 
from affecting Bolivian sovereignty and initiative. 

