Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The case involving the Movement of the 
Revolutionary Left [MIR] and its alleged links to drug 
trafficking has been submitted once again to FELCN [Special 
Antinarcotics Force]. A decision will be made in the next few 
hours. 
  The decision by the Chamber of Deputies' Constitutional 
Committee to put the investigation of MIR and its alleged links 
to drug trafficking in the hands of the Special Antinarcotics 
Force once again has caused surprise. The decision was 
surprising because the Chamber of Deputies had decided that the 
committee would investigate the cases. However, things changed 
after a suspicious -- so to speak -- visit by U.S. Embassy 
officials to committee Chairman Edil Sandoval 
  [Begin recording] 
  Sandoval: Well, what has actually occurred is that 
the Chamber of Deputies has ordered an investigation focusing 
exclusively on possible links between MIR leaders and drug 
trafficking. In other words, it is an area in which the chamber 
has ordered an investigation but, I reiterate, it will focus on 
MIR leaders allegedly linked to drug trafficking. 
  That is to say, there will be no interference in the 
investigations being performed by FELCN into the problem as a 
whole, that is, the fight against drug trafficking. The 
committee is not interfering with those activities. We will 
concentrate our investigation on MIR leaders who might be linked 
to drug trafficking. 
  Unidentified reporter: However, yesterday ... 
[changes pattern] today newspapers published a statement by you 
saying that the matter could be returned to FELCN. 
  Sandoval: A minor disagreement has arisen, and we 
will continue to debate it in the committee. It refers to the 
fact that a brief, fast analysis of case folders has revealed -- 
especially to me -- that the FELCN investigation is not over 
yet. Even the report FELCN has submitted to the judicial branch 
is an investigation that has not been finished yet. I have 
concluded therefore that this investigation, which -- I 
reiterate -- is not over yet, should continue and that we -- 
despite the mandate we received from the Chamber of Deputies -- 
should not interfere in that investigation. That is why I 
suggested to the Constitution Committee that all the 
investigations the FELCN is currently conducting be submitted to 
the committee upon their completion and not to the regular 
courts. The proposal's objective is to prevent the overlapping 
of work and to concentrate all matters involving political 
leaders under the committee's jurisdiction. 
  Reporter: Did the courtesy visit by U.S. Embassy 
officials have anything to do with this? 
  Sandoval: No, not at all, because I made the 
decision before the visit by the Embassy officials. [end 
recording] [passage omitted] 

