Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] We interviewed director of Electrotechnical Lab 
(RTL) and the top executives of 12 Japanese manufacturers, each 
heading the company's R&amp;D division, concerning major 
achievements for 1993, R&amp;D themes to be pursued for 1994, and 
comparison of the U.S. and Japanese R&amp;D efforts. All makers 
listed a ``multimedia-related area'' as a research theme to be 
pursued. More specifically, the majority of the makers selected 
an area related to image processing technology as their 1994 
research theme. The number of makers who will pursue 
``environment/energy-related'' theme has increased. As for their 
achievements, emphasis was on product development and practical 
application of technologies. Results in basic research were few 
and far in between. 
  A chorus of many voices. Shift in research themes during the 
past 3 years is manifested in a sudden increase in the number of 
multimedia-related R&amp;D projects undertaken. In contrast, only 
one company pursued HDTV R&amp;D in 1993. 
  The questions put to top R&amp;D executives are as follows: 
<H5>  A. R&amp;D Results and R&amp;D Policy </H5>
  (A-1) Please list approximately five of your main R&amp;D 
achievements for 1993. 
  (A-2) Please list approximately five of your main R&amp;D 
themes 
for 1994 projects. 
  (A-3) Please tell us shift in your R&amp;D investment for 
the 
past 20 years. 
<H5>  B. R&amp;D in Recessionary Times </H5>
  (B-a) The trend appears to indicate Japanese electronics 
makers are cutting back their investments. Is this true of your 
company? If the economic condition is such that your company has 
no choice but to cut back R&amp;D investments, how will you 
change 
your R&amp;D policy? What sort of measure will you take so that 
your 
company's technical performance will not suffer from investment 
cutbacks? 
<H5>  C. Comparison between U.S. and Japanese R&amp;D </H5>
  (C-1) Do you think the U.S. manufacturing industries, having 
overcome the recession and now well on the way to full recovery, 
are stronger than before in the manufacturing field? How are 
they doing in the R&amp;D field? What makes you think so? How 
will 
they change in the future? 
  (C-2) Where do you think the strength of Japanese 
manufacturing industries lie? What about the U.S. industries? 
What are the factors attributable to those differences? 
  (C-3) In which field and under what kind of conditions each 
country's system works most effectively? 
  (C-4) Generally speaking, which field and themes should 
Japanese electronics makers focus their attention? In your 
opinion, which field and themes are considered important by 
American manufacturers? 
<H5>  Hitachi, Ltd. - Mr. Yasushi Takeda, Managing Director. </H5>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Wide-band region ISDN ATM exchange system; 
  (2) Super computer ``HITAC S-3800 system''; 
  (3) High-speed and large-volume ``Creative Station 3000 
Facsimile Series''; 
  (4) Single chip RISC microcomputer ``SH series''; 
  (5) Single electron memory; 
  (6) Total automatic washer ``Crisp and Dry,'' with a faster 
hydroextractor rotational speed. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Information transmission systems, such as wide-band ISDN 
and mobile communication systems; 
  (2) Large-scale rail travel management system; 
  (3) Medical electronics which takes into consideration aging 
society; 
  (4) Multimedia workstation system; 
  (5) Information recording technology and high-density 
opto-magnetic large memory recording technology. 
<H3>  Building up R&amp;D Center To Achieve High Speed in Product 
Development </H3>
  From technical standpoint, American manufacturers are 
substantially ahead of the rest of the world in the software 
field. Japanese manufacturers, on the other hand, possesses 
well-balanced technologies, beginning with R&amp;D and ending 
with 
manufacturing. I believe that Japanese culture should be 
reflected on software technology as well. We should work on the 
kind of software which is uniquely Oriental in its approach. The 
automatic distribution system currently under development at 
Hitachi exemplifies this. It is being used in railway 
operational control. 
  What we should learn from the United States is a significant 
role played by American universities in R&amp;D. Japanese 
R&amp;D relies 
too much on private industries. Our universities have only a 
feeble role to play in this respect. If Japan is to assert 
itself as a country founded on science and technology, our 
government should invest to strengthen academic research 
environment. In the United States, since the industry's vision 
tends to be short-ranged, universities are called in to provide 
a long-range vision. Japanese industries' approach, on the other 
hand, is based on a long-range vision. For this reason, it is 
important for Japanese companies to exercise well-balanced 
judgement in allocating research resources. 
  I want to see more effective use of our R&amp;D resources. 
We 
should not be boasting a huge amount spent in investing in 
R&amp;D. 
I feel that R&amp;D and product development are two entirely 
different activities. R&amp;D constitutes ``a total business 
innovation'', while product development constitutes a segment of 
our enterprise division's total activities. In order to 
construct an efficient product development system, we are 
expanding a ``development center'' as a nucleus of this system, 
covering an entire operation of the company. At present, we have 
11 such centers. These serve as a nucleus of the development of 
``strategic enterprise project'' which began in 1992. The 
centers are supported by our research laboratories. 
  Personnel of each development center is drawn from the 
enterprise division and the research laboratory, each unit 
contributing 50%. In carrying out R&amp;D, different 
types of 
expertise brought by these two units are integrated to 
accelerate the pace of research. 
  These activities may give the impression that the company is 
shifting to product development, but I wish to emphasize that we 
are pursuing basic research at the same time. The problem facing 
us now is how we can revitalize product development without 
sacrificing basic research. 
<H5>  Aiming at ``Intelligence and Ecology'' </H5>
  The ``intelligent and ecological society'' is a direction 
toward which Japanese electronics makers are moving. They are 
contributing to the technical fields aimed at achieving advanced 
information society and environmental protection. I feel that 
networking technology, including radio transmission, will be 
crucial to achievement of this goal. 
<H3>  Toshiba - Mr. Seiichi Takayanagi, Representative Executive 
Officer-Vice President. </H3>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993 
  (1) Development of 256M bit DRAM cell in connection with the 
international project; 
  (2) TFT liquid crystal display with high aperture ratio and 
low voltage drive; 
  (3) Image compression technology (MPEG2 decoded LSI); 
  (4) Pen-input portable information device ``Xtend''; 
  (5) A total-body-length X-ray CT equipment using continuous 
helical scanning method; 
  (6) High thermal resistant organic material achieved by 
using 
molecular design. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994 
  (1) Basic next generation semiconductor technology; 
  (2) Digital media network system element technology; 
  (3) Human interface technology; 
  (4) Partial engineering technology (including CAD and other 
types of simulations technologies); 
  (5) High-performance secondary battery; 
  (6) High pressure-resistant and large-volume thyristor for 
transmission of direct current. 
<H3>  When Japan Turned Its Attention to Basic Research, U.S.'s 
Major Effort Shifted to Application Technology </H3>
  The ratio of R&amp;D spending to sales since 1991 for the 
most 
part has remained the same. We did not cut back. However, the 
recessionary economy severely affected market growth, with our 
sales curve remaining flat. Consequently, Toshiba's R&amp;D 
projects, more than ever, are becoming market oriented. 
  Although we tend to treat research and development as one 
activity, in fact they are two activities requiring different 
handling. With research, we use a strict process of selecting 
themes, fully taking into consideration technological trends and 
future of our company's business. This is the policy to which we 
have adhered throughout the past 20 or more years and which we 
have no intention of changing even under recessionary economic 
conditions. 
  Probably I am correct in saying that the U.S. manufacturing 
industry appears to be gaining strength. Efforts put in in 
improving its manufacturing technology and production method are 
now producing results. 
  I also noted change in their approach to R&amp;D which 
began to 
emerge a few years ago. At the time when Japan was crying for 
basic research, the United States already had shifted its 
attention to application-oriented research. In the past, the 
United States was pursuing R&amp;D using the concept of a 
``linear 
model.'' It began with research, which later would be linked to 
development, production, and marketing. What the U.S. industry 
has done is to interlock into this ``linear model'' a ``chaining 
model,'' designed to feedback marketing results into research. 
The U.S. industry, thus, shifted its orientation to application. 
  Our company has adopted a ``3-layered structure,'' linking 
the main office research laboratory, works laboratories, and the 
enterprise division. Because of active interchanges taking place 
between the main research laboratory and enterprise division, 
our company's style can be described as the chaining model. 
<H5>  Basic Research in Software Constitute Search for Concept </H5>
  However, although the three-layer structured system is 
suitable for R&amp;D of hardware technology, it does not work 
well 
with that of software. 
  The purpose of basic research in software is to work out a 
new concept. It is difficult for a large company to have a group 
of researchers with this type of talent. This is not limited 
only to Japan. In the United States, also, very few new concepts 
are emerging from large corporate laboratories. 
  Venture business probably is the only one which has this 
capability. The reason why a venture business can be easily 
established in the United States is that the software field is 
one of very few fields in which an ``American dream'' can be 
realized. Highly gifted researchers bury themselves in pursuit 
of a new concept, paying little attention to daily routines, 
such as eating and sleeping, and practically living on bread and 
water. It will be difficult to create such an environment, 
including a pay structure, within a large corporation. 
<H3>  Mitsubishi Electric - Mr. Eiichi Ohno, Managing Director and 
Head of Development Headquarters. </H3>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Development of a small synchrotron light emission device 
using a superconductive magnet; 
  (2) Development of a high-speed elevator (Landmark Tower in 
Yokohama City, Kanagawa Prefecture); 
  (3) Development of a refrigerator which does not use CFC; 
  (4) Development of a thin film polycrystalline Si solar 
battery; 
  (5) Development of a DINOR type flash memory; 
  (6) Development of a client/server system for use in basic 
tasks. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Development of the next generation of LSI (0.25 
micron-scale miniaturized processing technology); 
  (2) Multimedia-related application technology; 
  (3) Development of a wide-band region ISDN equipment and 
mobile communication equipment; 
  (4) Technology designed to solve energy and environmental 
problems; 
  (5) Social system technology (a road traffic system and a 
total system for a building) 
<H3>  Evaluation of R&amp;D Using Criteria on Whether It Leads to 
New 
Product </H3>
  Since 1990, the amount of investment made by Mitsubishi has 
remained approximately 7% of the company's annual sales. 
This 
situation probably will continue at least for the next two to 
three years. 
  Faced with this situation, effectiveness of R&amp;D becomes 
primary importance. What we mean by ``effectiveness'' in this 
context is whether a given R&amp;D will lead to a new product. 
If it 
leads to a product, its effectiveness is high and therefore is 
evaluated as a success. If it does not lead to product, then it 
is viewed as a failure. In order to enhance effectiveness, it is 
necessary to apply strict criteria in selecting R&amp;D themes. 
In 
making investment, the company will focus its attention on the 
importance of R&amp;D themes and make investment decisions 
accordingly. 
  Based on this approach, the company restructured its R&amp;D 
organizations in June 1993. Several research laboratories 
located at the development headquarters have been moved to the 
enterprise headquarters. The enterprise headquarters is now 
responsible for determining R&amp;D themes. Overall adjustments 
of 
themes will be carried out by the development headquarters. 
<H3>  Elimination of Waste by Transferring Authorities through 
Reorganization </H3>
  The reorganization we have undertaken is not a short-term 
change but rather is designed to solve the type of problems 
peculiar to the R&amp;D setup of general electric manufacturers. 
  The scope of general electric manufacturing business is 
expanding, more widely than we have ever imagined possible. In 
order to deal with this, from the 1970s to 1980s, our company 
had established one research laboratory after another at the 
development headquarters. Until recently, we had emphasized 
centralization for the sake of efficiency. We began to realize, 
however, that such a decision-making process as selection of 
themes, to be handled by the development headquarters alone was 
to limit ourselves. 
  We had, therefore, decided to move, whenever possible, 
research laboratories which are working on themes closely linked 
to commercial undertakings to our enterprise headquarters. Only 
those types of researches which are not extensions of existing 
research remain with the development headquarters. For instance, 
in the semiconductor field, both LSI and optic-microwave device 
research laboratories, as well as Custom LSI Design Technology 
Development Center, have been placed under a newly-established 
semiconductor enterprise headquarters. At the development 
headquarters, a semiconductor basic research laboratory which 
emphasizes basic technology has been installed. Research in the 
small synchrotron radiation device, listed as one of our 1993 
achievements, will be continued at the semiconductor basic 
research laboratory. 
  There are disadvantages associated with the decentralization 
of this type. It becomes difficult to share research results 
among the laboratories. In order to prevent this, the 
development headquarters serves as an intermediary between 
research laboratories belonging to the enterprise headquarters. 
<H5>  NEC - Mr. Yasuo Kato, Managing Director. </H5>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) ATMLAN product development and multimedia communication 
system development; 
  (2) Development of parallel computer products; 
  (3) Product development of a high-precision thin liquid 
crystal projection display for use with workstations; 
  (4) RISC multiprocessor core with an operating frequency of 
500MHz; 
  (5) PC voice input/output system product development; 
  (6) Development of metal-containing carbon nanotube. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Hypermedia information transmission system with a high 
degree of speed and freedom; 
  (2) Superparallel/superdistribution processor and its 
software; 
  (3) Intelligent man-machine interface technology; 
  (4) High-precision picture/image technology; 
  (5) The 1 micron-width level microprocessing; 
  (6) Environmentally-sound technology for product 
manufacture. 
<H3>  Laboratory-Nurtured Technology Now Linked to Products with 
More Definite Purpose </H3>
  Of the 1993 R&amp;D expenditure, approximately 10% 
is allocated 
to research laboratories, with the remainder going to the 
enterprise division's R&amp;D section. The investment in the 
enterprise division for 1993 was reduced by &yen;10 billion over 
the 1992 figure. We also held down the costs of software 
development which the research laboratories and enterprise 
division's R&amp;D section ordered from the outside source. 
  We are going to maintain basic research no matter how 
difficult this may become. We will not concentrate our 
investment only in the field where our company's technical 
capabilities excel. Our R&amp;D spending has been reduced over 
the 
past two consecutive years. No further cutbacks, however, will 
be forthcoming. At this juncture, it appears that 1994 will see 
a turnaround, or at least it is expected to be a better year 
than 1993. 
  It is worthwhile to note that our research efforts in 1993 
produced four practical technologies, something which we 
normally do not see. In order to overcome the declining business 
afflicting the entire company, we directed our R&amp;D efforts to 
link the technologies nurtured at the research laboratories to 
product development. 
  We also changed our research management system. Goals, 
investment targets, and R&amp;D schedules have been more clearly 
defined. In the past, research laboratories' projects, in some 
instances, were carried out on a voluntary basis by those 
involved in the field. We have changed this by providing a 
project leader with a clear-cut authority. 
  Moreover, we adopted a system whereby individual researchers 
can select working hours which best suit them. They will be 
evaluated not by the hours they put in but rather by the results 
produced. 
<H3>  We Have No Technology Which Can be Left to Other Companies 
To Develop </H3>
  It is not our understanding that the U.S. companies have 
been 
weakened. For instance, in terms of the electronics industry, 
Japanese industry still has some distance to go before it can 
catch up with the U.S. The United States had been strong in the 
electronics field, and it will continue to be so. However, we do 
not believe that there is little hope for the Japanese industry. 
At least partially, we should see the emergence of a field in 
which the U.S. industry will embrace our ideas and follow our 
steps. 
  In the multimedia field, an R&amp;D joint venture involving 
Japanese and U.S. companies is in progress. Insofar as the field 
in which NEC is involved is concerned, we do not see any 
technology which we must rely on expertise of other companies. 
The reason for this is that, unlike other domestic general 
electric manufacturers, our company has not ventured into 
various other areas. 
  The purpose of our joint undertaking with other companies is 
simply to share technical concept and architecture and not to 
acquire technologies from other companies. 
<H3>  Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. - Mr. Shiro Horiuchi, 
Managing Director </H3>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) A 98mm-thick television image receiver using a flat CRT; 
  (2) Development of a blue-green semiconductor laser which 
oscillates at room temperatures; 
  (3) Development of a 3-D measurement technique which can 
handle an object measuring as little as 0.01 micron without 
touching it; 
  (4) Development of a quantized neural-network technology and 
neuro chips; 
  (5) Product development of a home raw garbage dehydrator. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Application development of neural network technology; 
  (2) Development of LSI with the minimum processing size of 
0.35 microns; 
  (3) Development of energy-related technology focusing on 
cells and motors; 
  (4) Development of HDTV digital-signal-processing 
technology; 
  (5) Development of information appliance related technology. 
<H3>  To Construct Designs Linking Research Results Quickly to 
Profit </H3>
  The United States is much better at producing a new 
technological idea, while Japan is superior at manufacturing. 
Japan's real strength is the ability to make things with 
accuracy. 
  When the value of the Japanese yen continues to remain high, 
if we are to remain competitive price-wise, we have no 
alternative but to move our production base to overseas. Soon, 
we will have to face the problem of deindustrialization which 
once plagued the U.S. industries. The question of how Japanese 
industries should reconstruct their strength if this should 
occur is the problem with which we all will have to wrestle in 
the near future. 
  Our R&amp;D investment for 1994 falls short of the 1993 
level. 
Unlike equipment and plant investment, R&amp;D is one of the 
divisions given a preferential treatment investment-wise. 
However, the R&amp;D Division no longer can expect the company to 
continue increasing the amount of R&amp;D budget annually as a 
matter of course. 
  Since R&amp;D is a segment of the company's investment 
cycle, it 
must be linked to profit. Only after a result of our research 
produces business profits, can we say that R&amp;D has completed 
a 
cycle. 
  We must, therefore, create a setup whereby results of 
R&amp;D is 
turned into business profits quickly. Our R&amp;D division and 
enterprise department hold a meeting regularly so that the two 
can jointly pursue the project at an earlier stage than has been 
done previously. This will shorten the time required for the 
R&amp;D 
division to deliver the result of its research to the enterprise 
department. Previously, the division did not get together with 
the enterprise department until its research had been almost 
completed. 
<H5>  Undertaking Development of Electric Vehicle Motor </H5>
  Matsushita will intensify its effort to develop such 
energy-related technologies as batteries. Our R&amp;D division 
more 
than ever is aware of the importance of environmental protection 
problems. Development of an electric vehicle motor is our 
energy-saving technology project which will be undertaken soon. 
We have a strong battery technology, and already an inquiry 
regarding our battery technology has been received from a 
manufacturer handling electric vehicles. In order to develop 
superior batteries, development of a motor which drives battery 
should be undertaken simultaneously. 
  The field of home information electronics still remains 
nebulous. We want to develop as many related technologies as 
possible, an example of which is a manufacturing technology 
designed to make electronic products thin and compact. 
<H3>  Fujitsu - Mr. Mikio Otsuki, Representative Managing Director 
and Vice President; and Representative Managing Director and 
President, Fujitsu Laboratories </H3>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Practical ATM exchange and transmission system; 
  (2) Product development of a digital portable phone and an 
elastic wave surface filter; 
  (3) Development of a relational database machine equipped 
with high-speed retrieval functions (100 times the speed of 
existing machine) 
  (4) Super high density external memory device technology (MR 
head technology and opto-magnetic disk device); 
  (5) Completion of 620M bit/second-channel optical parallel 
link module; 
  (6) Product development of 21-inch color plasma displays. 
  1994 R&amp;D Themes: 
  (1) Research in a multimedia system integrated with 
superspeed networks; 
  (2) All-purpose high parallel computer which can deal with 
multimedia; 
  (3) Digital high-quality image processing technology; 
  (4) VLSI technology (64 bits SPARC chip) and new device 
(HEMT); 
  (5) Development of compact portable information equipment 
and 
human interface; 
  (6) Development of middle-ware (intelligent Pad, CASE, 
object-oriented DBMS, etc.) 
<H3>  Research Setup To Anticipate Market Needs and To Transform 
Research Results Quickly into Products </H3>
  R&amp;D spending for 1993 is expected to be &yen;275 
billion, 
which is a decrease of &yen;40 billion over the 1992 figure. 
However, because of the efficient research setup we now have, we 
are able to maintain the same level of result. Through the 
consolidation of the divisions working on overlapping research 
themes and through joint research with other companies, Fujitsu 
company was able to reduce costs and time requirements. 
  Results of joint developments undertaken with British ICL 
and 
PLC, as well as Amdhal in the U.S., have begun to emerge 
finally. They consist of a network management software and 
group-ware. 
  In order to accelerate commercialization of these products, 
it is necessary to change a research setup. With the past setup, 
research began with seeds and only after research was under way, 
it was connected to needs. With our new setup, however, research 
will begin with well-defined needs and determine what technology 
will be required to satisfy those needs. In order to achieve 
this, we developed a measure enabling researchers in different 
fields to work jointly. 
  For instance, in order to catch up with the United States in 
the field of microprocessor research, researchers in 
semiconductor process and system fields will be brought together 
to form a working group. A joint development project involving 
Fujitsu Laboratories and Fujitsu Corporation was undertaken in 
the field of computer peripheral devices for the first time two 
years ago. Four or five projects are currently in progress. 
<H3>  Fujitsu Will Continue its Effort in Multimedia-Related Field 
into 1994 </H3>
  In the software field, Japan has no alternative but to 
accept 
the U.S.-produced operating systems. We should do our utmost to 
develop the middle ware which will play an important role in the 
future. Our company has been selling an object-oriented 
database, ``ODBII'' and a visual type development environment, 
``Intelligent Pad.'' We will aggressively pursue multimedia, 
also. In 1993, Fujitsu established a new multimedia project 
headquarters and a personal system laboratory. 
  Needless to say, basic research will not be neglected 
either. 
We developed a high-speed numerical processing (such as 
factorization) software, the Risal/Asir. At our information 
societal science laboratory, research in genetic algorithms (GA) 
is being conducted. It involves artificial life based on GA, and 
we are investigating the possibility of linking this to human 
interface research. Also under investigation is the linking of 
GA-based optimization to development of software. 
<H5>  Sony - Mr. Minoru Morio, Managing Director and Vice President </H5>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Continuous oscillation of blue-green semiconductor laser 
(oscillation wavelength 523 nm) at room temperature; 
  (2) Development of 16M bit SRAM with access time of 9ns; 
  (3) Commercialization of 1/2-inch business-use digital VTR 
``Digital Beta Cam'' designed to record component signals; 
  (4) Development of an 8-channel motion picture digital voice 
system ``Sony Dynamic Digital Sound''; 
  (5) Development of a 0.7-inch 18,000-pixel color 
liquid-crystal display. 
  1994 R&amp;D Themes: 
  (1) High-density magnetic recording and optical recording 
technology; 
  (2) High-performance ASIC semiconductor technology; 
  (3) Digital signal processing technology; 
  (4) Display device technology; 
  (5) Multimedia-related technology. 
<H3>  To Make Most of Each Country's Area of Expertise, System 
Research Assigned to U.S. and Device Research to Japan </H3>
  It has been said that the U.S. manufacturing industry is 
staging a comeback in recent years, or perhaps it may be better 
to say that we are seeing it right now. Intrinsically, there is 
little difference between U.S. and Japanese approaches to 
manufacturing. Most likely, we will continue to compete, 
sometime we will win and at another time we will lose. When 
Japanese manufacturing industry was at its height, the U.S. 
industry learned from it. Now it is Japan's turn to learn from 
the United States. 
<H5>  U.S. Environment Nurtures New Ideas </H5>
  In R&amp;D, also, we have a great deal to learn from the 
United 
States, as we had in the past. It was in the United States where 
new system technologies, such as those in the computer and 
cellular telephone fields, were developed. This situation 
remains unchanged. The Iridium Project is a good example of 
this. With respect to the next generation of television 
broadcasting, a wide variety of proposals, including expansion 
into the areas of ATV and CATB, have been made. 
  The reason why new ideas are generated in succession by the 
United States is that it has a social climate ideal for 
innovation. Its approach toward the administration of regulatory 
controls is a case in point. Japan is a country which regulates 
everything, while the United States's guiding principle is 
freedom. Consequently, if an idea of transmitting TV images over 
telephone circuits is proposed, in the United States, the idea 
can be actually tested. In Japan, on the other hand, the same 
idea can go no further than the proposal as it hits many 
regulatory walls. 
  Another strength of the United States might be that it is a 
country in which researchers and engineers can move from one 
company to another relatively freely. In the United States, a 
researcher can move to a company which is willing to let him 
pursue his interest. Such an environment cannot be created in 
Japan by one company's effort alone. For this reason, I believe 
that our research dealing with the new concept of a fusion of 
communication and computer should be conducted at our U.S.-based 
R&amp;D division. Favorable environment, after all, is essential 
to 
the conceptualization of a new idea. 
  Research in device designed to support such a new system 
will 
be undertaken by our research laboratories in Japan since Japan 
has developed excellent device-related technologies. For 
instance, thanks to the effort of Japanese manufacturers, today, 
semiconductor lasers used in CD players can be manufactured at a 
few hundred yen. 
  I have no intention of carrying this concept of division of 
labor to extremes. Given the present research environment, I 
felt that our U.S. division is best used for conducting 
innovative research and our Japanese division for more 
manufacturing-oriented research. Who knows, in the 21st century, 
their roles may be reversed. 
<H3>  Sharp - Mr. Ichiro Fujimoto, Managing Director and Head of 
Technology Headquarters </H3>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) GaAs monolithic microwave IC for use in digital cordless 
telephone; 
  (2) High vision liquid crystal projector using 1.31 
million-pixel 2-inch polycrystalline Si color TFT liquid 
crystals; 
  (3) Wide angle of visibility technique for color TFT liquid 
crystal displays; 
  (4) 4.9-inch plastic STN liquid crystal displays; 
  (5) Super resolution optical magnetic disks capable of 
enlarging memory capacity sixfold. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Larger-scaled and higher-precision liquid crystal 
display; 
  (2) Development of devices which will be the key to the 
semiconductor laser, high-frequency elements, and other products; 
  (3) Element technology research dealing with digital image 
processing and other multimedia-related equipment; 
  (4) Development of new communication equipment such as 
portable and mobile communication terminals; 
  (5) Development of environmental protection technologies, 
including that of a high-efficiency and low-priced solar battery 
and environmental protection technology. 
<H3>  Reject ``Jack of All Trades'' Approach to R&amp;D; Selection 
of 
Themes and Concentration of Efforts Important </H3>
  It is important to improve efficiency in carrying out 
R&amp;D in 
recessionary times. The ``jack of all trades'' R&amp;D, having a 
finger in every theme in sight, does not work well. Only by 
selecting a theme carefully and concentrating our effort on it, 
will we be able to succeed. 
  Our handling of a liquid crystal display research is a case 
in point. In order to achieve a flat-panel display, a plasma 
display could also be brought into our project. Our company, 
however, rejected the extension of its effort in that direction. 
  If we have not narrowed down themes properly, however, its 
consequence will have been devastating. Suppose that, of 100 
research themes selected, only three themes were able to produce 
result, the company will have the serious problems of both staff 
morale and business profit at hand. We should aim for a 
100% 
hit in selecting themes. At present, the company relies on top 
executives' judgment in selecting themes. 
<H5>  ``Rush Project'' Which Produced Liquid Crystal VIEWCAM </H5>
  In order to improve R&amp;D efficiency, the company is 
putting 
into practice the following procedures: 
  (1) When selecting a theme, even in the area of basic 
research, we consider the question of how it can be linked to 
our future business undertaking. For instance, in 
superconductive research, we target a high-sensitivity magnetic 
sensor which can be used in medical electronics. We do not 
pursue research in zero-resistant superconductive cables as they 
are not related to our business. 
  (2) In order to bring together our management resources on 
important themes, we introduced a system known as a rush 
project. The rush project is designed to bring together staff 
members working in the related area from all sectors of the 
company to work under a chief assigned to a given R&amp;D 
project. 
The project will deal with an R&amp;D theme, for which all 
element 
technologies are in place and of which future is comparatively 
transparent. It takes one or one and a half years for this type 
of theme to reach a product development stage. Both the ``liquid 
crystal VIEWCAM'' and the ``compact MD (mini disk) Player'' are 
products of the rush project. The projects works so well that 
almost 90% of the products produced by the rush project 
was a 
huge success. 
  (3) In order to utilize test facilities effectively, we 
shortened a core duration of flex time. Although it was 5 hours 
a few years ago, it now has been reduced to 2 hours, from 1:00 
p.m. to 3:00 p.m. If the flex time system is used, we can 
stagger the time for using the facilities. R&amp;D in recent 
years 
uses a large-scale measurement instrument and manufacturing 
equipment, the kind of equipment which the company cannot afford 
to purchase in multiple sets. 
<H3>  Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd. - Mr. Shintaro Ushio, 
Managing Director and Head of R&amp;D Headquarters </H3>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Document OCR equipped with free-format printed-document 
recognition capability; 
  (2) A text-voice synthesized system ``Bat-Man''; 
  (3) Proposal for personal communication methods (for 
instance 
wireless method/voice coding method); 
  (4) High-frequency component for use in mobile 
communication; 
  (5) Optical module with transmission speed of 1-G 
bit/second. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Human interface technology for image and character 
recognition; 
  (2) High-speed information communication system construction 
technology; 
  (3) Intelligent information system designed for natural 
language processing and knowledge processing; 
  (4) Personal technology for information and communication 
(including PDA and radio technology); 
  (5) Device for next generation communication networks. 
<H3>  From Agrarian to Hunting - Change Demands Researchers' 
Ability to Debate </H3>
  In some fields, Japanese are better at making things than 
Americans. That does not mean, however, that Japanese industries 
are superior to the U.S. industries. Especially in the field of 
software, Japan cannot possibly compete with the United States. 
Consider object-oriented technology, group ware, etc.--they all 
originated in the United States. 
  In our own backyard, Korea is closing in on us. Southeast 
Asian countries also are exerting themselves for manufacturing. 
We can no longer consider the industrial world simply in terms 
of the United States as a thinker and Japan as a maker. Then 
what should Japan do? The answer is Japan must become a thinker 
as well. 
  However, there are cultural differences to consider. For 
instance the United States has a built-in mechanism of debate. 
Its people, therefore, are expected to express their thought. 
The Japanese corporate climate, on the other hand, favors 
suppression of individual thought, as reflected in the saying, 
``A tall tree catches much wind.'' 
  A method employed by Japanese corporations is that of a 
typically agrarian people. They sow seeds and they harvest. Each 
company brings back seeds given by the United States and 
cultivates them in its own field. Intrinsically Japanese are 
different from Americans who are hunters expected to move about 
energetically. 
  It is unreasonable to expect Japanese, who were agrarian 
people by nature even now, to transform themselves to hunters. 
Unless they begin practicing ``javelin throwing'' of hunters, 
how will they possibly be able to create new intelligence? One 
of the methods is to use performance as a basis of a salary 
system; however, this system still is too alien to the Japanese 
corporate culture. Of course, ultimately, as in the United 
States, a contractual base will be adopted. 
  I want researchers to be able to think freely. In terms of 
specialized knowledge, individual researchers are superior to 
managers, as it is the working researchers, and not managers, 
who deal with the substance of research. I want researchers to 
make proposals freely and frequently, paying meticulous 
attention to the quality of their proposed research. As in 
elsewhere, it is important to be discriminating in private 
industries, also. I want them to have dreams and to be able to 
tell me how their potentials can be transformed into practical 
results. I feel that this is the quality which is lacking in 
today's researchers. Most researchers like to talk about 
methodology. ``They can explain to me articulately how they will 
proceed with their research.'' However, they have not given much 
thought to the question of ``for what purpose.'' I cannot put 
this type of researchers in charge of a project. Future 
researchers must work on acquiring the ability to ``debate.'' 
Perhaps we can say that this is what javelin throwing practice 
is all about. 
<H3>  NTT - Mr. Miyawaki, Managing Director and Head of R&amp;D 
Headquarters </H3>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Began Integrated Experiment (Second Phase of VI&amp;P 
Experiment) of high-speed and broad-band communication system 
involving high-speed multimedia service and computer 
communication; 
  (2) Development of half-rate voice coding algorithms used in 
mobile communication; 
  (3) Succeeded in 100G-bit/second multiple/separation optical 
transmission; 
  (4) Verification of 0.2-micron CMOS gate array's low-energy, 
high-speed actions; 
  (5) Discovery of new geometric optical illusion phenomenon 
(quantum-lens optical illusion). 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) New communication service (high-speed computer 
communication, personal communication, and multimedia 
communication); 
  (2) High-speed, wide-band communication (ATM node-link, 
optical line subscriber); 
  (3) Customer networking; 
  (4) Photonics (optic wave communication, optic exchange, and 
optic information processing); 
  (5) Nanoelectronics (low power-ultra speed LSI, quantum 
effect). 
<H3>  Important for Telecommunication Business to Establish Setup 
Design to Deal with Sweeping Change Affecting Industry </H3>
  The environment surrounding the telecommunication industry 
is 
facing a sweeping change. It will be important for our R&amp;D 
division to be able to deal quickly with new R&amp;D themes as a 
result of the emergence of new service needs or with changes 
which may occur in management environment. 
  From a service standpoint, indications are that the fusion 
of 
communication and broadcasting or that of communication and 
computer will advance rapidly. 
  For instance, the type of image transmission service which 
can be offered to homes varies depending on a system involved. 
However, it is too late to conduct R&amp;D in image transmission 
after the system already has been decided upon. We believe that 
the VI&amp;P experiment currently being pursued by our company 
will 
be sufficiently comprehensive to take care of a wide variety of 
cases. 
  The processing capability of terminals linked to network 
will 
drastically increase in the near future. This increasingly will 
create the need for offering the kind of network services which 
can be controlled at terminals rather than at the networks 
themselves. 
  Because of anticipated changes impacting a form of service, 
one telephone company after another in the United States are 
opting for joint undertaking of R&amp;D projects. Also for us in 
Japan, joint research is becoming a necessity. In the past, 
prerequisite to our company's joint R&amp;D efforts mostly had 
to do 
with a supply of equipment. In the future, it will become 
necessary to conduct R&amp;D project jointly with other company 
even 
without such a prerequisite. 
<H5>  Dividing R&amp;D Division Should Be Avoided </H5>
  From the management environment standpoint, a debate on 
whether we should go ahead with the dividing of the R&amp;D 
Division 
in 1995 will become a full-scale undertaking. 
  Speaking in terms of our R&amp;D division alone, however, I 
do 
not believe that the division will be split. We are entrusted 
with a mission of pursuing R&amp;D from the standpoint of common 
good as stipulated by the law. If our R&amp;D division becomes 
smaller units by the split, R&amp;D power also becomes mitigated, 
which means that we will not be able to complete our mission. 
  From the R&amp;D standpoint, the split also will have 
negative 
effect on NTT's branches, such as NTT Mobile Communication 
Network (Everywhere) and Data Communication units. From the 
management standpoint, however, the division of the unit 
certainly will increase efficiency. I am not saying ``no'' to 
the establishment of branch units through split of various 
company divisions. What I am pointing out is that we must give a 
careful consideration to its method so that its adverse effects 
can be minimized. 
<H3>  Sanyo Electric - Mr. Kotoku Kuwano, Managing Director and 
Head of R&amp;D Division </H3>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Liquid crystal projector type 3-D display which does not 
require glasses (Jointly developed with NHK Engineering Service 
and Toppan Printing Co.); 
  (2) Development of a CD with four-times a storage capacity 
of 
existing CDs and a moving picture CD player for MPEG1; 
  (3) Development of the lithium ion secondary battery which 
uses a load material of 370mAh/g capacity; 
  (4) Development of a practical photovoltaic technology; 
  (5) Semiconductor quantum effect transistor TNT (Two Mode 
Channel FET) for use in radio receiver/transmitter. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Development of multimedia-related technologies such as 
the next generation high quality display and an optic disk 
device; 
  (2) Development of such new material-related basic 
technologies as a high-performance secondary battery and solar 
cell; 
  (3) Development of microelectronic-related technologies such 
as polycrystalline Si liquid crystal and multimedia LSI element 
technologies; 
  (4) Development of mechatronics-related technologies such as 
non-CFC refrigeration technology and control technology 
utilizing neural network and CAOS (completely automatic 
operational system). 
<H3>  Today's R&amp;D Project Compels Japan To Establish Concept 
First </H3>
  In the United States, researchers establish the concept of 
what they wish to achieve first before undertaking R&amp;D. In 
the 
future, Japanese manufacturers also should undertake the kind of 
R&amp;D project which has a concept and philosophy put in the 
forefront. What matters most is that firm convictions 
(philosophy) held by researchers in undertaking R&amp;D. 
  In the case of Japan, unlike the United States, the 
regulation will not allow mutual participation of a broadcasting 
company and a communication firm in an R&amp;D project, and, 
therefore, this may be more difficult to achieve. However, as 
long as a researcher has an idea which he wants to realize and 
does all he can to convince others around him, I am certain that 
it will become possible. I have pursued my idea in the field of 
solar battery by proposing the ``GENESIS Project,'' aimed at 
distributing electricity by connecting the world with 
superconductive cables. By persuading a government agency to 
install a solar battery at each household and to make reverse 
power flow feasible, I finally have managed to realize my idea. 
<H5>  Creation of Exciting and Electrifying Multimedia </H5>
  We are devoting a great deal of our effort to R&amp;D of 
multimedia equipment. We entered the field through 
audio-visuals, thereby making the most of Sanyo Electric's 
technology. A path to multimedia research will be opened as long 
as we have a conviction. 
  We limited our efforts in achieving only efficiency and 
serviceability in the multimedia products thus far developed. 
However, those products will not be adequate for society which 
attained maturity, namely, that of the United States, Europe, 
and Japan. Unless they contain elements of excitement and 
inspiration, they will not be well received. 
  In comparison with the time allocated to TV news 
broadcasting, time given to TV entertainment hours are far 
longer. The reason why a game software costing several thousand 
yen sells well and J league is enormously popular is that they 
generate excitement and sensation among the audience. Pursuing 
only serviceability in multimedia will not give the company a 
competitive edge. Ultimately, the market will be won by those 
who can offer the best cost performance. 
  It follows then that the only way we can open up the 
multimedia market is through a home electric generation system. 
If we develop multimedia equipment as an extension of the 
computer, it will end up being nothing more than a product of 
convenience similar to the one pursued in developing electronic 
pad. It will not generate excitement among the audience, the 
kind of excitement only realtime three-dimensional natural 
images can create. 
  Bearing the foregoing in mind, we are working on the 
development of multimedia element technologies. Although 
development schedule has yet to be determined, it is our wish to 
develop MPEG 2 chip within the year 1994. The chips will be used 
in products one year after they have been developed. Within the 
next few years, we intend to make an announcement which will 
generate a great deal of excitement over our products. 
<H3>  IBM-Japan - Mr. Seiji Ishida, Managing Director-Vice 
President and Head of R&amp;D Headquarters </H3>
  Main R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Gentle to global environment ``Green PC'' designed to 
save space and energy, and to reduce noises; 
  (2) Reorganized environment for creating and using 
multimedia 
achieved through a system software designed to deal with 
multimedia; 
  (3) An 18-inch high-precision liquid crystal panel; 
  (4) a 25-inch large volume magnetic disk using an MR 
(magneto 
resistive) head. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) Development of a system fully utilizing Power PC's 
powerful processing capability; 
  (2) Human centric-related technology, the foremost of which 
is multimedia computer equipped with a human-like quality; 
  (3) To achieve high speed and a large storage capacity in a 
small magnetic disk; 
  (4) High-performance graphic system. 
<H5>  User Needs Incorporated Even in Basic Research </H5>
  It is true that IBM is cutting back its R&amp;D spending. 
However, we are not reducing our output. It is possible to 
reduce spending without reducing output also. Spending cuts came 
from reduction in fees paid for use of office space and in the 
number of staff employees. From the international standard, fees 
for use of office space were too high. 
  IBM research laboratories consist of a basic research 
laboratory in Tokyo and product laboratories located in [Yasu], 
Fujisawa, and Yamato. They are conducting R&amp;D projects in 
cooperation with the entire IBM laboratories. [Yasu] Laboratory 
specializes in microelectronics, including semiconductors, while 
Fujisawa and Yamato are developing magnetic disks and personal 
computer/network systems, respectively. 
  The center of gravity of these researches is the development 
of personal system products. It is a field which shows a great 
deal of promise. In this personal system field, the United 
States will emerge as an advanced market. For this reason, 
development of a product targeting the U.S market will come 
first. 
  As for R&amp;D priority, product development directly leads 
to 
commercialization will receive the first priority. We gave 
priority to those product developments which contribute to 
company's profitability, while withdrawing those which produce 
little profits. We move at a fast pace in R&amp;D and do not 
hesitate to use other companies' products if they are good. 
Moreover, we are considering the formation of an alliance with 
other companies so that we can share R&amp;D tasks. 
  With respect to computer system basic research, we send 
researchers to the business division so that they will have the 
opportunity to come in contact with users and to understand 
their needs. Otherwise, research may become nothing more than a 
researcher's ego trip. However, this arrangement will not apply 
to those pursuing element technology such as solid state 
research. 
<H5>  Development of ``Human-Centric'' Interface </H5>
  The highlight of our 1994 R&amp;D undertaking will consist 
of the 
following: 
  (1) human-centric interface technology designed for closer 
interaction of man and machine; 
  (2) object-oriented technology. The goal of our compact-size 
magnetic disk project will be the development of a 3.5-inch disk 
with a 1G-byte memory. 
<H5>  Electrotechnical Lab (ETL) - Mr. Sakutaro Toyama, Director </H5>
  Major R&amp;D Achievements for 1993: 
  (1) Proposal for low defect density amorphous Si which broke 
through the theoretical wall of thermal equilibrium; 
  (2) Development of a high-sensitivity magnetic sensor which 
uses a vacuum micro-device; 
  (3) Development of a super-speed superconductive LSI module 
on which a Josephson element is mounted; 
  (4) Explanation of motion control function by using a 
reverse 
dynamic computation of the cerebellum; 
  (5) Development of an anisotropic high-temperature 
superconductive element; 
  (6) Super-vacuum atom-count technology using laser 
ionization. 
  R&amp;D Themes for 1994: 
  (1) User-friendly processing of sensitivity information; 
  (2) Superconductive power electronics elements; 
  (3) Development of super-flow operating system; 
  (4) Development of advanced ceramics material for use in 
thermo-electric conversion; 
  (5) Research in coordinated architecture software model. 
<H3>  Aiming for Information Processing Best Suited to Japanese, 
Research Approached from Software and Device Standpoints </H3>
  In the field of transmission of information, the United 
States is showing a great deal of vitality. The United States 
always has led Japan in this field because of its superior 
technologies, the most representative of which probably is a 
basic software technology. The gap, in fact, is so wide that it 
is not easy for Japan to catch up with the United States. 
However, this does not mean that Japan is inferior in every 
aspect of software technology. In the game software field, Japan 
offers a higher standard. 
  The question, then, is why Japan lags behind the U.S. in the 
information communication field when it is capable of producing 
excellent game software. I suggest that this is not the problem 
of technology or capability but rather that of users. Japanese 
users are not effective in handling information systems. They 
are not particularly skilled in utilizing information so that 
value can be added to whatever they do or produce. Consequently, 
networking does not develop. 
  The reason why Japanese cannot utilize information 
effectively is that perhaps they feel ``regardless of what 
information says, truth can be obtained only by asking people.'' 
In addition, Japanese users tend to seek information on many 
values and prices all at once. When they are unable to obtain 
such information, they doubt the validity of the information 
source itself. 
<H5>  Role of National Research Institute To Provide Guidance </H5>
  At ETL, we selected research themes so that these problems 
can be dealt with. Since ETL is a national research facility, we 
spent our time listening to users' ``extravagant'' demands and 
are devoting our effort to the kind of research which will 
produce a software which users will find ``interesting.'' Our 
theme, ``coordinated architecture,'' is an example of the kind 
of software we have in mind. Not only in software research but 
also in device research, we are aiming for information 
processing which are best suited to Japanese. More specifically, 
we are working on devices to be used in both optical and 
parallel information processing. 
  Although research themes on our list do not appear too 
different from those of manufacturers, their contents are 
substantially different. With our themes, it is difficult to 
predict where they will lead us. In recessionary times, business 
is not likely to take on this type of themes. Our aim is to make 
clear where these themes will lead us. I believe this is the 
role of the national research institute. 

