BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview in writing with ROK President Kim Yong-sam by </F>
Georgina Higueras in Seoul; date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [Introductory passage omitted] [Higueras] Does 
North Korea have the military capability to launch a surprise 
attack against your country? 
  [Kim] Yes. It has over a million armed personnel and 
possesses conventional weapons exceeding those of South Korea. 
The North has also developed its own long-range missiles, which 
can reach not only the whole of our national territory but even 
the coasts of Japan. It must also be borne in mind that 65 
percent of its military might is concentrated near the armistice 
line. If the international community decides to apply sanctions 
against the North Korean regime, or the latter believes that it 
has no other solution in order to stay in power, its having 
recourse to the adventure of a provocation is not to be ruled 
out. Despite this, I believe that North Korea will not attack 
us, since this would cause its own destruction. 
  [Higueras] What is your opinion of what Kim Il-song said the 
other day -- that he has neither the atomic bomb nor the 
technology to construct it? 
  [Kim] If what he says is true, he must prove it. I believe 
that Kim Il-song should accept both International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) inspection and reciprocal inspection between the 
two Koreas so as to end the suspicions about nuclear weapons. 
  [Higueras] Should the United Nations intervene if Pyongyang 
persists in not allowing the inspection of its nuclear 
facilities? 
  [Kim] North Korea must take the international community's 
concern into account and comply with the IAEA's nuclear safety 
measures as soon as possible. It should also guarantee nuclear 
openness through faithful observance of the joint declaration by 
Pyongyang and Seoul on the denuclearization of the peninsula. I 
believe that if North Korea continues to reject IAEA inspection, 
the UN Security Council will adopt the appropriate measures, and 
many countries of the international community will join in that 
decision. 
  [Higueras] Do you believe that the current tension with the 
North could cause the return [to power] of the Army, which has 
ruled your country almost uninterruptedly? 
  [Kim] The Armed Forces positively support the military 
reforms which my government is implementing, and since there is 
a growing conviction among them that they themselves will suffer 
most if they intervene in politics again, I feel certain that 
the Army will not interfere in public life again. 
  [Higueras] The U.S. military presence in your country is 
increasingly opposed by young people. To what extent do you 
deem that presence necessary? 
  [Kim] Although there are some anti-American slogans among 
some young people, the majority of the South Korean people are 
aware of the importance of the U.S. troops' being stationed in 
South Korea. If we take into account the reality of the 
security of the Korean peninsula, where the Cold War is not yet 
over, the role currently played by the U.S. forces is more 
important than ever. 
  [Excerpt] [Higueras] You recently visited China. Do you 
believe that in the medium term that will be the ally which will 
replace the United States in Seoul's interests? 
  [Kim] In the economic field, relations with China are 
developing very rapidly. However, political and diplomatic 
cooperation, even on the nuclear issue, remains limited. In the 
future, there will undoubtedly be an intensive development of 
relations in all fields, which will contribute to peace and 
stability in this area of northeast Asia, but I believe that the 
United States will remain a very important country for us both 
in the medium and in the long term. 
  [Higueras] Are you in favor of the reunification of the 
Korean peninsula? 
  [Kim] The government has a firm principle laid down -- to 
carry out reunification by peaceful means in accordance with 
consultations between the South and the North -- but last March, 
during a session of inter-Korean talks, Pyongyang did not 
hesitate to address to our delegation outrageous and threatening 
remarks, such as that they would turn Seoul into a "sea of 
fire." With this, the dialogue was broken off, but if North 
Korea demonstrates its efforts to dispel the nuclear suspicions, 
relations between the South and the North could make significant 
progress. 
  [Higueras] At the beginning of your presidency, you launched 
a merciless war against the corruption inherited from the former 
regime, but this currently seems to have become bogged down. To 
what extent does corruption hamper your exercise of power? 
  [Kim] The struggle against corruption and administrative 
irregularities has achieved results which were never imagined in 
the past. I am now striving to continue and administer the work 
aimed at preventing a return of those evils, since it is not at 
all easy to uproot a system of corruption which has been rooted 
for so long in our society. Nevertheless, it is clear that, if 
I had left corruption as it was, the state's competitiveness 
would have collapsed from within. In this era of unlimited 
competition, corruption was making our survival impossible; that 
is why I am unshakeably determined to end it. 
  [Higueras] How does the GATT affect your country? 
  [Kim] The removal of the various barriers to trade, in 
accordance with the new GATT agreement, will affect South Korea 
very favorably, since it will increase our exports and diversify 
our export markets. Although certain industries whose 
competitiveness is weak will experience short-term difficulties 
as a result of the liberalization, in the medium and long term 
it will rather be advantageous for strengthening Korean 
industry's physical makeup or structure. That is, the benefits 
will be greater than the losses. 

