Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Igor Karpenko report: "World's Largest Energy System Being </F>
Privatized. Twenty-Four Million `RAO YEES Rossii' Shares on 
Offer at Check Auctions"] 
  [Text] It seems as though all-Russia check auctions have 
ceased to be events that attract any particular attention from 
the mass media. For instance, the appearance on this nationwide 
market in mid-January of 6 million shares in the famous 
"AvtoVAZ" went unnoticed even by our ubiquitous television 
against the backdrop of the governmental clashes. Nonetheless, 
it is hard to call the all-Russia auction which will open 7 
February anything other than sensational -- 19 million shares in 
the "RAO YEES Rossii" (the world's largest joint-stock company) 
will be offered for sale. 
  Indeed, if this record is to be listed in the Guinness Book 
the figures should be clarified straightaway -- 24 million 
"power generation" shares will be sold simultaneously and, apart 
from the Russia-wide auction, another 5 million shares will be 
on offer at ordinary regional check auctions, mainly in areas 
where the main enterprises of the "Yedinaya Energeticheskaya 
Sistema Rossii" [Integrated Power System of Russia] joint-stock 
company are located. 
  The terms of the auction and the economics of his enterprise 
were revealed to Russian and foreign journalists by Anatoliy 
Dyakov, president of the joint-stock company. The "RAO YEES 
Rossii" is now indeed the world's largest holding structure, 
uniting 72 legally independent joint-stock enterprises with a 
total work force of more than 1.2 million. The enterprise will 
not become completely independent even after these auctions are 
over -- the state still holds a controlling block of shares and 
also regulates electricity prices. 
  The giant enterprise's economic condition is strong and 
stable -- it has managed to preserve all its subunits and the 
volume of power produced. Its profitability stands at 
approximately 23 percent on average. The power workers 
currently lack investment funds -- largely as a result of the 
huge debts owed them by energy consumers. In December, for 
instance, these debts stood at more than 2.2 trillion rubles 
[R]! Admittedly, the power workers themselves owe their own 
partners more than R1 trillion -- the problem of mutual 
nonpayments is well known. 
  Interestingly, in order to solve this problem, the power 
workers are now switching to using bills of exchange for their 
transactions. Within this system bills promise to be very 
effective instruments, since the bulk of mutual nonpayments is 
localized within a small closed "circuit" -- coal-oil 
products-transportation-energy. 
  The all-Russia check auction will run from 7 February 
through 
28 March. Total book value of the "RAO YEES Rossii" property 
offered for sale is R12 billion, which is around 20 percent of 
its total incorporation capital. Nominal price of the shares is 
R500. 

