Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed (RKX): "Claes: Presence of Belgians in </F>
Serbia `Not A Major Problem'"; as released by Brussels BELGA 
Database] 
  [Text] Brussels, 13 Feb (BELGA) -- The presence of Belgians 
in Serbia does not constitute a major or immediate problem, 
Belgian Foreign Minister Willy Claes stated on Sunday [13 
February] during a BRT [Dutch-language Belgian radio and 
Television] discussion program "The Seventh Day." 
  Minister Claes indicated that after the announcement of 
sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, Belgian diplomatic 
staff in Belgrade had already been reduced to a strict minimum. 
The only remaining staff in the Serbian capital are a 
chancellor, a charge d'affaires, and a telex operator. The 
families of diplomats have also already been advised to leave. 
  Minister Claes also said that he saw no immediate danger for 
Belgian civilians in Serbia. This concerns just a small number 
of people, most of whom have dual nationality. The Belgian 
foreign minister did announce, however, that Belgium and the 
other EU member states will be discussing further measures 
concerning foreigners in Yugoslavia next Wednesday. 
  Unlike the United States, Great Britain, and the 
Netherlands, 
France also is not thinking of evacuating its citizens from 
Belgrade, said French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe on Sunday 
during a visit to Jordan. 
  During the television debate, Minister Claes said that he 
believed that it would not be necessary for NATO to carry out 
its threat to bomb Serbian positions in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The 
Serbs and Moscow have both understood the situation, said the 
minister, who believed that Moscow and Belgrade will be exerting 
sufficient pressure on the Bosnian Serbs to ensure that they 
comply with the NATO ultimatum. 
  Claes stated that the NATO ultimatum also formed an 
excellent 
basis for further negotiations. The discussion as to whether to 
send more and better armed ground troops to Bosnia -- as 
proposed by Mark Heirman of the CIP [Press Information Center] 
-- was not urgent or, above all, feasible, stated Claes. Claes 
asked who would be required to supply such troops, as the United 
States refused to do so and Germany was prevented from doing so 
by its constitution. 
  Claes stated that as far as NATO and the United Nations were 
concerned, scenarios 1 and 2 currently apply to Bosnia. If the 
NATO ultimatum does not produce any results, then scenario 3 may 
be considered, namely the extension of NATO's field of action. 
Claes had no doubt that no further meeting of the UN Security 
Council was required in order to take any further decisions. 
NATO would simply have to consult with Secretary-General 
Butrus-Ghali, who, under Security Council Resolutions 824, 836, 
and 844, has "political authority" regarding Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The foreign minister also said that at the moment there are 
no indications that Yugoslavia is planning reprisals in Belgium 
or any other country. 

