Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] A government, industry, and academic joint project 
led by the Agency for Science and Technology (STA) on 
``Functionally Gradient Materials (FGM) for Energy Conversion'' 
has been introduced. FGMs are considered next-generation new 
materials capable of producing a high-efficiency energy 
conversion system with high-power output. The technology 
development in this area has been attracting considerable 
attention because of its application potential as a source of 
electricity in space stations and direct electricity generation 
reactors. This project constitutes comprehensive research funded 
by the Special Coordination Funds for Promoting Science and 
Technology. It is a 5-year project starting in FY93. The first 
phase (3 years) of the project includes: FGMs for various types 
of energy conversion such as the ``thermoelectric conversion 
element'' which can convert energy efficiently by gradually 
changing the composition and the structure of the materials; and 
the development of high-efficiency, high-performance energy 
conversion. The second phase (2 years) includes the 
establishment of the key technology for design and manufacturing 
for application in space systems. 
  FGMs are composite materials created from materials that 
perform completely different functions. Joined together, the 
materials gradually change in composition and structure from one 
side to the other. This is a new concept that originated in 
Japan. It results in new materials which share the advantages of 
a number of materials. When FGMs are used for thermoelectric 
conversion elements that convert high heat into electricity, for 
example, the energy conversion efficiency rate increases 
tremendously. 
  This comprehensive research project will pursue development 
of manufacturing technology and structural control technology by 
focusing on thermoelectric conversion which involves a great 
deal of crucial development of functionally gradient structures 
among various energy conversion materials. It is theoretically 
possible to create materials that perform at high efficiency and 
high output by applying FGM technology to thermoelectric 
conversion elements which have maximum performance indexes at 
particular temperature levels. Furthermore, the project team 
plans to examine technical viability of developing an 
``ultra-high efficiency energy conversion system'' which can 
combine functionally gradient structured thermoelectric, 
thermionic high energy conversion elements at their most 
appropriate energy levels. 
  The participants of the project include the STA, the 
National 
Aerospace Laboratory, the National Research Institute of Metals, 
MITI's National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research of 
the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute 
of Technology, Kogakuin University, Daikin Industries, Ltd., and 
Hitachi, Ltd. 

