BFN 

<F P=106> ["United States, Violator of Korean Armistice Agreement" -- </F>
KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, May 21 (KCNA) -- Foreign public and press 
circles denounced the criminal act of the U.S. imperialists who 
have turned the Korean peninsula into a dangerous area of a 
nuclear war. 
  The Libyan paper AL JAHAF AL AHDAR in a commentary said that 
the United States deployed its military bases in South Korea 
under the pretext of "protecting" South Korea from "communist 
threat" right after World War II. 
  The United States has divided Korea into the North and the 
South recording another stained chapter in its history, it said. 
  The Vietnamese paper NHAN DAN in an article entitled "South 
Korea, Largest U.S. Nuclear Base in Far East" exposed that the 
United States built more than 200 military establishments and 40 
big military bases in South Korea and deployed there nuclear 
weapons amounting to 55 percent of those in the Asia-Pacific. 
  The Cuban news agency PRENSA LATINA reported that Washington 
has kept some 40,000 U.S. troops stationed in South Korea and 
deployed over 1,000 nuclear weapons including Lance, Hawk and 
Honest John missiles. The agency noted the recent deployment of 
formations of new-type tactical helicopters and "Patriot" 
missiles is a new strategy of the United States of arms buildup 
in South Korea. 
  The Indian paper DELHI SAMACHAR said that the U.S. 
imperialists shipped nuclear weapons into South Korea, regarding 
it as a bridgehead and a nuclear forward base for aggression on 
Asia and domination over the world. 
  Govind Narain Srivastava, secretary general of the Asian 
Regional Institute of the Chuche Idea, said that despite of the 
unanimous denunciation of the Korean people and the world 
public, the United States introduced "Patriot" new-type missiles 
into South Korea and planned to resume the "Team Spirit" joint 
military exercises, a nuclear war gamble. 
  The United States has systematically violated articles of 
the 
Korean Armistice Agreement for 40 years in the past contrary to 
its duty as a signatory to the agreement, he noted. 

