CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by TRUD political commentator Vitaliy Golovachev: </F>
"Can You Imagine? The Mine Is Being Shut Down...] 
  [Text] The settlement of Khalmer-Yu is becoming an 
"experimental testing ground" where the process of eliminating 
unpromising coal mining enterprises is under development. 
  So after 2 years of debate, specific preparatory work has 
begun to resettle the people and shut down the first of the 11 
Russian coal mines which are considered to be unpromising and 
destined to be eliminated in the near future. This first 
enterprise--a unique experimental testing ground--is the 
Khalmer-Yu mine of the "Vorkutaugol" Production Association in 
the Far North. 
  The difficult and painful process has entered its practical 
phase. The order was signed by Russian Federation Minister of 
Fuel and Energy Yuriy Shafranik on 17 February 1994. The first 7 
billion rubles [R] for this purpose have been allocated by the 
Ministry of Finance. Schedules have been set to dismantle the 
principal equipment and remove the mine shafts. 
  The overall program to shut down the unpromising and 
especially unprofitable mines and open pits in the Russian 
Federation as a whole is being concluded. The Independent Trade 
Union of Coal Industry Employees is playing an active role in 
this work by making a strong stand for the priority of social 
guarantees for miners and their families. Specifically with 
regard to the Khalmer-Yu settlement, the measures for social 
protection of the residents following the mine's closure have 
been raised to the government level and guaranteed by Prime 
Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin. 
  "Unfortunately, different production cannot be organized in 
the settlement of Khalmer-Yu," said Vitaliy Budko, chairman of 
the Independent Trade Union of Coal Industry Employees. "After 
stocks have been exhausted and the unprofitable Khalmer-Yu mine 
is shut down, the settlement of several thousand inhabitants 
will cease to exist. This is why all these people should be 
resettled." 
  It has been stipulated that residents of the Khalmer-Yu 
settlement are to be allocated a special one-time compensation 
from the budget to obtain housing in the region where a miner's 
family wishes to live. This is how it adds up: 18 square meters 
of overall space for each family member at a cost of R250,000 
per square meter in prices for the second quarter of 1993--with 
this sum to be indexed subsequently, naturally. That is, if 
prices to build housing in a given town or rural area rose by 
four times as much, let us say, beginning last July, R30 million 
should be allocated to purchase a two-room apartment with a 
total area of 30 square meters. (But if the apartment actaully 
costs less, the sum allocated will be less as well.) The state 
is also to pay for moving belongings and baggage by rail (one 
boxcar per family). 
  As of today, the mine management has already purchased 161 
apartments in Leningrad, Orel, Ivanovo, Nizhegorod, Vladimir, 
and Vologda oblasts at a cost of R3.5 billion. Housing has been 
purchased in accordance with the individual wishes of the 
miners' families. 
  In addition, one more benefit has been provided. The 
settlement's working residents who travel outside the Komi 
Republic in search of work in coordination with the 
administration are given one-time financial assistance in the 
amount of their average wage for 4 months. Altogether, 1,687 
families are to be resettled--270 of them to Vorkuta. Total 
expenditures to resettle the people and shut down the mine (in 
prices for the second quarter of 1993) will be about R43 billion 
(by October next year, this sum will be from R250 billion to 
R500 billion or more). 
  "No, it is not cheap," Vitaliy Budko said. "But if the 
unneeded enterprises are not shut down, huge sums will have to 
be spent--trillions of rubles over several years--for no purpose 
to support the unprofitable mines which have neither industrial 
stocks of coal nor a future. Isn't it more reasonable to spend 
them on work? It will be better for the people, the budget, and 
the state." 
  "Unfortunately," the trade union leader continued, "the 
situation in the sector is being aggravated to the extreme by 
financial problems. The lack of funds is not only postponing 
implementation of the program to shut down unpromising mines and 
pits until an uncertain future, it is putting the miners in an 
extremely difficult position as well. There is no clear-cut 
program today for restructuring the sector and the indebtedness 
for the coal that has been shipped is increasing. All this has 
led to enterprises' bankruptcy, the curtailment of social 
programs in mining towns and settlements, and constant delays in 
wage payments. Meanwhile, in accordance with the wage agreement, 
state support has been authorized for mines and pits through 
subsidies from the Russian Federation budget and budgetary 
appropriations for centralized capital investments. But instead 
of the R11.9 trillion planned for this year, the government has 
allocated R5.6 trillion and is promising another R2 trillion. 
And the rest of the money? Won't this `economizing' turn into a 
social upheaval?" 
  [Golovachev] But after all, Vitaliy Ivanovich, isn't there 
really any money in the treasury? 
  [Budko] By not implementing a structural policy and 
supporting unpromising mines which must be shut down without 
delay, the state is losing immeasurably more and multiplying its 
financial losses. This is not thrifty or prudent. So there never 
will be any money in the treasury. 
  [Golovachev] Which mines are especially unprofitable? Can 
you 
name all 11 mines which are to be shut down? 
  [Budko] In addition to Khalmer-Yu, this group includes the 
Anzherskaya Mine ("Severokuzbassugol" Association), the 
Lvovskaya, Kamenetskaya, and Smirnovskaya mines (all three in 
the "Tulaugol" Association), the Kalachevskaya Mine 
("Chelyabinskugol" Association), the Tsentralnaya, Imeni 
Krupskaya, Zapadnaya, and Tayezhnaya mines (all four in the 
"Kizelugol" Association), and the Khasan Mine ("Primorskugol" 
Association). Seven of these mines have no industrial stocks of 
coal. That is, the coal in the mines has been practically worked 
out. 
  Altogether, about 7,000 persons (industrial production 
personnel) are working at these 10 mines (aside from 
Khalmer-Yu). Each metric ton of coal extracted at these mines 
from the so-called "balanced" reserve brings losses of R3,000 to 
R11,000 (in 1993 prices). As a whole, many millions in financial 
losses. 
<H8>  * * * </H8>
  The alarm expressed by the chairman of the Russian 
trade union is fully justified. The deep crisis in the economy 
has hit the coal industry as well. Every year the volumes of 
coal mined are dropping by 8 to 10 percent and the 
labor-intensiveness and hazards of mining operations are 
increasing. Two-thirds of the mines are hazardous because of the 
gas and dust, and the danger of spontaneous combustion is high 
in every second mine. More than half (60 percent) of the 238 
mines have been operating for over 20 years. And they have not 
been modernized once. 
  The state, which continues as before to be the principal 
owner in the sector, cannot turn its back on the miners, who 
have become a powerful detonator of political instability, let 
us remember, and "helped" the government of Nikolay Ryzhkov go 
into retirement. And it was precisely the miners who gave strong 
support to Boris Yeltsin when he declared the new policy--the 
policy of reforms. It is very imnportant not to antagonize them 
today... 
  However, the mood of the miners, alas, is not changing in 
favor of the current authorities. The picketing near the White 
House has vividly demonstrated this. In the first quarter, the 
total indebtedness for wages is R440 billion, according to 
Vitaliy Budko. But how can they live without money? In this 
connection, I will quote an excerpt from a simple verse by 
Aleksandr Kuritsyn, published in the miners' newspaper FLAG 
GORNYAKA: 
  We come at midnight, singly and in a small group, but 
they say "It's no use, fellows..." 
  You pester with grievances to no purpose. You will 
receive everything that is yours. After all, this is not party 
or arbitrary rule now. 
  If it does not turn out well with banknotes, we will 
pay you in kind. Less. You will receive what you produced. 
  Concrete for the concrete workers and cloth for the 
fullers. The miners will be bartered for pieces of coal 
  The tire worker will receive tires. And defense workers 
will receive mines. And a boxer will receive his [pay] as a 
fist... 
  So 161 families will leave soon (if there is money for the 
move) from the remote northern settlement of Khalmer-Yu. But 
what can the 6,876 workers in the other 10 unwanted mines 
expect? When will their fate be decided? Will the future become 
clearer for the entire coal industry? 

