BFN 

<F P=106> [Shanxi provincial government work report delivered by </F>
Shanxi Acting Governor Sun Wensheng (1327 2429 4141) before the 
Second Session of the Eighth Provincial People's Congress on 24 
February: "Seize the Opportunity for Reform, Quicken the Pace of 
Development, and Further Advance the Great Cause of Revitalizing 
Shanxi and Making its People Prosperous"] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies, 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I now 
submit 
the report on the work of the government for your examination 
and approval, and also for suggestions and comments from members 
of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and 
other observers. 
<H5>  I. Remarkable Success Was Achieved in Reform, Opening Up </H5>
and Modernization in 1993 Through Genuine Hard Work and All-Out 
Efforts 
  The year 1993 marked the first year in our all-out efforts 
to 
push the provincial economy to a new height. It is also a year 
worth summing up. Under the correct leadership of the CPC 
Central Committee, the State Council, and the provincial party 
committee, and with strong support and supervision from the 
provincial people's congress and the provincial committee of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, the 
provincial people's government adhered to Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, upheld the party's basic line, and worked 
closely around the theme of "seizing the opportunity to develop 
ourselves" in mobilizing and organizing the people of the whole 
province to vigorously grasp the three foundations (agricultural 
capital construction, basic industry, and infrastructural 
facilities) and giving prominence to the four key areas (coal 
mining, power generation, road construction, and river 
diversion). We were thus able to quicken the pace of reform, 
opening up, and economic construction, and basically realized 
the objectives and tasks adopted by the First Session of the 
Eighth Provincial People's Congress for 1993. 
  1. The national economy continued its rapid 
development and the three key industrial sectors reported 
all-round growth. Gross national product (GNP) for the 
province was 63.22 billion yuan, 113.9 percent of the planned 
amount, or an increase of 12.2 percent over the previous year 
calculated at comparable prices, with primary, secondary, and 
tertiary industries realizing increases of 10.6 percent, 13.4 
percent, and 10.6 percent respectively. The rural economy 
showed all-round development, with grain output hitting an 
all-time record of 9.902 million tons, 15.4 percent more than in 
the previous year. With the exception of cotton, the output of 
agricultural, forestry, and animal products all registered 
increases. Township enterprises showed rapid growth, with 
business earnings reaching 59.49 billion yuan, 84.4 percent over 
the 1992 figure, and realizing the target set in the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan two years ahead of schedule. Industrial 
production registered rapid growth in spite of substantial 
market changes and the shortage of funds and transport 
facilities, and steady improvements were made in economic 
results. Industrial enterprises covered by the budgets of local 
governments registered increases of 33.1 percent and 54.7 
percent respectively in business earnings, and profits and taxes 
realized compared with the previous year. Fiscal revenue for 
the whole province was 7.24 billion yuan, 113.3 percent of the 
budgeted amount, or 24.9 percent over the previous year. In 
dealing with the conspicuous contradictions and problems that 
cropped up in the course of rapid economic development, we 
conscientiously implemented the central government's measures on 
strengthening macrocontrol, firmly and resolutely stopping and 
checking illegal fundraising, sorting out unauthorized 
inter-borrowings, and putting an end to the state of confusion 
in the financial market by consolidating the financial order and 
enforcing financial discipline. Through these efforts we were 
able to stop the practice of issuing white slips when purchasing 
farm and sideline products, ensure bank payments, increase 
investment in key projects and enterprises, and bring about a 
healthy development of the national economy. 
  2. Great success was achieved in "construction in 
three areas" and the reserve strength for economic development 
was further enhanced. Investment in fixed assets in the 
localities amounted to 12.5 billion yuan, 115.9 percent of the 
planned target, or an increase of 42.1 percent compared with the 
previous year. In the state sector of the economy, investment 
in fixed assets in agriculture, energy, transportation and 
telecommunications accounted for 59.6 percent. Last fall and 
winter a mammoth campaign was launched to promote "farmland 
water conservancy capital construction, voluntary road repair 
works, and key construction projects." The enthusiasm, drive, 
and awareness shown by the vast numbers of cadres and the masses 
in this campaign were unprecedented. A total of more than 280 
million work-days were put into farmland water conservancy 
capital construction, and 103,000 ditches were built. Work was 
in full swing on five of the six major highways under 
construction, and one had already been opened to traffic. A 
remarkable job was done in the construction of country roads, 
with 12 more townships made accessible by highways, 34 small 
towns made accessible by asphalt roads, and 630 villages made 
accessible by motor vehicles. Key construction projects 
proceeded smoothly. Some 3.62 billion yuan were spent on the 27 
provincial- level key construction projects, eight of which had 
already been completed and put into operation. 
  A total of 220 technical upgrade projects were launched at 
a cost of 2.3 billion yuan. Here, I must point out in 
particular that work on the long-awaited project to bring water 
from the Huanghe River into Shanxi at Wanjiazhai, as well as the 
eastern and western sections of the Tai-Jiu Expressway, had 
already started; construction of the elevated waiting room for 
the Taiyuan Railway Station and the main section of the 
departure hall of the Taiyuan Airport were basically completed; 
the Xiaoliu Railway was open to through traffic; and the number 
of counties and cities served by program-controlled telephone 
exchanges and long- distance digital networks now reached 36. 
In the course of the year, coal production capacity was 
increased by 1.42 million tons; power generating capacity was 
increased by 840,000 kilowatts; and an additional 535 kilometers 
of highways and 58 kilometers of railroads were opened to 
traffic. 
  3. Reform of the economic structure made a great 
stride forward, and new headway was made in opening the province 
to the outside world. The experiment on changing the 
operation mechanism in 100 selected large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises progressed smoothly, and 14 aspects of 
operational autonomy were basically implemented in these 
enterprises. Reforms of the labor and personnel, wage 
distribution, and social security systems were carried out in 
more than 3,000 enterprises, about one-third of all state-owned 
enterprises in Shanxi. Reform of the enterprise property rights 
system made a substantial step forward. The number of 
enterprises adopting the shareholding system increased to 260 
from 64 in 1992. The Xinghuacun Fenyang Wine Limited 
Shareholding Company successfully issued shares and became a 
publicly listed company. Joint-stock cooperative enterprises 
thrived in the whole province. New progress was also achieved 
in reform of the market system, social security system, and 
housing system, and in the establishment of a collectivized 
social service system in the rural areas. Individual and 
private economies and foreign investment all achieved rapid 
growth. In the coal industry, significant progress was achieved 
in rationalizing the management system and rectifying the order 
of production, shipment, and marketing. Further progress was 
made in opening up the province, with 220 contracts worth 1.5 
billion yuan having been won by the four provincial-level 
economic development zones at Taiyuan, Datong, Changzhi, and 
Fenglingdu. Trade promotion activities and economic and trade 
negotiations held overseas and in other parts of the country all 
yielded good results. The total volume of imports and exports 
for the whole year amounted to $837 million, an increase of 19.4 
percent over the previous year, with exports accounting for $634 
million, an increase of 8.7 percent. During the year, 660 
partially or wholly foreign-owned enterprises registered for 
business. Their investment totaled $998 million. Of this, the 
amount of foreign investment agreed was $402 million, and the 
amount actually used was $177 million. Horizontal ties of 
economic and technological cooperation with other provinces, 
cities, and autonomous regions were also further strengthened. 
  4. Scientific and technological education was further 
strengthened, and new progress was made in all social 
undertakings. Thanks to the reform of the system for the 
management of scientific and technological allocations, the 
establishment of a system of responsibility for investment in 
scientific and technological projects and the introduction of a 
risk mechanism, scientific research institutions were 
revitalized. Construction of the 10 intermediate test bases for 
scientific research and development saw smooth progress. A 
total of 65 key scientific and technological projects relating 
to industry and agriculture were completed, 27 of which were 
pacesetters. Marked economic results were achieved in the 
promotion of 25 selected scientific and technological projects, 
92 "Spark Program" projects and 63 "Torch Program" projects. 
The strategy of invigorating the rural economy through the 
integration of agriculture with science and education was 
well-implemented. A total of 250 enterprises moved into the 
Taiyuan and Changzhi High-Tech Industrial Development Zones. 
Annual earnings from technology-related industries and trade 
amounted to 550 million yuan, 100 percent more than in the 
previous year. Education saw new development, with 
vocational-technical education making particularly swift 
progress. In spite of the strained fiscal situation, the amount 
spent on education in the whole province and investment by 
provincial-level departments on capital construction for 
educational purposes still registered increases of 14.7 percent 
and 26.8 percent respectively compared with the previous year. 
Special allocations were made by the provincial government to 
increase length of service allowances for primary and secondary 
school teachers and subsidies for teachers of community-run 
schools, transfer 3,000 outstanding teachers of community-run 
schools to regular government payroll, issue allowance to 
intellectuals with senior professional or technical titles, and 
provide better housing for middle-aged and young teachers of 
some universities and colleges and for primary and secondary 
school teachers in cities and towns. Sports saw further 
progress. Our athletes achieved good results at the Seventh 
National Games. Medical service saw further improvement in both 
urban and rural areas. Progress was also registered in the 
fields of culture and art, the press and publishing, radio, film 
and television, family planning, environmental protection, 
social welfare, nationalities and religious affairs, archives, 
relics, old-age care, and so forth. New achievements were made 
in socialist democracy, the legal system, and the overall 
control of public security. 
  5. People's income rose and their living standards 
continued to improve. The average amount that city dwellers 
used for living expenses was 1,714.9 yuan, 108.5 percent of the 
planned target. This represented an increase of 20.7 percent 
over the 1992 figure, or a real growth of 4.2 percent after 
allowing for price rises. Per-capita net income for peasants 
was 718.3 yuan, 102.6 percent of the planned target, up 14.6 
percent, or a real growth of 4.2 percent after allowing for 
price rises. The market was brisk. The total volume of retail 
sales was 27.47 billion yuan, 100.2 percent of the planned 
target and an increase of 14.2 percent over the previous year. 
In spite of the rising level of consumption and an increase in 
investment avenues, such as shares, bonds, and fund 
subscriptions, the volume of bank savings for both urban and 
rural residents increased by 9.6 billion yuan. Housing 
conditions for urban and rural dwellers improved following the 
completion of 4.83 million square meters of housing units in 
cities and towns and 9.46 million square meters in the rural 
areas. The provincial government took active steps to supply 
drinking water to people and livestock in poverty-stricken areas 
and to improve the education and medical facilities there. In 
the course of the year, more than 260,000 people and 40,000 
large livestock at some 1,300 natural villages in 40 
poverty-stricken counties had had their water supply problem 
solved. Teaching conditions were improved in rural primary 
schools in 16 poverty-stricken counties, and hospitals were 
extended or repaired in 59 townships or small towns. These 
three measures were highly acclaimed by people in 
poverty-stricken areas. 
  Fellow deputies! Our province accumulated much valuable 
experience in pushing forward reform and quickening the pace of 
development in the past year. The following are some of the 
more important points: 
  1. In order to quicken the pace of economic 
development in our province, it is necessary to emancipate the 
mind, seek truth from facts, and proceed from reality in 
everything. If we compare our province with the coastal 
areas, we see that we suffer not only subjective disparities, 
but also objective deficiencies, such as backward infrastructure 
and unfavorable geographical conditions. Last year, our province 
managed to make fairly big strides forward in reform and opening 
up and maintain rapid economic growth in spite of difficulties, 
precisely because we had adhered to the ideological line of 
emancipating the mind and seeking truth from facts. We not only 
formulated the necessary policies and measures for deepening the 
reform and further opening up the province, but proceeded from 
reality in devoting major efforts to improving the 
infrastructure. 
  2. In order to quicken the pace of economic 
development in our province, it is necessary to grasp the 
principal contradiction and the weak links and make timely 
readjustment of the development strategy. The principal 
contradiction in the economic development of our province is 
that our singular pillar industry, production of primary 
products, and irrational industrial structure tend to affect the 
quality of the overall economy and the improvement of 
consolidated economic performance. The acute shortage of water 
resources and poor transport are two major obstacles to our 
economic development. Last year, we made timely readjustment of 
our economic development strategy by putting forward the plan to 
bring about total innovation and comprehensive development of 
production bases for energy and heavy chemical industries. By 
attaching importance to "the three foundations" and "the four 
key areas," we managed to bring about a great advance in the 
readjustment and optimization of the industrial structure. 
Practice proves that this strategy is in keeping with Shanxi's 
reality. 
  3. In order to quicken the pace of economic 
development in our province, it is necessary to rally the people 
and properly guide, protect, and arouse their enthusiasm. 
Accelerating reform and development in order to revitalize 
Shanxi and make its people prosperous is a great, yet arduous, 
historical mission which can only be accomplished through the 
joint efforts of the people of the whole province. Last year, 
we made the call to do genuine hard work and make all-out 
efforts, urging cadres at all levels to speak the truth, do 
solid work, set a good example, and take the lead in working 
hard. The broad masses of the people saw hope and felt 
encouraged. In particular, the spirit of starting an enterprise 
through self-reliance and hard struggle found vivid embodiment 
in the practice of "three constructions." 
  4. In order to quicken the pace of economic 
development in our province, it is necessary to uphold justice, 
enforce law and discipline, and maintain political and social 
stability. Stability is the precondition for development. 
Last year, we firmly implemented the policy of paying equal 
attention to cultural and ideological progress and material 
progress in strengthening socialist culture and ethics and the 
legal system. With profound love for the people of Shanxi, we 
fought all kinds of evils and strengthened the overall control 
of public security. Law-breakers among those in office, such as 
the public security bureau chiefs of Linyi County and Xinzhou 
City, were seriously dealt with in accordance with the law, 
while a number of arch criminals were executed, much to the 
delight of the masses. In the fight against corruption, tough 
and serious action was taken against cadres, some at district 
and departmental levels, who abused power for personal gain and 
committed serious crimes in violation of law and discipline. 
Through these actions, we boosted the morale of the people and 
upheld social justice. 
  Fellow deputies! The past year has been a year of 
remarkable success for reform and development in our province. 
These achievements have not only given us a good starting point 
in the further implementation of the development strategy of 
"overall innovation and comprehensive development," but have 
laid a good foundation for the reform strategy of "overall 
advance with emphasis on key areas." On behalf of the 
provincial people's government, I wish to express my highest 
consideration and heartfelt gratitude to all workers, peasants, 
intellectuals, cadres, commanders and fighters of the People's 
Liberation Army, officers and men of the people's armed police 
and public security police, and people from all walks of life in 
our province, for the positive contributions they made in 
reform, opening up and modernization and for their all- out 
support to the government. 
  While fully affirming the achievements, we must soberly see 
that there are still some shortcomings and deficiencies in the 
work of the government, and that there are still many obvious 
contradictions and difficulties in the road of development. In 
economic life, structural problems have yet to see major 
improvements, and technological and managerial levels are 
backward. A large number of large and medium-sized state-owned 
enterprises have a high equity- debt ratio and heavy inherited 
burdens. They cannot compete in the market, and some are on the 
verge of bankruptcy because they have more liabilities than 
assets. Capital construction is over- extended, with far too 
many projects under construction. Although measures have been 
taken to concentrate resources on key projects, the use of funds 
is still too dispersed. Agriculture has not yet firmly 
established its position as the foundation of the economy. The 
rising cost of grain and cotton production and the widening 
price scissors between industrial and agricultural products have 
affected the enthusiasm of peasants to develop grain and cotton 
production. The fact that a situation of total opening up has 
yet to truly take shape is also restricting our economic and 
social development to some extent. The macroeconomic 
environment is not relaxed enough, and there is a general 
shortage of funds. The general retail price level has gone up 
by 13.1 percent, and the hidden danger of inflation remains 
unabated. Although fiscal revenue has increased by no small 
amount, due to increased expenditure in all areas, more than 
half of the total number of counties in our province have been 
unable to pay wages on time in their implementation of the 
annual budget. In social development, the task of controlling 
population growth remains arduous, environmental pollution is 
becoming an increasing problem in some areas, and factors 
affecting social stability still exist. Meanwhile, the 
ideological level, workstyle, and professionalism of government 
organs and government functionaries at all levels cannot measure 
up to the new standards required for the development of a market 
economy, and problems of bureaucratism, formalism, laxness, 
extravagance, and waste exist to varying degrees in departments 
at all levels. In particular, corruption among a handful of 
government functionaries has aroused the resentment of the 
masses. The above- mentioned contradictions and problems 
deserve our attention. We should and must, by analyzing the 
contradictions, recognizing the gaps and heightening our sense 
of crisis, urgency, and concern, arouse the fighting spirit of 
the people of the whole province, and seize the opportunity to 
push forward our reform and quicken our development. 
<H5>  II. Make Structural Readjustment, Improve Economic </H5>
Performance, and Maintain the Sustained, Healthy, and Rapid 
Development of the National Economy 
  The year 1994 is an important year for maintaining the 
momentum of development and striving to fulfill the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan ahead of schedule. It is also a crucial year for 
the implementation of the "Decision of the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee" and the relevant measures 
proposed by our province for the establishment of the socialist 
market economic structure. The general policy for the work of 
the government this year is as follows: Firmly adhere to 
the guidance provided by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics and the party's 
basic line, seize the new opportunity for reform and development 
to accelerate the establishment of the socialist market economic 
structure, establish a new enterprise system, further open up 
the province, quicken the pace of structural readjustment, 
promote technological advances, continue to strengthen the 
agricultural foundation, basic industries and infrastructure, 
and strive to improve overall economic performance, further 
improve people's living standards, and maintain social stability 
in order to promote the sustained, healthy, and rapid 
development of the national economy. 
  According to this general policy, the principal targets for 
economic development in the whole province in the year 1994 are: 
GNP is to reach 73 billion yuan, or a 10 percent increase over 
the previous year calculated at comparable prices. Primary 
industry is to grow by 4 percent, secondary industry by 12 
percent, and tertiary industry by 10 percent. Every effort will 
be made to break the 90 percent mark in the new comprehensive 
industrial economic performance index. Local fiscal revenue, 
calculated according to the new system, is to reach 4.76 billion 
yuan, or a 21.9 percent increase calculated on the comparable 
basis. The total volume of foreign trade is to reach $700 
million, up 10.4 percent. The total volume of retail sales is 
to increase by 15 percent to 31.6 billion yuan, with sales of 
consumer goods expected to reach 28 billion yuan. 
  The above targets have been decided upon after careful 
analysis and appraisal of the situation, taking into account 
both the difficulties and problems in our economic life and the 
favorable factors and opportunities before us. They are targets 
based on an understanding of the overall situation and the need 
to maintain an overall balance. The present international and 
domestic situation is very much to our advantage, and the people 
of the whole province are eager to deepen the reform and quicken 
the pace of development. The growing demand for investment in 
the country and the priority given by the state to 
infrastructural facilities and basic industries will give a 
boost to our economic development. The fact that the coal 
management structure has been basically rationalized and coal 
prices have been deregulated is a favorable factor allowing us 
to bring our resource superiority into play. Last year a number 
of capital construction and technical upgrade projects were 
completed and put into production, and these will continue to 
serve their useful purpose this year. Farmland water 
conservancy construction has produced some useful results and 
laid a good foundation for agricultural production. On the 
whole, this year's economic development targets are positive and 
can be achieved through hard work. We should seize the 
opportunity and strive to attain the highest speed of 
development possible. However, we must also properly handle the 
relations between speed and performance, between economic growth 
and qualitative improvement, and between emphasis on key areas 
and overall development. In our opinion, in order to make a 
success of economic work this year, it is important to uphold 
the following three principles: 
  First, it is important to uphold the principle of giving 
priority to economic performance. Optimal performance, fair 
competition, and elimination of the inferior through competition 
are objective requirements for the market economy. In the wake 
of reform of the fiscal and financial systems, enterprises can 
no longer rely on preferential tax concessions, fiscal 
subsidies, and bank loans to pay their workers. If they perform 
poorly and even sustain losses, they will have to declare 
themselves bankrupt. Similarly, if a place is unable to improve 
its economic performance, it will not be able to increase 
revenue and improve the livelihood of its people. Thus, it is 
necessary to attach primary importance to the improvement of 
economic performance in economic work. In future assessment of 
economic development, we should mainly look at performance 
rather than output value. 
  Second, it is important to uphold the principle of putting 
scientific and technological advances above everything else. 
For many years, it had been our customary practice to develop 
the economy by putting up new establishments, launching new 
projects, and engaging in the extensive form of enlarged 
reproduction. As a result of this practice, established 
enterprises had a shortage of funds, while new projects did not 
have enough investment, and neither could perform well. In 
order to change this state of affairs, it is important to tap 
potential, take the road of intensive development, and bring 
economic construction onto the orbit of reliance on scientific 
and technological advances and improvement of the quality of 
laborers. With this in mind, it is necessary to earnestly 
implement the strategy of relying on science and education to 
revitalize Shanxi, promote the close integration of 
"agriculture, science, and education" and of "industry, science, 
and education," pay attention to the vocational training of 
staff and workers and to the cultivation of specialized 
personnel, strengthen scientific research and development, step 
up technical upgrading in existing enterprises, make use of new 
techniques and technologies, develop new products, and promote 
the readjustment of the industrial structure and the improvement 
of the economy as a whole. 
  Third, it is important to uphold the principle of balanced 
and coordinated development. The market economy can effectively 
bring into play the fundamental role of the market in the 
deployment of resources, but it can also be quite blind. In 
particular, in developing the market economy, we are liable to 
overlook agriculture which has low returns, or the development 
of infrastructural facilities, environmental protection, and 
public welfare causes which require huge investment but yield 
slow results. Thus, it is necessary to correctly handle the 
relations between primary, secondary, and tertiary industries, 
correctly handle the relations between immediate and long-term 
interests, do a good job of the overall coordination of economic 
operations, maintain a basic balance of total demand and supply, 
guard against big economic fluctuations, and maintain the 
sustained, healthy, and rapid development of the national 
economy. 
  In adhering to the above principles in our efforts to 
realize 
this year's economic development objectives, it is important to 
strengthen the large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises 
and expand the state sector of the economy. On this basis, 
steps must be taken to quicken the pace of development of the 
collective economy and give positive support to the development 
of individual and private economies. It is important to 
concentrate efforts on grasping the following six tasks: 
  1. Bring about the all-round development of the rural 
economy, taking as our primary objective increases in the supply 
of essential agricultural products and peasants' income. 
Agriculture is the foundation of the national economy. It is 
also the sector that can ensure the country's stability. This 
year, the primary task of our rural work is to implement the 
spirit of the Central Committee Conference on Rural Work, 
improve the infrastructure, rely on scientific and technological 
advances to develop township enterprises and strengthen the 
collective economy, and try by all and every means to reap a 
bumper harvest in agriculture and to increase peasants' income. 
  Centering round the task of increasing the supply of 
essential agricultural and sideline products, we should 
energetically grasp grain and cotton production and the 
"shopping basket" project, striving to ensure a stable and high 
yield for principal agricultural products such as grain, cotton, 
and oil- bearing crops, with output targeted at 9.5 million tons 
for grain, 90,000 tons for cotton, and 400,000 tons for 
oil-bearing crops. From the time new grain is ready to go to the 
market, steps must be taken to suitably raise the procurement 
price of grain and the order price for cotton. Positive steps 
must be taken to develop agroindustry and stabilize the price of 
capital goods in the agricultural sector. It is important to 
increase agricultural input and make a success of the 
comprehensive development of agriculture. It is also important 
to continue to mobilize the masses to carry out farmland water 
conservancy capital construction in a big way and improve the 
conditions of agricultural production. Efforts must be made to 
accelerate the development of agricultural mechanization and 
raise the level of agricultural modernization. It is necessary 
to energetically develop forestry and accelerate the development 
of protective forestry belts in the "three northern regions," 
and of afforestation in the Taihang Mountains and on the plains 
in an effort to improve the ecological environment. It is also 
necessary to earnestly put the "Land Management Law" into 
practice, cherish arable land, and pay attention to its 
protection. 
  In order to increase peasants' income and quicken the 
process 
of achieving a moderate level of prosperity in the rural areas, 
we should rely on the development of high-yield, 
high-efficiency, and high-quality agriculture and the 
development of township enterprises. Gearing ourselves to 
market needs, we should concentrate efforts on the readjustment 
and optimization of the rural industrial structure, 
energetically develop economic crops, forestry, orchards, animal 
husbandry, aquatic production, and the processing of farm and 
sideline products that have broad market prospects and promise 
good economic results, and make a success of the development of 
commodity grain and commodity cotton production bases, as well 
as bases for the production and processing of agricultural, 
forestry, animal husbandry, and sideline products. We should 
actively develop economic associations that combine farming, 
breeding and processing, production, supply and marketing, or 
agriculture, industry, and trade, improve collectivized social 
services, and guide and organize peasants to take part in market 
competition and to open up and seize markets. Accelerating the 
development of township enterprises is not only the principal 
way to increase peasants' income and strengthen the rural 
collective economy, but is an important measure for accelerating 
economic development in the whole province. This year, township 
enterprises must devote more attention to economy of scale, 
structural readjustment, upgrading technology, and economic 
performance, ensure a growth rate of over 25 percent, and 
achieve increases in both sales revenue and taxes paid to the 
higher authorities. Every effort must be made to build three 
prefectures and cities with an income of 10 billion yuan, 30 
counties (city districts) with an income of 1 billion yuan, 300 
townships (small towns) with an income of 100 million yuan, and 
1,000 villages with an income of 10 million yuan. It is 
important to build relatively centralized industrial 
subdistricts and speed up the urbanization of rural market 
towns. It is important to continue to implement measures aimed 
at protecting peasants' interests, strictly control centralized 
profit retention to a given percentage, strengthen fiscal 
management in the rural areas, keep accounts open and 
effectively reduce peasants' burdens. 
  It is important to devote major efforts to poverty relief, 
increase input into the work, speed up the construction of 
infrastructural facilities, such as roads, power plants, and 
telecommunications in poverty-stricken mountainous areas, 
continue to tackle problems of drinking water for men and 
livestock, schooling and medical service in these areas, support 
the poor through advances in science, technology, and education, 
and concentrate efforts on making a success of the Luliang 
project, which has been set up as an example for shaking off 
poverty. 
  2. Accelerate industrial development and improve 
economic performance, taking the readjustment of product mix and 
the upgrading of technology in enterprises as points of 
emphasis. With market needs as guidance, we should actively 
support the development of newly emerging industries and 
industries enjoying a strong competitive edge, expand the 
production of fine-processed products and products making use of 
high and new technologies, concentrate efforts on making a 
success of coal-burning power generation, coal-related chemical 
production, the production of special steel products, heavy 
machinery, aluminum and aluminum products, as well as the 
processing of farm and sideline products, and push forward the 
readjustment of the industrial structure. In a situation where 
imbalance between the supply of and demand for coal has been 
ameliorated, it is necessary to practice the system where 
production is determined by transport capacity, strike a balance 
between production and marketing, pay attention to the 
protection of resources, prohibit unauthorized mining and market 
dumping. It is necessary to concentrate efforts on the 
construction of key power plants and accelerate the work of 
supplying electricity to Jiangsu, Shandong, Hebei, Beijing, and 
Tianjin in order to turn our province into a commodity 
electricity base. It is necessary to raise funds by every means 
in order to speed up the development of the aluminum industry. 
  We should bring into play the superiority enjoyed by the 
Taiyuan Iron and Steel Company in the production of special 
steel products and increase the proportion of high-quality steel 
in its production. Measures must be taken to invigorate the 
machine-building, electronic, and automotive industries. We 
should energetically develop the production of high- grade 
cement, plate glass, special refractory materials, granite, new 
building and interior decoration materials as well as refined 
chemical products, and turn these into new growing areas of our 
economy. We should tap the potential of the military industry, 
and speed up the development of civilian products. Our consumer 
goods industry is a weak link that calls for increased input and 
considerably faster development. To begin with, we should try 
to boost the production of foodstuffs, hides, and ceramics. In 
all trades and industries, it is important to readjust the 
product mix in line with market needs, and increase the 
production of competitive products, brand-name and high-quality 
products, high- and new-technology products, and export products 
for earning foreign exchange. It is also important to actively 
open up markets, strive to boost sales, and raise the selling 
rate of products. 
  The fundamental way to readjust the product mix and improve 
economic performance lies in tapping latent potential, upgrading 
technology and using incremental production elements to bring 
along the readjustment of existing production elements. The 
upgrading of technology in old enterprises must be accorded 
strategic importance and grasped with every effort, and steps 
must be taken to rationally readjust the use of fixed assets and 
increase the intensity of technological upgrading. This year, 
investment in the upgrading of technology has initially been 
fixed at 4 billion yuan, 1.7 billion yuan more than last year, 
and efforts will be made to speed up the upgrading of 42 large 
and medium-sized enterprises. Meanwhile, a number of projects 
involving short construction cycles and small investment but 
that will yield quick results will be launched. These are 
expected to produce results in the same year investment is made. 
It is also necessary to establish and improve research and 
development systems in enterprises, and organize colleges and 
universities, research units and manufacturing enterprises to 
launch various forms of technical cooperation or join hands in 
tackling problems. Effective measures must be taken to 
concentrate resources on making a success of the Taiyuan and 
Changzhi High-Tech Industrial Development Zones. Governments at 
all levels must work on the overall coordination of economic 
operation in accordance with the requirements of the socialist 
market economy. It is important to continue to practice the 
system of responsibility for stopping losses, and reduce losses 
by 15 percent compared with the previous year. It is also 
important to pay attention to the promotion of safety and do a 
good job of safety in production. 
  3. Speed up the development of tertiary industry by 
attaching importance to key areas and relaxing policy 
restrictions. In line with the requirements for the 
development of the market economy, it is necessary to 
concentrate efforts on making improvements in commodity 
circulation, communications and transportation, posts and 
telecommunications, finance and insurance, tourism and the 
service industries, and increase the weighting of tertiary 
industry in GNP on the basis of last year's figure. It is 
necessary to speed up the construction of facilities for 
commodity circulation and improve the commodity circulation 
network with key cities at the lead and medium-sized and small 
cities as the foundation. Further efforts should be made to 
mobilize the masses to render voluntary service in road repairs, 
do a good job of highway construction, and realize the goal of 
making every township accessible by highways, every small town 
accessible by asphalt roads, and every village accessible by 
motor vehicles over the next two years. This year, the capacity 
of local program-controlled telephone switches will be increased 
by 400,000 lines and that of long-distance switches will be 
increased by 50,000 circuits. The number of cities and counties 
with local program-controlled switches will be increased to over 
70, and telecommunications facilities for the province as a 
whole will be further improved. It is important to develop in a 
planned way all kinds of financial institutions, such as 
specialized insurance companies, trust and investment companies, 
securities companies, financing and leasing companies and 
enterprise group finance companies, establish and develop 
foundations, cultivate bonds and securities markets, and broaden 
the channels for investment and financing. It is important to 
energetically develop accounting, auditing, law, and notorial 
offices, as well as information counseling, real estate, 
tourism, culture and recreation, and livelihood services. Also, 
we should fully bring into play and utilize our rich tourist 
resources, improve the infrastructure and increase the number of 
tourist spots in order to attract more Chinese and overseas 
tourists to visit our province. 
  In order to accelerate the development of tertiary industry, 
it is necessary to relax policy restrictions, open the industry 
to all, and uphold the policy of allowing state, collective, and 
private undertakings to grow together. In particular, it is 
necessary to energetically develop the nonstate economic sector 
which includes collective, individual, and foreign economies in 
both urban and rural areas. It is necessary to open the doors, 
dismantle the barriers, and attract unemployed youths in cities 
and surplus labor in the rural areas to set up business in the 
tertiary sector. Self- service organizations run by enterprises 
and establishments must gradually break away from their 
"mothers" and follow the road of independent management by 
assuming responsibility for their own profits and losses, 
gearing themselves to social needs and fighting for their own 
survival. 
  4. Continue to do a good job of key construction 
projects around the "three foundations and four key areas." 
Key construction projects have a vital bearing on the overall 
situation and the reserve strength for economic development in 
our province and must therefore be grasped with unremitting 
efforts year after year. We must uphold the principle of 
working within our capability and to the best of our ability, 
and concentrate our material and financial resources and main 
energy on completing the existing major infrastructure projects. 
This year, key projects in the fields of agriculture, energy, 
water conservancy, transportation, education, and science and 
technology will continue to receive guaranteed investment in 
fixed assets. Arrangements have been made for 20 key projects 
at the provincial level, including the Huanghe River diversion 
at Wanjiazhai and 16 other ongoing projects. The three new 
projects are the library building at Shanxi University, the 
science and technology building at Taiyuan Polytechnic 
University, and the eight-ton truck production line at Shanxi 
Automotive Works. Eight projects, including the updating of the 
Taiyuan Railway Station, are due for completion this year. 
Every effort will be made to start work on the proposed 
Yangcheng No.1 Power Plant, a key project under the strategy of 
attaching equal importance to coal and power export. 
Preparation for the Wangqu Power Plant, intended to supply 
power to Shandong, as well as the power plant intended to supply 
power to Beijing, Tianjin, and Hebei will also be stepped up. 
  The shortage of funds is a striking problem in the 
construction of key projects in our province. We must work hard 
not only on raising funds, but also on the use of funds. We 
must do a good job of absorbing funds and resort to all ways and 
means to draw capital from abroad and from other provinces and 
cities. Funds for construction may be raised through the 
auctioning of land-use rights and the property rights of some 
state-owned enterprises and through the issuance of bonds and 
shares. We should practice the system of responsibility for 
project legal persons, strengthen management over construction 
work, ensure the progress and quality of construction, and 
strive for better investment returns. We must continue to check 
up on projects under construction, reduce investment in fixed 
assets, and resolutely halt duplicated projects, projects 
showing poor performance and dim market prospects, and projects 
without the necessary fund injection. 
  5. Vigorously develop science, technology and 
education and ensure their coordinated development alongside 
economic construction. Governments at all levels and all 
enterprises must implement the "Scientific and Technological 
Advancement Law," increase scientific and technological input 
through different channels and, while doing a good job of 
research on the basic theories of applied technologies and 
building up technological strength, concentrate efforts on the 
application, dissemination and popularization of existing 
scientific and technological achievements. In dealing with the 
weak links in the development of industrial and agricultural 
production and the technical problems confronting our key 
industries, we must organize and concentrate resources on 
tackling these key problems. This year, we must complete the 
work of tackling 40 technical problems in agriculture and 30 
technical problems in industry. We must continue to implement 
the "Spark Program," "Torch Program," and programs for the 
dissemination of research results, concentrate efforts on 
grasping the dissemination and application of 37 of these 
research results and promoting their commercialization and use 
in all types of enterprises as quickly as possible, and strive 
to increase the extent to which research results are turned into 
productive forces and to improve economy of scale. We must 
actively readjust the structure of science and technology, 
energetically develop nongovernmental scientific and 
technological enterprises, and gradually form a research, 
development, and dissemination system that has an optimal 
structure and a rational distribution system and works in close 
conjunction with economic development. 
  We must accelerate the development of education by earnestly 
putting into practice the "Outline for Reform and Development of 
Education in China" and the "Law Governing Teachers." We must 
increase input in basic education and concentrate efforts on 
improving primary school education in 38 poverty-stricken 
counties. We must mobilize all forces in society to support 
"Operation Hope" in order to increase student enrollment among 
school-aged students in poverty-stricken areas and speed up the 
enforcement of nine-year compulsory education. With 
vocational-technical education as the point of emphasis in the 
restructuring of education, we must energetically develop all 
kinds of secondary vocational and technical schools and skilled 
workers' schools, and do a good job of running 
vocational-technical schools of high standards in some counties 
and districts. We must actively develop adult education and 
concentrate efforts on providing on-the-job training for workers 
and continue efforts to eliminate illiteracy among young and 
middle- aged people. In tertiary education, it is important to 
stabilize the scale, positively readjust the curriculum setup, 
reform teaching materials and improve the quality of teaching. 
While concentrating efforts on the successful running of Shanxi 
University and Taiyuan Polytechnic University, it is necessary 
to strengthen the establishment of key disciplines, laboratories 
and research institutions in other colleges and universities. 
  It is necessary to further enhance people's awareness of 
the importance of "invigorating Shanxi through the application 
of scientific and technological advances" and foster a fine 
social atmosphere of paying attention to scientific and 
technological education, respecting knowledge, and respecting 
qualified people. More effective measures should be adopted to 
arouse and bring into play the enthusiasm of intellectuals by 
improving their work, study, and living conditions and giving 
handsome rewards to those who have made outstanding 
contributions. We must continue to do a good job of 
intellectual imports, the import of qualified people, and the 
dispatch of personnel to other units, and attract more 
outstanding people to come to work in Shanxi by putting into 
practice the policy of "supporting students studying overseas, 
encouraging them to returning and letting them decide for 
themselves whether to come or go." 
  6. Try by all means to increase people's income, 
strive to improve the quality of life, and actively develop 
various types of social undertakings. Continuously 
improving people's material and cultural life on the basic of 
economic development is the starting point and ultimate goal of 
government work. This year, the per capita living expense 
income of city dwellers is to increase by 15.5 percent to 1,980 
yuan, while peasants' net income is to increase by 11.4 percent 
to 800 yuan. Governments at all levels must attach importance 
to and firmly grasp the task of increasing people's income and 
ensure the successful realization of the targeted increases. At 
present, there is a decline in income among workers in 
enterprises that are performing poorly or have totally or 
partially ceased production, as well as among some retired 
personnel. Due to fiscal problems, government functionaries and 
primary and secondary school teachers in some places did not 
receive their wages on time. Some poverty-stricken areas and 
remote mountainous areas still have problem securing enough food 
and clothing for their people. People who have relations and 
cannot support themselves, families of martyrs and armymen, as 
well as the handicapped, also have a difficult time making ends 
meet. Governments at all levels must take effective measures to 
deal with these problems. In order to correctly handle the 
relations between accumulation and consumption, it is necessary 
to uphold the principle of "first, feed the people and, second, 
build the country" in arranging fiscal expenditure. On no 
account should money for feeding the people be spent on 
construction or on ostentation and extravagance. As in the 
"three constructions," it is necessary to promote in a big way 
the campaign to increase production, practice economy, raise 
revenues and reduce expenditure, and develop a healthy habit of 
thinking it an honor to practice economy and a disgrace to 
waste. In particular, leading cadres at all levels must take 
the lead in practicing frugality, and all government 
functionaries must be the first to bear hardships and the last 
to enjoy comforts, and must wage hard struggle alongside the 
masses. It is necessary to attach importance to stabilizing 
prices and controlling inflation in economic work, establish a 
reserve system for important commodities, improve the system for 
the collection and use of the price regulation fund, strengthen 
market and price management, deal strict blows to fake and 
inferior commodities, fully take into consideration the 
tolerance level of the masses in price readjustment, and keep 
annual retail price rise under 10 percent. 
  Great efforts must be made to resolve practical problems of 
concern to the masses and raise their quality of life. We 
should firmly uphold the policy of prevention first, and make a 
serious effort to grasp the prevention and treatment epidemic 
and vocational diseases, particularly endemic diseases. This 
year, it is important to concentrate efforts on upgrading and 
equipping hospitals in 82 key small towns and townships with a 
population of over 10,000 in 50 poverty-stricken counties to 
facilitate the masses. We must extensively promote mass sports 
activities, improve people's physique, and do a good job of 
running the ninth provincial games. We must show concern and pay 
attention to the work of looking after the aged and develop 
old-age care. We must speed up housing construction, develop 
urban gas supply networks, and improve the water supply 
conditions in both urban and rural areas. This year, efforts 
will be made to tackle the drinking water problem for 900,000 
more people, striving to completely resolve the problem of 
finding drinking water for both men and animals in rural areas 
in the whole province and the water supply problem for people in 
16 poverty-stricken counties. The work of forecasting natural 
disasters must be strengthened and a good job must be done in 
rescue and relief. We must pay greater attention to 
environmental protection and earnestly enforce environmental 
protection laws and regulations, with the focus on the control 
of the three types of industrial wastes, in order to further 
improve the environmental quality of the provincial capital 
Taiyuan and of the whole province. Governments at all levels 
must attach great importance to family planning, further 
strengthen management by objective, strictly enforce birth 
control laws, regulations and policies, effectively strengthen 
propaganda, education and services, put the focus of work on the 
rural areas and the floating population, and resolutely keep the 
natural population growth rate to under 13 per thousand. 
  III. Strive for Overall Advance, Make Breakthroughs 
in Key Areas, Quicken the Pace of Reform for the Establishment 
of the Socialist Market Economic Structure 
  The Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee 
charted the grand blueprint for the establishment of the 
socialist market economic structure. Early this year, the 
Seventh Plenary Session of the Sixth Provincial CPC Committee 
passed the proposals for implementing the "Decision of the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee" and made 
overall arrangement for reform and opening up in the last seven 
years of the 20th century. Since this year will be the 
foundation-laying year for the establishment of the new market 
economic structure, and since the scope, intensity and 
difficulty of reform will be significantly increased, we must 
make an all-out effort and concentrate on pushing forward reform 
in the following three areas with a view to making breakthroughs 
in our endeavors. 
  1. Do well in the implementation of measures for major 
macro- control reforms. The series of major measures 
adopted by the state since the beginning of the year for the 
reform of the fiscal, financial, investment, planning, and 
foreign trade management systems are of decisive importance in 
setting the framework of the new structure. Reforms aimed at 
establishing and improving the macrocontrol system are the focal 
points of this year's national reform; they are also an 
important task in our provincial reform. Governments at all 
levels and general economic departments concerned must do a 
serious and meticulous job of all necessary groundwork and 
carefully organize implementation. On the basis of the division 
of provincial and local administrative jurisdiction, the 
existing fiscal system where local governments are allowed to 
retain all the above-quota revenue is to be replaced by a fiscal 
system of revenue sharing between the provincial and local 
governments. It is important to pay close attention to the 
establishment of local taxation systems, form local taxation 
organs, and strictly enforce tax collection and management in 
order to increase fiscal revenue. We should establish a system 
of unified budgeting, make overall arrangements for budgetary 
and nonbudgetary funds, strengthen budgetary constraints, and 
make more efficient use of fiscal revenue. In practicing the 
new fiscal and taxation system, it is necessary to properly 
handle the relations between provincial and local governments 
and between the state and enterprises in order to arouse the 
enthusiasm of all quarters. Reform of the financial, 
investment, planning, and foreign trade management systems must 
be conducted positively and steadily in accordance with the 
steps and procedures prescribed by the state. These reform 
measures introduced this year are rich and specialized in 
content and contain many new concepts and stipulations. For 
this reason, it is necessary to create favorable conditions for 
the smooth implementation of these reform measures by actively 
publicizing the main ideas of these reforms as well as knowledge 
pertaining to these areas and by strengthening cadre training. 
  2. Strive to make marked progress in reform in six key 
areas. The proposals for the implementation of the 
"Decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee" in our province made it clear that we must make 
overall plans, strive for overall advance, make breakthroughs in 
key areas, implement the reforms step by step, and quicken the 
pace of reform and opening up in the whole province. This year, 
we must concentrate on six key areas and strive to make 
breakthroughs in reforms in some key links and key areas. 
  (1) We must speed up the establishment of a modern 
enterprise 
system that is suited to the needs of the development of the 
market economy, and concentrate efforts on making a breakthrough 
in the reform of the property rights system. Since large and 
medium-sized state-owned enterprises are the pillars of the 
national economy, and reform of these enterprises is the focal 
and difficult point in the reform of the economic structure, it 
is necessary to attach importance to this reform. We must 
continue to put the "Enterprise Law" and "Regulations" into 
practice and make sure that enterprises are given their share of 
responsibility, rights, and interests. Arbitrary appropriations, 
fund-calls and charges must be halted in order to protect the 
legitimate rights and interests of enterprises. It is important 
to further grasp the experimental transformation of operational 
mechanism in 100 large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises, 
begin the work of reappraising the stocks and assets of 
enterprises and of defining their property rights, take positive 
steps to relieve enterprises of their historical burdens, and 
create favorable conditions for reorganization in line with the 
corporate system. From these 100 pilots, 25 larger enterprises 
which perform well and which possess the necessary conditions 
should be selected and reorganized into corporate bodies in 
accordance with the requirements for the establishment of a 
modern enterprise system. The number of enterprises selected to 
try out the shareholding system should be increased from the 
present 260 to 560. The auctioning of small state-owned 
enterprises and large and medium- sized enterprises should be 
accelerated. State-owned enterprises with heavy losses, more 
liabilities than assets, and no potential for development should 
be resolutely liquidated in accordance with law. It is 
important to effectively strengthen the management of 
state-owned assets, grasp well the experimental points for the 
supervision and management of assets in state-owned enterprises 
in the two cities Datong and Yangquan and in the 
machine-building and electrical appliance industry, explore new 
approaches and accumulate experience. 
  Taiyuan has been chosen by the state as a pilot city for 
bringing about "the optimum structure of capital and the 
invigoration of enterprises." We should seize this opportunity 
to quicken the pace of enterprise reform. All localities should 
proceed from reality and strive to make bigger headway and 
achieve greater success on the basis of reform in small 
state-owned enterprises and urban collective enterprises. 
  (2) Step up the establishment of a unified and open market 
system for orderly competition, and concentrate efforts on 
making a breakthrough in the cultivation of a production factor 
market. We should put an end to the previous practice where 
urban markets were stressed at the expense of rural markets, 
comprehensive markets were stressed at the expense of 
specialized markets and commodity markets were stressed at the 
expense of production factor markets, and strive to broaden the 
market scopes and form links with markets nationwide and in the 
international arena. Efforts should be made to further develop 
financial markets and open all kinds of fundraising channels, 
both direct and indirect. Positive steps must be taken to 
cultivate and develop labor markets and form an employment 
mechanism for the rational flow of manpower, where workers can 
choose their own jobs and enterprises can choose their own 
workers. It is important to step up the development of 
technology markets and strive to complete the establishment of a 
permanent, regular, and high-standard technology market at the 
provincial level in the not too distant future. While putting 
the primary land market under state monopoly, we should 
deregulate and invigorate the secondary land market, guide the 
healthy development of the land market, and use land to bring 
business and generate profits. We should pay close attention to 
the establishment of property rights transaction markets, 
encourage the flow of existing enterprise assets and promote the 
formation of different property rights structures. We should 
also establish specialized wholesale markets in production, 
marketing and distribution centers of staple agricultural 
products, manufactured consumer goods, and capital goods. 
  (3) Step up the establishment of rational labor distribution 
and social security systems, and concentrate efforts on making a 
breakthrough in the reform of the unemployment insurance, 
medical, and housing systems for enterprise employees. Social 
security in urban and rural areas should be resolved in diverse 
and multi- layered ways, with the provincial authorities making 
overall plans for pensions for employees of state-owned 
enterprises and the county authorities making overall plans for 
pensions for employees of urban collective enterprises. We 
should earnestly put into practice the State Council's 
"Regulations Concerning Unemployment Insurance for Employees of 
State-Owned Enterprises" and lose no time working out detailed 
rules for the implementation of these regulations in our 
province. We should make positive efforts to reform the free 
medical system and promote the practice where medical expenses 
are appropriately tied to individuals. At the same time, 
efforts should be made to try out the medical insurance system 
at selected units and gradually establish a medical insurance 
system that links the medical insurance fund for serious illness 
with personal medical accounts. In the reform of the urban 
public housing system, we should put the stress on the sale of 
public housing, promote the provident fund system in an 
all-round way, and quicken the pace of public housing sales. 
  (4) Step up the establishment of a new system for the 
development of commercialized agriculture and the rural market 
economy, and concentrate efforts on making a breakthrough in the 
reform of the land-use system and the development of a 
joint-stock cooperative system. Land-use rights should be 
deregulated. Upon expiry of contracts for the use of farm 
plots, land-use rights should be extended and kept intact for 30 
years without change in ordinary areas and for 50 years in 
poverty-stricken and remote mountainous areas. Rights for the 
use of "four types of barren land" auctioned or contracted out 
to peasants should be kept intact without change for 100 years. 
Land-use rights may be traded, leased, or converted into share 
capital in accordance with law. On the basis of clearly 
defining property rights, we should promote the rural 
joint-stock cooperative system in an all-round way, taking 
counties as units, and strive to achieve marked progress in this 
regard in one-third of our counties. Experimental reforms on 
household registration should be conducted in Shouzhou and some 
small towns, where peasants will be permitted to settle in 
cities to work in factories, do business or join the service 
industry. 
  (5) Accelerate the establishment of a system of science, 
technology, and education which promotes the development of the 
market economy, and concentrate efforts on making a breakthrough 
in the reform of the system of personnel training and 
employment. We should deepen the reform of the scientific and 
technological system in an all-round way around the task of 
invigorating research organs and promoting the flow of skills. 
We should actively support the development of nongovernmental 
scientific and technological enterprises and encourage 
scientific and technological personnel to go and work on 
contracted technological projects in the rural areas. In keeping 
with the need to develop the market economy, it is important to 
actively readjust the structure of education, and concentrate 
efforts on the development of vocational-technical education. 
It is important to give schools the necessary decisionmaking 
powers in running their own affairs and gradually increase the 
percentage of students enrolled through agency and of 
self-funded students in colleges and universities and in 
technical secondary schools. 
  The system of job allocation for graduates of colleges and 
universities should be reformed so as to give both graduates and 
employing units the right to choose. Measures should be taken to 
encourage university graduates and technical secondary school 
leavers to go and work in enterprises, especially township 
enterprises. It is important to reform the systems of personnel 
training, selection, exchange, and employment, remove the 
barriers between ownership systems and between cadres and 
workers, promote the rational flow of qualified personnel, and 
develop a mechanism of incentive and competition for qualified 
personnel. 
  (6) Accelerate the establishment of a new system for foreign 
trade and economic cooperation, open the province wider to the 
outside world, and concentrate efforts on making a breakthrough 
in the use of foreign capital and the import of technology. In 
keeping with the direction of "unified policy, open operation, 
fair competition, responsibility for one's own profits and 
losses, integration of industry and trade, and practice of the 
agency system" efforts should be made to quicken the pace of 
reforming the system of foreign trade and economic cooperation 
and opening to the outside world, seize the favorable 
opportunity, make better use of foreign funds, resources, 
technologies and markets, and develop an export-oriented 
economy. While improving the "hard" environment, it is also 
necessary to attach importance to the improvement of the "soft" 
environment by rationalizing the system by which external 
investors are attracted to do business in the province, provide 
better services by centralizing approval and clearance 
procedures, and truly put into practice the series of 
preferential policies formulated by the state and our province 
to attract foreign investors and investment from Hong Kong, 
Macao, and Taiwan compatriots. Taiyuan is the political, 
economic, and cultural center of our province, as well as an 
open city in the Chinese heartland. Efforts should be made to 
improve and strengthen the city's urban construction and 
management and see to it that it is kept clean, tidy, civilized, 
and orderly so as to create a desirable living and investment 
environment. Positive steps should be taken to encourage old 
enterprises to carry out overhauls using foreign capital, and to 
promote the healthy development of the three types of partially 
or wholly foreign-owned enterprises. We should aim at 
establishing over 400 partially or wholly foreign-owned 
enterprises in the province in the year 1994, with total 
investment exceeding $500 million. Better guidance should be 
given to the use of foreign capital in order that more funds 
will go to the basic industries, infrastructure, and key 
projects. We should continue to grasp the construction of 
export commodity bases, readjust the export product mix, improve 
their grade and quality, and actively open up new overseas 
markets in an effort to increase foreign exchange earnings. 
Foreign trade enterprises should be encouraged to make 
themselves more competitive by developing into profit-oriented 
international business groups. Efforts should be made to do a 
good job of foreign economic cooperation and strengthen the 
management of off-shore enterprises. The whole province and all 
trades and professions should make concerted efforts to create a 
stronger and more animated atmosphere of opening up. 
  (3) Actively push forward the reform of administrative 
organs 
to change the function of the government. Reforming the 
administration and changing the function of the government is 
essential to establishing the socialist market economy and 
accelerating economic development. The chief problems in this 
respect are overstaffed departments, lax discipline, and low 
efficiency. We should, in accordance with the principle of 
separating government and enterprise functions and maintaining 
streamlined, unified, and efficient administration, abolish or 
merge some of the specialized economic departments and 
institutions which overlap with or perform similar functions as 
others, reduce the number of nonpermanent organs, strengthen 
departments in charge of macrocontrol and supervision, and 
reinforce the functions of social management departments. 
Matters that fall within the jurisdiction of enterprises should 
be left to enterprises, matters that should be handled by market 
forces should be left to the market, and matters that can be 
handled by market intermediaries should be left to intermediary 
organs. At the same time, it is also important to strengthen 
the functions of the government in macrocontrol, comprehensive 
coordination, and social management. Institutional reform 
should be launched in full this year, and reform of 
provincial-level institutions should be completed in the main 
within the first six months. On this basis, the system of 
public service should be introduced. In the reform of 
institutions, the main difficulty lies in making appropriate job 
arrangements for displaced personnel. In this respect, it is 
important to conduct active and appropriate ideological work and 
broaden the avenues for accommodating the displaced staff. For 
example, some may be transferred to work in grass-roots units, 
or encouraged to go into the service sector, while others may be 
asked to join public institutions or corporations. We should 
see to it that all personnel, be they people who still work in 
the government or those displaced, can play their proper role 
and prove their ability. After the reform, government 
departments at all levels must strengthen their institutional 
restructuring in accordance with their terms of reference. They 
must streamline procedures, improve efficiency, and strive as 
quickly as possible to establish an operating mechanism that 
meets the need to develop the market economy. 
  At the same time, efforts should be made to intensify the 
reform of public institutions in accordance with the principle 
of separating the functions of the government and public 
institutions and the principle of collectivized services. 
Public institutions in the scientific and technological, 
educational, cultural, and public health sectors should, in 
light their own reality, explore their own road of operation 
along enterprise lines, face the market, and offer paid service. 
  Fellow deputies! Only by seizing the opportunity for reform 
can we seize the opportunity for development, and only by 
deepening reform can we accelerate development. People's 
governments at all levels must redouble their efforts in reform, 
carefully organize and coordinate their work, and promptly 
discover and deal with new situations and problems in the course 
of implementation so as to ensure the smooth progress of reform. 
<H5>  IV. Create a Fine Socio-Political Environment for Economic </H5>
Construction, Reform and Opening Up by Insisting on Doing Two 
Types of Work Simultaneously, Attaching Equal Importance to Both 
  Fellow deputies! The present formidable tasks of economic 
construction and reform need the assurance of a stable socio- 
political environment. The Seventh Session of the Sixth 
Provincial CPC Committee pointed out that this year we should go 
all out to grasp the "three major tasks" of reform, development, 
and stability, make new strides forward, show novelty and open 
up new horizons. This places higher demands on the work of the 
government. Firmly adhering to the principle of doing two types 
of work simultaneously and attaching equal importance to both, 
we must further strengthen cultural and ideological work, 
strengthen the establishment of the legal system, and strengthen 
the building of leadership bodies, the rank and file, as well as 
workstyle, in order to create a favorable socio-political 
environment for economic construction, reform, and opening up. 
  1. Effectively strengthen socialist culture and 
ideology, taking as our objective the cultivation of a new 
generation of better-educated, self-disciplined people with new 
ideals and moral integrity. We should, in the development 
of socialist culture and ideology, concentrate our efforts on 
the cultivation of a new generation of people with new ideals 
and moral integrity, who are better educated and have a strong 
sense of discipline, so as to provide a powerful spiritual drive 
and intellectual support to reform, opening up, and economic 
construction. We should organize cadres and the masses at all 
levels to carefully study volume 3 of the Selected Works 
of Deng Xiaoping, and arm them with the theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. We should conduct 
extensive, in-depth, and lively education on patriotism, 
collectivism, and socialism, teach people to cherish their 
motherland, Shanxi, the collective, and their own native 
village, hold high the main theme, and energetically publicize 
heroes and exemplary models who demonstrate the spirit of the 
times on all fronts. We should continue to unfold in depth 
education on public-mindedness and professional ethics, oppose 
money worship, pleasure-seeking, and extreme individualism, and 
cultivate fine customs and habits. Our province has a glorious 
revolutionary tradition. Today, in pushing forward reform, 
speeding up development, and realizing the objective of 
revitalizing Shanxi and bringing prosperity to its people, we 
still need to energetically carry forward the spirit of the 
older generation of revolutionaries and heroes who defied 
difficulties and dared to sacrifice; we still need to 
energetically carry forward the enterprising spirit of new and 
old models in relying on their own efforts and working hard; and 
in particular, we still need to energetically carry forward the 
pioneering spirit of the pacesetters of reform in daring to 
blaze new trails, take risks, and set the pace for others. 
  In strengthening socialist culture and ideology, it is 
important to uphold the principles of serving the people and the 
cause of socialism and letting a hundred flowers bloom and a 
hundred schools of thought contend, and strive to bring further 
prosperity to cultural undertakings. Literature and art, the 
press and publishing, radio, film, and television should all 
strive to create and publish more and better works that reflect 
the spirit of the times, show local characteristics and are 
welcomed by the masses. They should arm people with scientific 
theories, guide people with correct opinions, mode people with 
lofty aspirations, and inspire people with outstanding works. 
It is important to strengthen cultural market market in 
accordance with law and strictly deal with illegal publishing 
activities. Efforts should be made to strengthen the protection 
of cultural relics and build more libraries, cultural palaces, 
museums, science and technology halls, and archives. Mass 
cultural and ideological activities should be given energetic 
support in the urban and rural areas. In the rural areas, we 
should carry out activities to promote material progress and 
cultural and ideological progress extensively and in great depth 
with the aim of achieving a modest level of prosperity. In the 
urban areas, we should carry out "civilized city" and "civilized 
unit" activities in a deepgoing and sustained way, with the 
focus on creating a beautiful environment, establishing a fine 
social order, and providing high-quality service. We should 
mobilize the masses to change their ways and habits by doing 
away with outmoded conventions, bad customs and superstitions, 
and encourage and foster socialist new concepts, moral standards 
and habits. 
  2. Maintain social stability by further 
strengthening socialist democracy and the legal system. 
The fundamental aim in strengthening socialist democratic 
politics is to protect the rights of the broad masses of the 
people as masters of the country. Governments at all levels 
should earnestly put into practice the resolutions and decisions 
passed by the people's congresses and their standing committees, 
take the initiative to make progress reports, consciously accept 
comments and supervision by the people's congresses and their 
standing committees, and accept supervision by the people's 
deputies and by the broad masses. They should strengthen ties 
with the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference and 
other democratic parties, giving them support in participating 
in and discussing government and political affairs and 
fulfilling their role in political consultation and democratic 
supervision, in order to give full scope to the patriotic united 
front. They should attach importance to the role of trade 
unions, the Communist Youth League, women's federations, the 
China Association of Science and technology, the All-China 
Federation of Returned Overseas Chinese, and other mass 
organizations as bridges and channels. They should adopt proper 
procedures for handling affairs in a democratic way, and see to 
it that there is adequate research and consultation before 
policy decisions are made so that the decisionmaking process 
will be more democratic and scientific. Governments at all 
levels should continue to open up channels through which to 
maintain contacts with the masses, paying close attention to the 
letters and visits they receive from the masses and keeping 
themselves informed of the people's criticisms of and demands on 
their work. They should strengthen democracy at the grass-roots 
level, see to it that the congresses of workers and other 
employees, the neighborhood committees and the villager 
committees function well, and encourage democratic participation 
at the grass-roots level. The party's policies on minority 
nationalities and religion should be earnestly put into practice 
in order to strengthen unity among all our nationalities. It is 
also important to strengthen religious affairs management and 
take positive steps to make religion compatible with socialism. 
  Strictly adhering to the spirit of the directive, "carry 
forward the fine traditions of the party controlling the armed 
forces and strengthen the building up of reserve forces for 
national defense," recently issued by Jiang Zemin, chairman of 
the Central Military Commission, in an inscription he wrote for 
the Shanxi Military District, as well as the guiding ideology of 
"subordinating to the overall interests of economic construction 
and meeting the needs of national defense construction," we 
should strengthen the building up of the militia and the 
reserves at the grass-roots level, organize these units to take 
an active part in the maintenance of public order, and launch 
activities of sustaining the armed forces through proceeds from 
physical labor so that they can contribute their share toward 
bringing Shanxi's economy to a new height. It is important to 
stabilize the armed forces departments at the grass-roots level, 
and educate people about the importance of national defense. 
The government should support the Army and give preferential 
treatment to families of armymen and martyrs, and the Army 
should support the government and show its concern for the 
people. The whole society must show concern for defense 
construction, cherish the people's soldiers, and make continuous 
efforts to consolidate the unity between the Army and the 
government and between the Army and the people. 
  We should attach importance to the legal system and 
strengthen the government's work in this respect. In keeping 
with the need to establish a new market economic structure, it 
is important to step up the establishment of local legal 
systems, actively put forward legislation proposals, and 
establish and improve administrative rules and regulations. 
Governments at all levels must learn to use legal means to run 
economic and social affairs, and abide by law in administrative 
matters. They must strictly enforce the "Law of Administrative 
Proceedings" and the "Regulations on Review of Administrative 
Measures," consciously accept supervision by law, by the media 
and by the masses, and resolutely correct violations of law such 
as failure to abide by the law, lax law enforcement, and letting 
law-breakers go free. They should attach great importance to 
and effectively strengthen the building up of the 
law-enforcement departments and raise the quality and 
law-enforcing ability of their personnel. All public servants 
must take the lead to study and understand law and set an 
example in abiding by law and discipline. Further efforts should 
be made to deepen education in the legal system and enhance 
people's awareness of the importance of the legal system and the 
sense of law throughout society. 
  Reform and development cannot take place without social 
stability. Governments at all levels must give priority to the 
maintenance of social stability and take effective steps to 
grasp this task firmly and well. They must strengthen the 
functions of the people's democratic dictatorship. The masses 
now feel very strongly about problems of public security. In 
this connection, it is necessary to deal heavy and quick blows 
at serious criminal offenses against people's lives and property 
and against modernization, and stop the growth in the number of 
criminal offenses. We should persist in combining specific 
struggles with overall control, crackdown with prevention, work 
conducted by specialized organs with work carried out by the 
masses, earnestly put into practice the system of leadership 
responsibility in the overall control of social order, and hand 
down measures for the overall control of social order to 
individual villages, neighborhoods, schools, government organs 
and industrial and mining enterprises. 
  Cases of major importance should be seriously investigated 
and dealt with, and economic offenders should be brought to 
justice in accordance with law. We should purify the social 
atmosphere, take resolute measures to ban social evils, and 
continue to wage struggles against pornography and "the six 
evils." We should correctly handle contradictions among the 
people, do a good job of resolving contradictions and tackling 
problems as soon as they emerged. It is also important to 
strengthen reform through labor and re-education through labor. 
  3. Strengthen the leading organs, ranks, and style of 
work of governments at all levels, encourage a revolutionary 
spirit, and unite in struggle. A leading body that is 
united in struggle, a contingent of cadres who are diligent and 
honest in their work, and a workstyle that is pragmatic yet 
creative are the fundamental guarantees for the victorious 
completion of our tasks of reform and construction. They are 
also the key to the maintenance of social stability and 
political stability. Our government is the government of the 
people. Governments at all levels and their leading cadres must 
put the interests of the people above everything else, work with 
one heart and one mind, fulfill their duties and 
responsibilities, and devote all their energies to the cause of 
reform and development. It is important to effectively 
strengthen the building of a diligent and honest administration, 
continue to wage a deep-going struggle against corruption, 
resolutely correct fraudulent practices among various trades and 
professions, enforce strict discipline, and set strict 
requirements on cadres, seeing to it that they are clean and 
honest, hard-working, and forward- looking. Leading cadres at 
all levels must set a good example in being honest and 
well-disciplined, be the first to act, and work still harder at 
establishing and maintaining a fine image for government 
functionaries. It is important to further strengthen the 
building of a clean government and establish an effective 
restraining mechanism for preventing the abuse of power for 
personal gain as well as fraudulent practices among various 
trades and professions. Law enforcement departments at all 
levels must fulfill their supervisory functions in real earnest 
and seriously investigate and deal with violations of law and 
discipline. Corruption, whether it is a matter of abusing power 
for personal gains, trading power for money, offering and taking 
bribes, or serious dereliction of duty, must be thoroughly 
investigated and punished in accordance with law and discipline 
regardless of who is involved. Provided that we firmly rely on 
the masses, we will be able to triumph over corruption and win 
the support and backing of the people. 
  After the general principles and work tasks have been set, 
the key lies in truly and firmly putting them into practice. 
Leading cadres at all levels must effectively change their 
style of work and make real efforts to grasp implementation. It 
is important to cut down meetings, paper work and administrative 
and protocol functions, spend more time going deep into reality 
to conduct investigation and studies, and strive to take the 
initiative in work by promptly discovering and resolving new 
situations and new problems in reform and development. It is 
important to respect the creative initiative of the masses, and 
pay attention to summing up good typical examples and experience 
in the localities in order to promote work in the whole 
province. Governments at all levels must be concerned about the 
weal and woe of the masses, listen attentively to their views, 
and adopt their suggestions in solving practical problems. They 
should, as General Secretary Jiang Zemin urged, always show 
concern for the masses, rely on the masses and do everything for 
the masses. They should resolutely overcome bureaucratism, 
resolutely oppose formalism which is neither realistic nor 
practical, and develop in the whole province a fine social 
habit, where everyone is honest, down-to-earth, realistic, and 
innovative. It is important to establish and improve systems of 
responsibility for objectives throughout one's tenure and for 
work each year. Starting from this year, the provincial 
government should divide important objectives into smaller 
projects and assign them to the provincial governor, vice 
governor, and department heads. They are to report their work 
at the end of each year, and their performance will be strictly 
appraised. Prefectural, city and county governments must also 
establish responsibility systems. They should ensure the 
victorious completion of all tasks set for this year, with each 
level grasping its work through to the end. 
  Fellow deputies! Our province is run by a good government 
which enjoys the support of the people, who desire progress. 
Now is the golden opportunity to speed up development. We are 
determined, under the correct leadership of the provincial party 
committee and the support and supervision of the provincial 
people's congress, to lead the people of the whole province to 
further emancipate their minds, resolutely carry out reform, 
push forward, and strive for the successful completion of this 
year's tasks with hard work and an enterprising spirit. 

