CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Maryukha and Grigoriy Nesmyanovich: </F>
"Black Sea Fleet True to the Oath Once Taken: That Is What the 
Military Council of the Black Sea Fleet Said About Its Position 
on the Incident in Odessa"] 
  [Text] "The unpunished actions of the Ukrainian special 
forces in Odessa took place with the connivance of the Ukrainian 
Naval Forces under Vice-Admiral Bezkorovaynyy," according to a 
statement of the military council of the Black Sea Fleet to the 
presidents of Russia and Ukraine. But Chairman of the State Duma 
Ivan Rybkin is certain that forces striving to disrupt the 
pending meeting of the heads of state of the CIS were interested 
in this incident. Russia, in turn, is therefore striving to 
minimize the political aspect of the actions of the Ukrainian 
special forces. 
  But such a striving cannot be seen on the Ukrainian side. On 
the contrary, the commanding officer of the forces of Odessa 
Military District has already assigned a new commander, Capt. 
1st Rank V. Marchenko, to the division that has been renamed 1st 
Brigade of ships for the protection of the water area. Ukrainian 
press services are disseminating statements to the effect that 
the former commander of the division, Capt. 1st Rank Oleg 
Feoktistov, has been hospitalized with the diagnosis of "acute 
alcoholic poisoning" and not a word about the handcuffs that 
apparently also "poisoned" the Russian officer. There is also no 
mention of the fact that the Russian seamen were given an 
ultimatum: either swear allegiance to Ukraine or be expelled 
beyond the boundaries of the republic. According to available 
information, only two officers of the division agreed to change 
flags. 
  One really ought to have forgotten this incident for the 
sake 
of peace and agreement between the two neighboring Slavic 
states. But one should have looked into the causes and sought to 
find the guilty parties. The Ukrainian side is resisting this, 
however. The authorities in Kiev forced Adm. Feliks Gromov, 
commander in chief of the Naval Forces of the Russian 
Federation, to change the originally planned route of his trip 
to settle the conflict, forbidding him to visit Odessa. 
Yesterday the commander in chief and the special ambassador 
Yuriy Dubinin arrived in Sevastopol to discuss the situation 
with Adm. Eduard Baltin, commanding officer of the Black Sea 
Fleet. 
  There is still more alarming information from the south of 
Ukraine. Sources close to the staff of the Ukrainian Naval 
Forces report that an action similar to the one is Odessa is 
being prepared in Izmail with respect to a brigade of river 
vessels, the personnel of which have declared a resolute protest 
in connection with the provocation in Odessa. The special forces 
of the Bolgrad Airborne Brigade that "distinguished themselves" 
in the assault of the division of ships mothballed in Odessa 
have already been put in a state of combat readiness.... 

