BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter An Chae-sung: "Friction Over Sausages--U.S. </F>
Plans To Notify the ROK of Super 301 Application"] 
  [Text] It has been learned that with a view to resolving 
the problem on U.S.-made sausages, whose customs clearance have 
been withheld by our government for reasons of safety, the U.S. 
Government is working out hardline measures, including the 
application of Super 301. It was also noted that the U.S. 
government, not remaining in its measures to merely solve the 
sausage issue, will raise an issue with our government's safety 
regulations on foodstuffs and quarantine system. This is 
reportedly aimed at satisfactorily exporting U.S. agricultural 
products and foodstuffs to the ROK. 
  This fact was confirmed by on 20 May a U.S. Government 
document obtained by HANGYORE SINMUN. This document is a 
summary of the contents discussed during a conference held on 26 
April by officials from the relevant U.S. Government offices and 
agencies in a bid to resolve the sausage problem. This 
conference was arranged by (Peter Collins), deputy 
representative for Asian-Pacific affairs in the Office of U.S. 
Trade Representative, and attended by relevant officials from 
the budget management bureau of the U.S. Department of State and 
Department of Agriculture. 
  According to this document, the participants in the 
conference put forward the opinion that because there was no 
progress in negotiations with the ROK Government for a solution 
to the sausage problem, the U.S. Government should notify the 
ROK Government of its plan to apply Super 301. 
  In particular, contrary to the opinion put forward by other 
participants who maintained that the ROK Government should be 
notified of the application of Super 301 this Autumn after 
watching the trend of negotiations, the relevant officials from 
the U.S. Trade Representative and U.S. Department of Agriculture 
expressed the hardline position that Super 301, their "best 
card," must be mobilized immediately. 
  Thus, this document confirms that U.S. Government officials 
are using Super 301 as a means for threatening [wihyop sudan] 
the ROK. 
  The document also revealed that a participant in the 
conference said that "the ROK is indeed afraid of Super 301. 
Therefore, Super 301 is our very weapon." 
  The document showed that the U.S. Government is handling the 
sausage problem not only as an issue related to sausage itself, 
but also as an overall issue concerning the export of U.S. 
agricultural products and foodstuffs to the ROK. 

