BFN 

<F P=106> [By Elsy Fors: "Portal: The North Americans Will Arrive Too </F>
Late for Cuban Mining"] 
  [Text] Havana, 23 Jun (PL) -- The North Americans will not 
arrive late; they are already too late to invest in Cuban 
mining, Basic Industry Minister Marcos Portal has said here at 
the conference sponsored by the British publishing house THE 
ECONOMIST. 
  During the second round table with the Cuban Government, 
which ended yesterday, Portal gave a detailed report on foreign 
participation in the island's mining and petroleum development 
to more than 170 businessmen and bankers from 23 countries. 
  According to official figures, Cuba estimates there are more 
than 300 million tons of nickel and cobalt reserves in 30 
deposits in the country. To date, Portal said, Cuba has signed 
26 contracts for mineral prospecting and exploration, two 
service contracts for exploitation of copper in Mantua, Pinar 
del Rio Province, and two partnerships for feasibility studies 
on gold, lead, and zinc deposits. These agreements already 
cover 50 percent of the area open to bidding in a total area of 
40,000 square km. 
  Portal said the nickel industry has recovered and increased 
its markets, adding the Cuban-mined mineral is now exported to 
26 countries. This sector obtained financial support from 
institutions in Canada, the Netherlands, Great Britain, and 
Italy. 
  In petroleum prospecting, 16 of the 33 areas with 
potentially 
great prospects have already been contracted out to French, 
Canadian, British, and Swedish companies. The minister also 
said the total area will have been contracted by the end of the 
year, so "it is not a matter of the North Americans arriving 
late; they are already too late" to participate in these 
projects. 
  The companies that are already participating are prospering, 
recovering the invested capital with part of the extracted 
petroleum. Partnerships have been established for the useful 
life of the fields, and this exhibits confidence in Cuba's 
guarantees, Portal added. During his participation in the round 
table, Portal received investment proposals. 
  The cosponsorship of the conference by the Canadian firm 
Sherritt, which has made large investments in Cuban petroleum, 
gas, and nickel, is evidence of foreign interest in the 
prospects of this sector of the local economy. 

