Language: <F P=105> Hindi </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Punam I. Kaushish: "Openness Has Begun To Be </F>
Effective as a Weapon Against Militants in Kashmir"] 
  [Text] In the poker game there is a time when the players 
have to cash in their coupons. Narasimha Rao is doing the same 
thing in the context of Kashmir. Recently four European 
diplomats visited Jammu-Kashmir. This has brought forward a new 
policy that the policy-makers in the South Block have now 
adopted. 
  This transparent operation is important for two reasons. 
First, it shows clearly that India is open and does not hide 
anything. Second, the clear picture has emerged to the Western 
nations and they understand the situation better. At the same 
time the complications in the Kashmir issue will be brought to 
light. It is hoped that the Indian situation will be 
strengthened by it, because the main problem in Kashmir is the 
Pakistan-induced rebellion, and it will become fully clear. 
  It is to the Indian government's credit that it did not 
hesitate in giving permission to the European ambassadors to 
come to India and visit Kashmir so that they can talk directly 
with the people there. This way, India has proved itself to be a 
progressive democracy. At the same time, it has shown its 
serious intent to resolve the Kashmir situation within the 
framework of Indian Constitution. 
  We hope that this visit will open the eyes of Western 
nations 
to the fact that India is not at fault. Fortunately, those 
diplomats who toured the crisis-ridden state supported what 
India has been saying. 
  This was glimpsed in the changed attitude towards the 
Pakistani resolution in the Human Rights Commission meeting in 
Geneva. No doubt, Benazir Bhutto is trying to play the human 
rights card which Bill Clinton and his Western allies are tying 
to support. Still, this human rights issue is not making much 
progress. Some reports indicate that these countries have warned 
about the Islamabad resolution and have said that this will 
further deteriorate India-Pakistan relations and aggravate the 
tense situation in southeast Asia. 
  It is good for New Delhi that these diplomats have reacted 
positively. It is not known what their report sent to the 
European Union says. However, the talk in the diplomatic circles 
in New Delhi hints that this will strengthen India's position. 
  They talked with various people in the state and it helped 
India's side. They also learned how the Indian government and 
the state government officials have been struggling with this 
serious situation. They have come to the conclusion that, except 
for some unfortunate aspects, the Kashmir issue from the Indian 
perspective has not reached a point from where there is no 
turning back. No doubt, they have returned with the impression 
that the people in the valley are tired of the terrorists and 
desire return to normalcy. 
  There is another and more important facet. They have begun 
to 
feel that this situation would not have been created if external 
powers had not interfered in Kashmir. In other words, they have 
gotten proof of another Pakistani war against India. In this 
context, three of the four diplomats congratulated General 
Krishna Rao and his administration. They said, "Everyone we met 
praised General Rao and his efforts. No one said anything 
negative." 
  They have returned with he impression that the army, the 
Border Security Force, the Central Reserve Police Force, and the 
local police that are stationed there do not have appropriate 
training for dealing with terrorists. They were impressed that 
the authorities did not deny that some extreme actions were 
taken. They were also provided information about all the cases 
involving extreme activities about what action was taken in such 
cases. 
  There is no denying that these extreme actions started on 
the 
other side of the border. India tried to deal with the problem 
after that. In this chain of events the security forces broke 
rules. Still, it is clear that India did not take the 
initiative; it followed the policy of dealing with the other 
side's initiative. 
  It is also true that Pakistani fundamentalists attacked 
Indian security forces. The Indian troops acted in retaliation 
and Pakistan made a mountain of a mole hill. Still, it was a 
smart Pakistani political move to support terrorism on a large 
scale and keep it hidden from the world. 
  More than 300,000 Kashmiri Pandits are living as refugees in 
various corners of the country. They have suffered a lot. The 
diplomats received proof of it through their meeting with 
Kashmiri Pandits and the Muslims living in Jammu. The Western 
nations should not have any problem in understanding this 
situation because a similar situation exists in Bosnia. 
  The truth is that if India wanted to hide facts, it would 
not 
have permitted the diplomats to visit Jammu-Kashmir and given 
them a free hand. They met all those they wanted to meet. They 
visited the Hazratbal shrine and hospitals, and talked with the 
leaders of Huriat Conference for two hours. Despite the 
Pakistani propaganda, they went there on their own without any 
security forces with them. For example, a taxi was parked 
outside Hazratbal which took the four of them to meet the Huriat 
leaders. 
  They saw Pakistanis and Afghans in the hospital that the 
security forces have arrested. The diplomats said that those 
people were not invented by India. 
  When they were talking with some people in Hazratbal, only 
then did they hear the demand for freedom. About 100 people had 
gathered there and the number rose to 500 later. The Huriat 
leaders demanded a referendum according to the UN resolution. No 
one said that they wanted to join Pakistan or want to live 
independently. Their demand was: the right to self-determination. 
  Almost everyone expressed respect for Dr. Karan Singh. No 
one 
said anything positive about Farooq Abdullah. It appeared that 
nobody likes him. 
  There could not have been a better time for this visit 
because the Americans had adopted an anti-India attitude at that 
time. Now it is clear that we can respond to the propaganda that 
Pakistan was spreading about human rights violations to which 
President Clinton was putting his seal of approval without 
thinking. 
  The Americans have never considered this problem to be of a 
insurgence induced by terrorism. Perhaps they thought that if 
they admit this, then Pakistan's role in Kashmir and Punjab 
would be exposed. The fact is that Washington refuses to 
understand the complexities of this issue. Instead, it views the 
situation as though Indian troops occupying the valley were 
spreading a civil war there. Meanwhile, Islamabad is depending 
on its Muslim brothers. 
  The Pakistani politicians have used the human rights 
approach 
to realize their ambitions. The truth is that such violations 
have occurred in their country and they are looking the other 
way. Islamabad has accepted the figures on Kashmir that Amnesty 
International has given, however, it is looking away from the 
figures about Pakistan that this organization has compiled. This 
organization has clearly written about Pakistan that tortures 
and rapes were committed by the police and other forces on 
people in their custody and that it happens in many places in 
Pakistan. 
  Even the chairman of Pakistan's own human rights group has 
listed many incidents of torture in Pakistan. For example, 95 
incidents of violence against political activists in police 
custody and 55 incidents of rapes of innocent women and children 
were cited by this group. These figures are for the last two 
months. Most of these incidents took place in Sindh, Benazir 
Bhutto's home province. 
  Argentina's organization, the World Movement of Restoration 
of Human Rights, has also condemned incidents of human rights 
violation in Pakistan. The Kashmir Democratic Forum is an 
organization of progressive Muslims in Switzerland. It also has 
condemned Pakistan. This organization told Benazir Bhutto to 
leave Kashmir to the Kashmiris, because her interference is 
causing innumerable problems for the Kashmiris. 
  The U.S. State Department report is also very strong. It has 
hinted about unethical killing usually shown as confrontation 
with the police. Many incidents of misuse of police officers are 
noted and corruption is increasing. The police and the jailers 
use force to make people say whatever they want to hear. 
Innocent people are beaten and all kind of atrocities are 
committed. This is the story of Pakistani jails where people die 
and commit suicide. 
  Pakistan is still going on with its propaganda war against 
India while committing these sins. The European diplomats have 
seen that. New Delhi is going to focus on the Islamic world now. 
It is going to invite the diplomats from Islamic countries. They 
will tour the valley and see what drama Pakistan has staged 
there. 
  There will be one major benefit from it. The shroud of 
secrecy over the valley will be lifted and Pakistan's lies will 
be exposed. After all, this problem should be resolved by 
working together. The Indian prime minister has adopted the 
right attitude about it with a lot of thought, balance, and 
creativity behind it. Now the idea of just holding talks with 
Islamabad has been dropped. No doubt New Delhi wants to 
normalize and improve its relations with its neighbors, however, 
there must be an appropriate environment for that. The issues on 
which we have serious differences can be left for a later date. 
This is the right attitude and will serve the interests of both 
nations. Narasimha Rao himself had shed light on it. The time 
has come now for the international community to stop looking for 
faults, and try to find truth.* 

