BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina by </F>
unidentified Channel 13 and NOTICIAS EL DIARIO reporters, in 
Asuncion on 16 April] 
  [Text] [Reporter] You must be aware, Mr. Robaina, that the 
flow of information from Cuba to Latin America, and especially 
to our country, has always been unilateral. We almost always 
receive information from just one source. The ability to talk 
directly to somebody from Cuba, to somebody who holds an 
important post there, is like a breath of fresh air. We would 
like you to formally introduce Cuba to society. This may be 
quite a wide-ranging question, but what is Cuba like in 1994? 
  [Robaina] Well, I am very pleased by what you have just 
said, 
because the fundamental objective of my trip to Paraguay, and 
indeed of my tour of several countries, is to present our point 
of view concerning Cuba's reality. 
  It is very difficult to discuss Cuba's situation today 
because today implies, above all, yesterday. Cuba is an island 
that is facing many pressures that stem from different 
situations. It is experiencing an extremely difficult and 
complex period, but it is armed with cultural, technical, and 
scientific qualifications. This has enabled it to confront the 
harsh situation, the terrible ordeal to which it has been 
subjected. 
  When I say a terrible ordeal, I mean a worsening blockade 
that was compounded by our loss, in 1989, when the long-standing 
privileged relationship between the island and the Communist 
bloc was brought to an end. Having endured the former and 
confronted the latter amid many constraints and a quasi-silence 
campaign, we have struggled to come to grips with a model that 
would enable us to find a place in the sun and, above all, to 
achieve a level of economic results that will enable us to 
maintain a handful of conquests that we deem sacred. 
  My country does not want to go backward in education, health 
care, science, sports -- the few areas in which Cuba has proven 
to be efficient and has accomplished results. It simply wishes 
to embark upon the path of economic transformation as we already 
have at our disposal raw materials, capital, and technology. 
  It should also be pointed out that the population profile 
has 
also changed on the island -- there are 5.7 million Cubans under 
30 years of age. Half the population was born after the Cuban 
project proved to be successful. On the one hand, this has its 
advantages, but on the other hand, it also has its drawbacks. 
  [Reporter] One former Cuban education minister once told us: 
"We may change everything, but we will not give up the present 
levels of education and health care." Is this correct? 
  [Robaina] That remark could even be much more to the point 
now because the country is in even more serious jeopardy. 
Everything is negotiable, anything may be discussed, except our 
sovereignty, our independence, our ability to speak with our own 
voice, which today are indeed at stake. 
  We can discuss anything except what may entail going 
backwards in our achievements in education -- as the former 
minister said -- in health care, science, and sports, because 
these are the areas where we have made conquests and can show to 
the world. 
  [Reporter] You have said that many things, indeed nearly 
everything is negotiable. Is Fidel Castro's leadership 
negotiable? 
  [Robaina] The Cuban people have never questioned Fidel 
Castro's leadership or considered the need to negotiate it. The 
Cuban people are not willing to take this issue to the 
negotiating table. I believe Fidel's presence and work are more 
important than his mere physical presence among us. I believe 
it was Fidel himself who brought up this issue for public 
discussion because he has no interest in staying in power 
forever. He remains in power, and with Cubans it is not because 
he decided to do so, but rather because Cubans wanted it. I 
believe Fidel is a testimony to the extent to which we guarantee 
the continuity of the project. To us Fidel embodies dignity to 
a superlative degree. He personifies a historic role in his 
time and now. He has such an important role to play today in 
the country's economic transformation process that he cannot be 
left aside on any account. To us, Fidel is too important to 
negotiate over or to allow anybody to demand that we include him 
in a series of alternatives in order to reach a certain 
agreement. 
  [Reporter] With regard to Fidel Castro's possible 
succession, is there any alternative political scheme under 
consideration or will his successor come from the same party, 
the same revolution? 
  [Robaina] I believe succession must come first, the 
succession of Fidel himself, who has taught us Cubans not to 
worry about change because changes should not be traumatic for 
Cubans. I believe succession affects both he who assumes 
office, no matter who that may be; but above all it affects the 
project in which many participate collectively. In my view, 
that is a phenomenon. Now, concerning the possibility of a 
political system different from the one we now have, that does 
not even depend on whether Fidel is in office. It is my 
considered opinion that any modification to the chosen system 
depends on the deep causes that led us to this system. 
  My country opted for an ideology and embarked upon a certain 
path due to an ongoing threat that has not disappeared. I am 
not referring to a military threat, as I am aware that some may 
wonder if we believe we are in danger of being attacked. My 
country is enduring an aggression that is much more difficult 
than an act of military aggression. My country contends it has 
been strangled through economic means and therefore, as long as 
these conditions prevail, my country cannot afford to make 
changes right now, as many countries living under normal 
conditions think we should. My country has to think about 
surviving first in order to be able to change later. While 
conditions continue unchanged it is impossible for my country to 
accomplish what other countries accomplish under normal 
conditions. 
  [Reporter] Is it possible to consider a capitalist Cuba in 
terms of a market economy? How is Cuba facing this reality? 
  [Robaina] No. Cuba is facing a reality in a world that up to 
now has had a bipolar structure and that at present is unipolar. 
For us, a Cuba that follows an economic model that renounces our 
conquests is out of the question. Notwithstanding this, we 
Cubans want -- and we are striving for it -- a Cuba that, in a 
changing world where options are so difficult and complex, is 
able to maintain some ties and economic relations without 
renouncing its very essence. To do this we must embark on a 
process of mixed partnerships in those areas where we are 
seeking markets and capital. We continue more than ever 
committed to a model that will enable us to make headway in our 
conquests and in social justice. We are aware that we have 
drafted and are implementing this model under a lot of pressure 
and at a time when working conditions have changed tremendously. 
This is why we say that the most important thing for us now is 
to defend the essence. We will defend ideals that for us are 
really sacred, given the conditions found along that path. My 
country is not, and does not intend to be included among those 
countries that, to overcome a crisis, state that the only way 
out is to adopt a model which, in my view, continues to make the 
rich richer and the poor poorer. 
  [Reporter] Will Cuba give up a centralized economic system 
or 
will it negotiate quotas, as you said concerning education and 
health care, despite the fact that these are not negotiable 
either. What is Cuba not willing to forego, to leave behind? 
  [Robaina] No, Cuba already has a new economic model. Cuba is 
no longer talking about a totally centralized and state-run 
economic model as we had up to now. Cuba wants to maintain its 
achievements and under the government's participation, has 
already embarked upon a process of mixed partnership. Moreover, 
Cuba is not the only country doing this. We are assessing other 
countries' experiences. We have opened the country to foreign 
capital, liberalized the labor market, and allowed the use of 
the land by farmers whether or not they work on sugar cane 
plantations. The decentralization of many duties, until now 
performed by the central government, speaks of an economic model 
that is being sought in order to adapt it to the Cuban reality. 
  [Reporter] We expected the ceremonies to welcome a guest of 
your stature by our authorities would be more grandiose, but the 
important thing is that you are here, as you have said, and have 
brought this new approach to relations, this new air that is 
beginning to be breathed between our countries. 
  [Robaina] For me, the most important thing, as you said, is 
that a new channel of communication is being opened. 
  Much has been said about this being a private visit, but I 
can assure you that I could not have made a more public visit. 
Anyhow, I am really pleased to have been able to know the 
Paraguayan people and with the many representatives I have the 
honor of meeting. 

