CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yasuo Ota, Tokyo Economic Department reporter: </F>
"True Price Competition for 10-Year Government Bonds"] 
  [Text] There was a time when the MOF was not able to raise 
adequate funds because government bond issues were "not being 
fully subscribed to." The March bond issue of four-year 
medium-term government bonds with a nominal interest rate of 3.0 
percent, placed on auction on 24 February received a lukewarm 
reception. Only 645.8 billion yen in bonds were subscribed to 
against an offering of 700 billion yen. If not all of the bonds 
are subscribed to, procedures require a repeat of the auction 
process and this potentially inflates fund-raising costs. 
  The Japanese government has been forced to launch several 
repetitive economic countermeasures in the form of public works 
projects to stimulate the economy and the bond sales program, 
including refunding actions, will reach a historically high 36.5 
trillion yen. And given the recent trend in tax revenue 
deficits, a decrease in bond issues beyond the next fiscal year 
is hard to imargine. 
  Amidst such conditions, the United States has demanded that 
the proportion of 10-year government bonds sold under 
competitive bidding procedures be increased from 60 to 100 
percent. Whether the request will be accepted or not depends 
upon the consideration given to the issues of full subscription 
and the costs of selling the bonds. 
  At one time, government bonds were considered the means by 
which a nation raised funds and banks were called upon to form 
syndicates to assist in the sale of the bonds. However, the MOF 
exercised formidable authority in negotiating conditions for 
issuing government bonds because of the priority treatment 
extended to such bonds. Interest rates were set at levels lower 
than prevailing market rates and failure to attain full 
subscription never occurred. 
  However, issuance of higher volumes of government bonds led 
to deregulation. In 1989, the MOF began selling 40 percent of 
government bonds through the auction process. This was in 
response to demands from foreign securities firms that the bonds 
be subjected to market forces as a condition for issuance. The 
percentage was lifted to 60 percent in 1990. The MOF is no 
longer able to make decisions on the conditions for issuance of 
the bonds, because bond prices are now determined through the 
competitive bidding process. 
  However, foreign securities firms and banks have recently 
requested that the proportion of government bonds subject to the 
competitive bidding process be increased because the firms had 
experienced being unable to procure the amount of new issues 
they desired when the bonds had reached the imposed ceiling. 
  In reality, the demand lodged by the U.S. firms is similar 
to the one presented by major Japanese securities firms and 
influential Japanese banks. You might say that the demands 
represent the logic of formidable firms capable of selling to 
clients in a bull market. 
  However, in the case of foreign financial institutions, the 
logic of formidable firms applies only in bull markets when bond 
investments appear to be profitable. During bear markets the 
logic of freedom of choice applies. Major Japanese financial 
institutions admit, "We would like to handle large volumes of 
bonds in a bull market, but we feel like returning our share of 
the bonds in bear markets," but foreign firms practice what they 
preach. This reality gives birth to MOF fears of future failures 
to attain full subscriptions. 
  Currently, the 40 percent of bond issues not exposed to the 
competitive bidding process is handled broadly by syndicates 
including small-to-medium-sized Japanese financial institutions. 
U.S. interests consider this portion of bond issues as being 
handled on a restrictive basis, preventing them from acquiring 
their desired share, but for the MOF such syndicates serve as a 
reliable means of disposing of bonds during bear markets. 
  Although such bonds are not a major portion of overall 
issues, four-year government bonds have already failed once to 
reach full subscription under the 100-percent competitive 
bidding process but lack any mechanism for preventing a failure 
to achieve full subscription. Most government bonds are issued 
as 10-year bonds and the 40 percent not subject to competitive 
bidding serves as a safety net. If this safety net is eliminated 
and the fear that under-subscription will lead to higher 
fund-raising costs exists, it is easy to see that the 
100-percent bidding process cannot be adopted. It can also be 
pointed out that long-term interest rates could swing widely. 
  However, even within the MOF, there is a perception that, 
"During periods of declining interest rates, if the 100-percent 
competitive bidding process is implemented, high bids could 
result in the issuance of bonds at a lower cost, thus offsetting 
any concern of potential under-subscriptions." In reality, the 
United States, which is plagued by recurring deficits, has 
issued large amounts of government bonds, but has never faced 
the problem of under-subscription. 
  Deeply rooted criticism of the 100-percent competitive 
bidding process reflects skepticism over fears of 
under-subscription in Japan which is the world's second largest 
economy. Needless to say, the dollar is a core currency which 
encourages the purchase of dollar bonds, but there is also a 
deeply rooted view that Japan should take action to enhance the 
appeal of its government bonds beginning with the tax system. 
  As we near the summit of advanced nations, income tax cuts 
and offsetting consumption tax hikes, which are the current 
focus of Japan-U.S. trade talks, will shift to the topic of 
sources of funding if income tax cuts are implemented, in 
advance, separate from any hike in consumption tax. Undoubtably, 
there will be considerably more dependence on government bonds. 
Moreover, there is greater expectation of an economic recovery 
and long-term interest rates are on an upward trend. We are at a 
stage where the fear of under-subscription could magnify and a 
safety net might be advisable for the near-term, but attention 
will be focused on what the MOF will decide for the long-term. 


