Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Welt-Nachrichtendienst" report: "Fewer Youths Sentenced"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- The number of minors sentenced for theft 
and embezzlement has declined by 60 percent in 10 years. In a 
response to a grand inquiry by Christian Democratic Union 
[CDU]/Christian Social Union [CSU] and Free Democratic Party of 
Germany [FDP] on the topic "situation of Young People in 
Germany," approved by the Cabinet in Bonn yesterday, FRG Youth 
Minister Angela Merkel said that, on the one hand, this is due 
to the demographic development. On the other, the youth courts 
refrain from sentencing the culprits in particular in case of 
less serious crime and use other kinds of punishment. 
  According to the criminal prosecution statistics, the number 
of young people sentenced for theft and embezzlement declined 
from 41,809 in 1982 to 16,528 in 1991. The number of young 
people sentenced for acts of violence has also declined--from 
8,799 by one-third to 5,937. 
  FRG Justice Minister Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger 
(FDP) 
expressed concern about the "alarmingly high involvement of 
young people in acts of violence with right-wing extremist 
motives and xenophobic crimes." The share of young people up to 
20 years of age in acts of violence with proven or suspected 
right-wing extremist motives amounted to about 69 percent in 
1991 and 67 percent in 1992. From January 1991 to April 1992 
alone this share amounted to 75 percent, the minister reported. 
She stressed that, from the viewpoint of the Federal 
Government, the current criminal law relating to young offenders 
is sufficient also to punish right-wing extremist violent 
crimes. A general tightening of the law is not intended. For 
serious crimes committed by young people a prison term of up to 
10 years is possible. However, this statutory punishment is 
hardly ever imposed. 
  The Cabinet was also presented with figures on young drug 
addicts and alcoholics. The proportion of young alcoholics 
between 18 and 24 years of about 2.5 million alcoholics is 4.6 
percent among men and 3.7 percent among women in the old 
laender. For the new laender there is information available 
only on the proportion of male alcoholics in this age group, 
which is 3.1 percent. 
  The proportion of opiate-addicted young people in the old 
laender is 30 percent of all drug addicts among men and 4 
percent among women. For young people addicted to 
pharmaceuticals the figures are 23 and 14.7 percent respectively. 

