CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Justice Minister Andres Gonzalez; place and </F>
date not given] 
  [Text] Minister of Justice Andres Gonzalez Diaz strongly 
and skillfully defended the new CPP [Criminal Procedures Code], 
which has been sharply criticized in the United States because 
it apparently deals very gently with drug traffickers. 
  Gonzalez said that in the three months it has been in 
effect, 
this Code has not yet had time to demonstrate all its benefits: 
"Among others, it has put an end to the automatic benefits 
criminals used to get." 
  In an interview with EL TIEMPO he also said that the 
excessive legal benefits drug traffickers receive come from old 
laws, most of which were abolished by the new Criminal 
Procedures Code. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Critics of the Criminal Procedures Code still 
say 
it is soft on crime and confused. 
  [Gonzalez] This Code has some fundamental features that 
nobody has emphasized. It has changed the system of benefits. In 
the old system there were automatic sentence reductions: 
Urdinola's attorney showed up and said here is his information, 
then the judge had to grant an automatic reduction without being 
able to evaluate the quality of that information. 
  Now, with the CPP reform, the effects of such information 
are 
not automatic. The Prosecutor General's Office can say: we are 
not interested in that information because it does nothing for 
us, so we are not going to give a significant sentence reduction. 
  The prosecutor can now adjust the reduction from one-sixth 
to 
two-thirds. 
  [EL TIEMPO] The maximum sentence for drug trafficking is 12 
years; then there are all sorts of reductions for good behavior, 
education, family visits, etc. This means that the sentences are 
almost ludicrous, but the Code retains that system. 
  [Gonzalez] The reduction for good behavior and education is 
part of the resocialization process for prisoners. That is a 
good part of the reason why our jails have not exploded like the 
ones in Brazil, Argentina, and Venezuela. It is because people 
are studying or working; that is the only way to resocialize 
prisoners. 
  The problem is abuses in sentencing. For example, some 
criminals ask for a sentence reduction, claiming that they work 
24 hours a day plus Saturdays and Sundays; that is absurd. Mr. 
Mejia Sanin (the first drug trafficker to turn himself in), 
submitted a ridiculous list for work reduction. 
  We also have to realize that the majority of the sentences, 
like those for the Ochoas and Urdinola, for example, were not 
issued under the new Code. If Law 81 (the new CPP) had been in 
effect for Urdinola's case, he would not have gotten such a 
light sentence. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Why? 
  [Gonzalez] Mr. Urdinola is a person who, for all his crimes, 
was given 17.5 years in jail, and that was immediately and 
automatically reduced by 71 months for informing. Now 
prosecutors can graduate sentence reduction benefits. 
  We have to realize that a number of laws preceding the Code 
reform are still being applied; they need a more restrictive 
interpretation. 
  One problem is that Law 30 of 1986 establishes automatic 
sentence reduction benefits for informing. Most of the drug 
traffickers' attorneys have been using that law because it 
provides automatic benefits. The legislators must have realized 
this when it was passed, because of what was going on at that 
time. Still, there are other legal principles that can be 
applied to make it more rational, like the principle of 
proportionality. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What do you mean? 
  [Gonzalez] In each case the method used, the person's 
record, 
and the circumstances need to be considered. There cannot be a 
systematic mathematical interpretation. There must be a complete 
and objective interpretation of the laws. 
  The prosecutor and the judge must distinguish between 
different situations. If a person informs on the role played by 
an employee on his farm, a subordinate, or a minor in the 
commission of a crime, that cannot produce the same effects as 
if the farm worker gave information on a major criminal or the 
head of a criminal organization. 
  People need to realize that the CPP has totally changed the 
system of automatic reductions for a system of flexible and 
discretional reductions. 
  [EL TIEMPO] If the change was as positive as you say, then 
what are the problems with the CPP? 
  [Gonzalez] The problem is that many cases are still being 
tried with the old system. Law 30 of 1986 provides an automatic 
reduction which is certainly not appropriate, and that distorts 
the new Code. 
  [EL TIEMPO] That law is applied because it has not been 
repealed, and in Colombia the principle of "favorability" exists. 
  [Gonzalez] It has been tacitly repealed by Law 81, so it can 
not continue to be applied. If tomorrow Messrs. X, Y, or Z try 
to get Law 30 applied, we believe that can not be done. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Then the judge who applies it can be charged 
with 
professional misconduct? 
  [Gonzalez] We do not have to go that far. The most important 
thing is for us to say, and that is my goal as minister, that we 
have a number of old laws still being applied, and in our view 
this merits reflection on the part of us all--the entire legal 
community, all of the media--so they will not continue to be 
applied. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Why not repeal all that legislation that 
contradicts the new Code? 
  [Gonzalez] No, that would do nothing for us. A tacit and an 
explicit repeal have the same effects, meaning that the old laws 
can no longer be applied. It means that what must be applied is 
the new Code. 
  [EL TIEMPO] With these varied interpretations, what can be 
done to unify standards? 
  [Gonzalez] We have to work together with the Prosecutor 
General's Office, with the Attorney General's Office, to train 
judges and prosecutors and put a stop to this and say, wait a 
minute: legal interpretations granting all sorts of reductions 
with no basis in law cannot continue to be used. 
  I also believe we need to call upon all the judges to make a 
joint stand to fight a very serious problem. The greatest 
service we could do for criminals is to fight among ourselves; 
those people would be delighted. I want all of us to work 
together to support some restrictive interpretation criteria. 
The Supreme Court of Justice and the courts play a very 
important role. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Then Law 30 should not continue to be applied? 
  [Gonzalez] Law 30 is contrary to the new CPP and so it has 
[essentially] been repealed. That law provides automatic 
sentence reductions, and what the new Code contains is flexible 
and discretional, not automatic reductions. 
  There is also another law that should not be used as it 
contradicts the new Code: Law 48 of 1987, which provides a fixed 
reduction of one-sixth for persons who committed crimes before 1 
July 1986. 
  That law should apply only to crimes committed before July 
1986, but sometimes misinterpretations are made. How is it 
possible, I wonder, for a person who committed a crime covered 
by Law 48 of 1987, and who then continues committing crimes 
after that date, to get that benefit? How can a person invoke it 
by saying: "I committed part of the crime before 1986, and get 
benefits under that law? 
  We need a very strict interpretation to avoid applying these 
regulations indiscriminately. Drug traffickers turn themselves 
in and say: "I started to commit crimes when I was very young." 
That sounds like sincerity, but later we may find it was 
designed to get the sentence reduction benefits offered by that 
law. 
  Another factor is also being incorrectly used, and that is 
related to accumulations of automatic reductions. The former CPP 
allowed an automatic accumulation for confessions and for early 
sentencing. That was abolished in the new Code, as two 
reductions can not be given for the same reason. 
  All this explains why sentences are so short: the benefits 
of 
Law 30 of 1986 are applied, plus the accumulation of reductions 
for early sentencing and confession in 90 percent of the cases. 
  [EL TIEMPO] You have discussed the Code's benefits. What are 
its defects? 
  [Gonzalez] Obviously, one cannot deny that there is always 
room for improvement. Perhaps some very specific points should 
be reviewed, but I believe the fundamental reform the Criminal 
Code needs is for the maximum ceilings on penalties to be raised. 
  [EL TIEMPO] You sent a letter to the Prosecutor General 
listing the parameters the government wanted for the policy of 
criminals turning themselves in; you asked, for example, that in 
his confession and information, the person who turns himself in 
must inform on at least three members of his organization. Why 
is that not in the Code? 
  [Gonzalez] Many things are in codes, while others obviously 
depend on the application in each case. A law is by nature 
general, not personal. This Code does provide evaluation 
criteria for confessions. 
  [EL TIEMPO] People say that attorneys working for drug 
traffickers "advised" some members of Congress on the new CPP. 
  [Gonzalez] In each specific case the results of that contact 
and its possible effects need to be evaluated. In Congress there 
were some positions that could have supported such interests; 
most of them were defeated. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Like what positions? 
  [Gonzalez] For example, that prior collaboration might be a 
factor in providing reductions or benefits, in the case of some 
alleged collaboration by the criminals in prosecuting other 
cartels or other criminals. That was rejected both by the 
government and by the Prosecutor General's Office, and Congress 
helped us there. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What was the source of such proposals? 
  [Gonzalez] I could not say exactly the source of such 
proposals, but what I can tell you is that we could clearly 
discern proposals that might favor some special interests, and 
we worked against them. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Is a formal investigation being conducted? 
  [Gonzalez] There are groups both in Congress and in the 
judiciary with the authority to investigate that. 
  [EL TIEMPO] And are you, as minister, waiting to see what 
they will say? 
  [Gonzalez] As minister, I believe we need to do everything 
we 
can to clear up this matter. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Have you formally requested this? 
  [Gonzalez] I understand this information has started to come 
out, even at the initiative of some persons connected with those 
actions. 

