BFN 

  [Text] The Legislative Assembly yesterday approved the full 
Drug Law aimed at combating drug trafficking. This law provides 
judicial ruling for attention to drug addicts who, instead of 
prison terms, will be provided with rehabilitation. This will 
be an obligation of the Nicaraguan State. 
  The law, approved by a majority of votes, provides that 
those 
who are not authorized to cultivate or harvest seeds or plants 
from which psychotropic substances are obtained will be punished 
with a prison term ranging from three to 12 years and a 
3,000-50,000 cordoba fine. 
  The legislation provides sentences for those who stock drugs 
as well as for those who promote and encourage their 
consumption. The sentence could be increased up to double for 
those who induce minors. The deputies fixed sentences that 
range from 15-30 years and fines of up to 5 million cordobas for 
drug trafficking chiefs. 
  Deputy Doris Tijerino, president of the parliamentary drug 
committee, said that the law provides for lean sentences for 
those who, because of necessity, become victims of drugs while 
she reiterated the state's obligation to arrange for the 
rehabilitation of drug addicts. The deputy gave as an example 
(with regard to the fines that drug traffickers should pay) that 
the fines imposed by the police are serving to improve the 
salaries of the police officers who earn meager salaries. 
  The Assembly resolved that the fines collected by the state 
for drug-related crimes should be allocated to the 
rehabilitation of drug addicts and that these fines should be 
heavy when it is a matter of individuals who obtain economic 
benefits through the trafficking. 
  As of 1990, Nicaragua started to become a sort of 
"springboard" or "transfer" [preceding word in English] of 
cocaine from the south, by South American drug cartels. This 
situation has put on alert the government, the community, and 
the very legislators even though the police force--with the 
support of the DEA--has staged significant drug busts on 
Nicaraguan territory. 
  Nongovernmental organizations that give attention to persons 
addicted to drugs such as cocaine, crack, marijuana, and others, 
have indicated that in our country there are approximately 
300,000 persons who consume various types of drugs. 

