Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Dr. Ghazi al-Qusaybi, the Saudi ambassador to 
Britain, denied "categorically" the truth of reports circulated 
by the Western media concerning a Saudi Arabian effort to obtain 
loans to pay off the state's general budget deficit. He asserted 
that "these reports have absolutely no basis in fact. There are 
no negotiations between Saudi Arabia and any Western or 
non-Western banking institution to obtain loans." 
  In an interview conducted by the Arab Department of the 
British Broadcasting Company (BBC) and broadcast on 17 December 
1993, al-Qusaybi said: "The Kingdom has not requested any loans 
from international or financial institutions." He made it clear 
that the "only foreign loan that the Kingdom had previously 
obtained was $4.5 billion. That amount was loaned to the Kingdom 
from abroad, and there is no other loan." 
  Regarding the deficit in Saudi Arabia's general budget, 
al-Qusaybi said: "It is strange that people are discussing it 
now, when in the past six or seven years there has been a 
disparity between expenditures and revenue in the budget. The 
disparity was financed by domestic loans. That was no secret. 
The new matter is that the Kingdom has had to defray huge 
amounts, estimated at $55 billion, which were caused by the Gulf 
crisis. Despite that, it has been able to overcome the crisis." 
  As to the statement of sources of the Bank of International 
Settlements, to the effect that up to November 1993, Saudi 
Arabia had borrowed $2.2 billion, the ambassador said: "In 
recent years the International Settlements Bank has imposed 
standards for the percentage of indebtedness, either domestic or 
foreign, as a kind of guideline, so that the percentage of 
indebtedness should not exceed 60 percent of the gross national 
product. The fact is that the Kingdom's foreign and domestic 
debts, as the bank knows, has not even come close to 60 
percent." Al-Qusaybi reaffirmed that "the Kingdom's foreign 
debts do not exceed $4.5 billion." 
  Ambassador al-Qusaybi said: "The Kingdom has not been 
waiting 
for anyone to express concern or to inform it about its 
responsibilities in this regard." He added that the pressure of 
governmental spending is constant, referring to the fact that it 
is within the context of the government's desire not to do 
anything harmful to the citizens. 
  In response to a question concerning a drop in individual 
income in the Kingdom, al-Qusaybi stated: "The true measure is 
measuring the percentage of inflation. I think that the rate of 
inflation in Saudi Arabia is one of the lowest percentages in 
the world." Regarding the decline of oil prices and the 
influence of that on the Kingdom's economy, the Saudi ambassador 
said: "I believe that we cannot be governed by the day-to-day 
price of oil. Certainly, OPEC will take measures to guarantee 
that the price of oil remains at a reasonable level. What 
happened this week must not, in any case, be a measurement for 
what the oil situation will be in the coming months." 

