BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent Konstantin Zhukovskiy] </F>
  [Text] Moscow, 18 May -- I am very satisfied with my visit 
to this splendid country, Argentinian Foreign Minister Guido Di 
Tella stated. Russia has never before enjoyed such respect, has 
never before evoked such sympathy in the world as it does today, 
he stressed in an interview with the ITAR-TASS correspondent. 
  Touching on the talks held in Moscow, the minister reported 
that an exchange of visits was discussed, in particular a trip 
to Moscow by Argentinian President Carlos Menem at the end of 
October this year. It is expected that documents on investment 
guarantees will be signed during his visit, and a mechanism for 
mutual credits will also be discussed at last, Di Tella reported 
to journalists after making a speech at the Diplomtic Academy of 
the Russian Foreign Ministry. We very much want to have close 
relations with the new Russia, he stressed. 
  Yesterday the Argentinian minister met Mikhail Mityukov, 
first deputy chairman of the State Duma, and Vladimir Shumeyko, 
chairman of the Federation Council. An exchange of opinions on 
the two countries' home and foreign policy took place. 
  The same day, the secretary for foreign economic relations 
of 
the Foreign Ministry of Argentina, who is accompanying Di Tella, 
met Arkadiy Volskiy, head of the Russian Union of Industrialists 
and Entrepreneurs. During the conversation the crisis situation 
in the Russian economy and the shortage of currency resources 
were discussed. The sides agreed on setting up a a system of 
compensation in bilateral trade. The day before that the South 
American businessmen were received at the Russian Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Relations. 
  The Argentinian entrepreneurs were very satisfied with the 
meetings held here since they saw Russia's enormous 
opportunities, Di Tella said today. Russia is and will remain a 
great world power, and the changes that are happening here are 
opening up huge prospects for its cooperation with all countries 
throughout the world, including Argentina, he stressed. 
  This evening the Argentinian minister is leaving Moscow for 
home. 

