Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Admiral Mario Cesar Flores, secretary of </F>
strategic affairs, by Carlos Chagas of MANCHETE; place and date 
not given; first three paragraphs are MANCHETE introduction] 
  [Text] Common sense and democratic sentiments. The 
combination of those two attributes makes Admiral Mario Cesar 
Flores, secretary of strategic affairs, an example of the right 
person in the right place. The image the country became 
accustomed to between 1964 and 1985--that of the truculent and 
radical, albeit well-intentioned, military officer--has been 
left behind. Now there is a new generation of general officers 
who, since the New Republic, have been exemplary in performing 
their duties, the primary one being to guarantee and preserve 
democracy and see that it is upheld. 
  In an exclusive interview with MANCHETE, Admiral Flores, 
without mincing words, discussed the question of threats against 
the regime and rejected the fujimorization theory, as did the 
minister of justice two weeks ago, using a very simple argument: 
there are no Fujimoris in Brazil; President Itamar Franco's 
democratic convictions are above all suspicion; and furthermore, 
the Armed Forces will not support or tolerate a breach of 
institutional normality. 
  The strategic affairs secretary also talked about such 
subjects as the defense of our borders, the internationalization 
of Amazonia, Indian tribes, and the role of Brazil on the world 
stage. Flores notes that history has always featured crises and 
confusion when a nation that holds military leadership is losing 
economic leadership, so it is preferable to try to achieve an 
equilibrium between the two powers. 
  [Chagas] Former President Fernando Collor abolished the SNI 
[National Intelligence Service] and was unanimously applauded 
here for his action, but that left the government without an 
intelligence body to support the Office of President of Brazil. 
Does the Strategic Affairs Secretariat play that role? 
  [Admiral Flores] The duties of the SAE are broader than that 
of a mere successor to the SNI, which was created as a healthy 
and well-conceived organization. It was only with the passage of 
time that the SNI acquired vices and distortions and performed 
functions inconsistent with the mere gathering, analysis, and 
dissemination of intelligence. With the Collor government's 
administrative reform came the abolition of the SNI and the 
creation of the SAE, which has an intelligence department. This 
is insufficient. In my opinion, the SNI needed corrective 
surgery, but its abolition did not solve the problem. There is 
still a need for intelligence. There is a preliminary proposal 
being studied in the administration that would rebuild an 
autonomous intelligence body suited to the democratic regime we 
live under. Sooner or later the intelligence area will be 
separated from the SAE, but the important thing is to 
rationalize that activity and its procedures on the basis of 
democracy. 
  [Chagas] A lot has been said about the possibility of coups 
and the adoption of anti-democratic measures, including 
fujimorization. Does that danger exist? 
  [Admiral Flores] The SAE has not detected anything 
concerning 
fujimorization. The press has published reports on the subject. 
There is not the least chance of this, for two reasons. The 
first is that President Itamar Franco has deep-rooted democratic 
convictions. The other is that these things do not happen 
without the support, or at least the tolerance, of the military. 
And the armed forces are committed to the democratic experiment. 
  [Chagas] What about the various groups of military 
reservists 
who preach nondemocratic solutions in manifestoes and 
proclamations? 
  [Admiral Flores] Those groups are made up of patriotic and 
well-intentioned people who envision solutions to this nation's 
problems that are impossible to implement. I believe they should 
keep doing what they are doing; it serves as incentive for us to 
concern ourselves with national problems. But I do not see how 
the consequence of the activities of those organizations can be 
a breakdown of institutions in this country. 
  [Chagas] And what about the anger of the multitudes? And do 
the active military share those diagnoses? 
  [Admiral Flores] I confess that I still do not quite 
understand what General Leonel meant to say. I imagine he was 
referring to the fact that in the past 15 years the Armed Forces 
have been relegated to a very dangerously low degree of 
priority, because their training has been declining in quality 
and the renovation of military equipment leaves a lot to be 
desired. We are not keeping pace with the technological 
developments seen in the rest of the world. Then there is the 
parallel problem of pay scales. What is happening to military 
pay lately is brutal. The same is true of public servants in 
general, with few exceptions. 
  [Chagas] They say an elevator operator in the Congress 
building earns more than the pilot of a Mirage. 
  [Admiral Flores] I have heard it is more worthwhile to pilot 
an elevator in the Congress than to fly a Mirage. I never 
compared the two, but the disproportions are enormous. That 
leads to dissatisfaction, but there is no reason at all for 
dissatisfaction to translate into institutional concern. We are 
a country that is battling difficulties, whose people are poor. 
We have to understand that the military cannot be a privileged 
class. But that sacrifice must be shared equally with all public 
servants. 
  [Chagas] Would you admit that there is a possibility that 
the 
military, especially the younger men, might be receptive to the 
preachings of the PT [Workers Party]? 
  [Admiral Flores] The military are citizens. There are 
probably many who, as citizens, follow the arguments of the PT 
with affection and attention. Just as there are others who do 
not. It is not in any way desirable that the military should 
link up with political parties. I still remember that 40 years 
ago, the military's excessive tendency to follow the UDN 
[National Democratic Union] did not yield results that can be 
termed excellent. 
  [Chagas] Many people imagine that the Amazon region is in 
danger, at the mercy of a foreign invader, or threatened with 
internationalization. Do you agree that there are grounds for 
those fears? 
  [Admiral Flores] I do not believe those threats exist. 
Obviously, we are seeing a worldwide sensitivity on the subject 
of the Amazon region. There are correct views, and many 
inaccurate ones. Myths have been created about the region. The 
world is worried about the Amazon, but that does not mean there 
are risks or--for example--threats of military action. What 
there is, is a tendency to condition international bodies--the 
World Bank for example--to support Brazilian projects provided 
they are subordinated to certain attitudes about Amazonia. 
  [Chagas] Isn't that subordination an affront to our 
sovereignty? 
  [Admiral Flores] The world is moving toward curbing the 
concept of sovereignty. If we want international support for 
Brazilian plans, we have to understand certain restrictive 
factors. It is a two-way street. Those interferences must be 
negotiated and, to the extent possible, reduced so that the 
balance is favorable for Brazil. 
  [Chagas] We have seen documents from other countries that 
suggest that autonomous territories, separate from Brazil, be 
created for Indian nations. What about this? 
  [Admiral Flores] Well, we could not agree to that in any 
form. The Indian areas must not be converted to tribal 
territories. That would be unacceptable. We have to accept the 
idea of demarcation of Indian lands to protect the tribal 
cultures, but the question is a complex one. In recent years it 
has become surrounded with a lot of emotion, spurred on by 
various interests, including foreign ones, concerned about 
conservation of natural resources as a reserve for the future. 
We have to take another look at the issue of Indian land 
demarcation because there are Indians, and then there are 
Indians. There are Indians who are still in the neolithic phase 
and perhaps want to stay that way. They deserve to have their 
lands marked off and to get special protection from the state. 
But then there are other Indians who exploit their reservation 
in a capitalistic fashion. Some chiefs have their own airplanes. 
So the rules should not be merely anthropological. We have to 
take into account the degree of acculturation and integration 
into society. An Indian who makes his living from a small farm 
whose products are sold in a nearby town is, in fact, a rural 
citizen and should be treated that way. Still, the demarcation 
of his territory needs to be generous, because his farming 
techniques are probably rudimentary. But the same 
anthropological rule cannot be adopted for that Indian as for 
the neolithic tribes, which need much larger expanses of land. 
  [Chagas] Should separatism be considered as nonsense, or 
might it represent a threat? 
  [Admiral Flores] I see no danger at all. These are 
manifestations of ideologized minorities that do not reflect the 
views of the people of those very regions, who are Brazilian and 
want to remain Brazilian. I don't waste time on that. 
  [Chagas] Are there strategic concerns with our neighbors 
across the border? 
  [Admiral Flores] In terms of relations with our neighbors, 
the situation is pretty calm. In South America, the risks we 
might face on our borders would result from illegal activities, 
not from conflicts between states. By illegal activities I am 
referring to the narcotics traffic, the production of drugs, and 
the guerrillas in the neighboring countries who could extend 
their activities into Brazilian territory as an alleged 
sanctuary. Those things can happen, although not supported, and 
even opposed, by the governments of the neighboring countries. 
So, in state-to-state terms, I do not see any threat of 
conflicts in South America. 
  [Chagas] And what about the world situation? 
  [Admiral Flores] I think it is rather unstable. We are 
seeing 
conflicts all over the world--although, oddly enough, very few 
in the Americas despite all the socioeconomic difficulties we 
are experiencing. Brazil's role in world conflicts will always 
be one of cooperation with international organizations. Our size 
cannot be ignored, we have influence, and that influence brings 
with it a responsibility for participating in the world order. I 
would be sympathetic to having the Brazilian armed forces better 
prepared to render assistance in the world under the mandate of 
an international organization. 
  [Chagas] The fall of the Berlin Wall and the dissolution of 
the Soviet Union ended bipolarity in the world. There is only 
one superpower, a new Rome, and it dictates its interests, even 
militarily. Has that made our situation worse? 
  [Admiral Flores] Although I have little nostalgia for the 
vanished bipolarity, I recognize that unipolarity is not good 
for the other nations. At any rate, I do not really subscribe to 
the theory that the world today is unipolar. Perhaps it is so 
strategically, from the military standpoint--but even then, I 
say this with reservations. Russia is very well armed. Western 
Europe is a military power. Certainly there is no doubt that the 
great military power, the world's strategic referee, is the 
United States. But from the economic standpoint it is not alone; 
in fact, it has been losing ground. A situation in which the 
biggest military power is not the biggest economic power has 
never worked out well. History shows us that confusion always 
occurs whenever there is a disassociation between those two 
factors. The military power reacts militarily against the loss 
of status in the economic sector. I would look favorably on an 
improved military capability in Western Europe, not to counter 
the United States, but to balance things. 
  [Chagas] Where does Japan fit in our equation? 
  [Admiral Flores] Japan enjoys a pleasant situation, one that 
it can invest all its resources in economic development, 
protected by the American umbrella to the extent that its 
adversary was the Soviet Union. Japan is, without any doubt, the 
shining focal point of a Pacific economic sphere. To a certain 
extent, what is happening is extremely curious, and ironic as 
well, because Japan tried to accomplish this by force in 1942. 
The Asiatic prosperity sphere is now being run peacefully, and 
under the leadership of the Japanese. Sooner or later, that is 
going to interfere with the better preparedness of the Japanese 
and their associates for military action. The unknown factor in 
the region is China. What is China's role? If it should come to 
terms with Japan, we are going to see an extraordinary power. 
Who knows whether the 21st century might be the century of the 
Pacific, as many people say it will? 
  [Chagas] President Itamar Franco puts a lot of faith in an 
integration between Brazil and China. Doesn't distance work 
against that? 
  [Admiral Flores] It is an obstacle, but the alliance is 
workable, given the potentials of the two countries. It looks as 
though our closer relationships in technological terms will be 
successful very quickly, especially in the field of satellites. 
  [Chagas] Lula would be elected president if the elections 
were held today. Bahia Governor Antonio Carlos Magalhaes 
predicts there will be a coup six months after the PT candidate 
takes office. Would you agree? 
  [Admiral Flores] I see no reason to. In politics, it is one 
thing to be a candidate, but something else to govern. Whether 
Luis Inacio da Silva or someone else is the victor, when he 
takes over he will find that the restrictions imposed by the 
responsibility will force the process to evolve in a controlled 
and moderated manner. We will not be taking a leap in the dark. 
At least at the moment, I do not envision any institutional 
earthquake. 
  [Chagas] The president of Brazil is having trouble imposing 
the rule that no one in government service can earn more than 
the equivalent of 90 percent of the salary received by a 
minister of state. Isn't that absurd? 
  [Admiral Flores] Corporativism is a national affliction. The 
Judiciary refused to uphold the application of that rule to the 
state enterprises because they are governed by labor law. But 
they should also be governed by tax law. And despite the 
position taken by the courts, there is still the ethical 
question. It is absurd for an employee of a company that is 
owned by the common people to earn more than the president of 
Brazil. Things cannot go on this way. In a poor country like 
ours, there is no justification for a public servant to be paid 
100 times the minimum monthly wage. 

