Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Angel Paez, of the Investigative Unit; first of </F>
a series on "the drug trafficking families"] 
  [Text] Intelligence reports from the National Police 
Antidrug Division note that of the 13 Chavez Penaherrera 
brothers and sisters, five have leading roles within the group 
led by their brother Demetrio, who is also known as "Loco 
Limonier." 
  The Army has similar information incriminating the Chavez 
Penaherrera brothers and sisters in the illegal trafficking of 
drugs. 
  Following a painstaking investigation conducted in the Upper 
Huallaga region in November 1991, an undercover agent named 
"Chaname" pointed out in his report No. 016-91 that in 
Campanilla, the main operations center of "Vaticano," the latter 
"is openly engaged in drug trafficking and is not intimidated by 
the presence of the FFOO (security forces) as he allegedly acts 
`in collusion' with them." The report further states that he is 
not in this business by himself "(but rather) in partnership 
with his brothers and sisters." 
  Second in importance to "Vaticano" is Jose Humberto, alias 
"Calavera" or "Colombo," born in Saposoa on 18 March 1951, a 
tropical music fan and director of the "Caribe Show" band. 
  According to police reports, "Calavera" has been in charge 
of 
the shipments of cocaine paste--which according to police 
estimates totalled 96,000 kg last year--since his brother 
Demetrio fled the country in 1992 to settle in Cali under the 
protection of his bosses Gilberto and Miguel Rodriguez Orejuela. 
  "Calavera" was also in charge of managing drug processing 
laboratories and landing strips built by the drug mafia, 
especially that of Campanilla. 
  This village, located in the San Martin region where drug 
traffickers named "Cocinero," "Wicho Perez," "Negro Coco," 
"Nacional," "Azul," "Max," "Chirapo," and "Gustavo" worked for 
Demetrio Chavez, was raided by the police on 24 July 1990. 
During that operation 350 kg of cocaine paste, weapons, and 
communications systems were seized. 
  But the coca industry continued to prosper on account of the 
"arrangements with the forces of order" referred to by 
"Chaname," the Army intelligence agent. This information was 
confirmed by another officer, commander "Alfonso," 
political-military chief of Tocache in 1992. 
  In his "Intelligence Note" No. 32-S2-BCS26 "Alfonso" 
recounted "the illegal activities carried out by 
countersubversive base No. 30 stationed in the town of 
Campanilla." 
  "Alfonso" was precise: "It has been verified that the 
Peruvian Army men (from the countersubversive base) live in 
collusion with drug traffickers, especially with the `Limonel' 
firm. They dedicate themselves to sending airplanes full of 
coca paste to Colombia." 
  With such agreement, "Vaticano" could do what he wanted. It 
is even said that on 17 January 1991 a Colombian Air Force plane 
landed in Campanilla and loaded 3 tons of cocaine paste and that 
Demetrio and his brother "Calavera" personally supervised the 
operation without being bothered by anyone. 
  In April 1992, combined Army, National Police forces, and 
U.S. DEA [Drug Enforcement Administration] members, again 
entered Campanilla. This time they confiscated 281 kg of cocaine 
paste--worth approximately $3 million--and arrested Victor Perez 
Pinedo, Luis Perez Aguilar, Esteiter Caballero Fernandez, and 
Rusbar Carbajal Gonzalez, who confessed they worked for 
"Vaticano" and acknowledged that "Calavera" was his right hand. 
  An Army officer who participated in the operation told "LA 
REPUBLICA" that "if it had not been for a leak, we would have 
captured `Vaticano.' Unfortunately there was a well paid 
informer among the people who participated in the operation." 
<H5>  Faithful Until the End </H5>
  After this operation Demetrio Chavez fled to Colombia and 
left the administration of the business to his brother Jose 
Humberto. 
  "Calavera" or "Colombo" also participated in the murder of 
Adolfo Isuiza Urquia, a journalist from the radio stations 
"Superior" in Juanjui and "Tropical" in Tarapoto. 
  In one of his last programs, on 17 July 1992, the brave 
journalist who denounced the scheme between the security forces 
and the "firm" of "Vaticano" said: "The famous `Vaticano' and 
his brother Jose Humberto do not want a centimeter of the 
landing strip they have in Campanilla District to be touched." 
[no closing quotation marks as published] 
  A few weeks later, on 23 August 1993, Isuiza was murdered by 
"Chacal" and "Lagartija," two hired killers who were also 
eliminated by order of Demetrio Limonier so as not to leave any 
evidence of his connection to the disappearance of the 
journalist. 
  On 4 December 1993 the combined forces of the National 
Police 
and the DEA again entered Campanilla and on this occasion they 
caught "Calavera" red-handed in a cocaine paste processing 
laboratory. 
  Although he attempted to escape from his captors as soon as 
he saw them arriving in a helicopter, he is now imprisoned in 
Juanjui. 
  Nearly a year earlier, on 7 January 1993, the police 
detected 
that, by order of "Vaticano," a stretch of the marginal highway 
was being repaired very near Campanilla, in Balsayacu, to turn 
it into a clandestine landing strip. The repairs were being 
supervised by none other than "Calavera." 
  Jose Humberto Chavez Penaherrera was one of the names 
mentioned by Colombian Manuel Guillermo Cruz Ayala, arrested on 
23 March 1993 during a police operation that ended with the 
destruction of a laboratory and a landing strip in the town of 
Nueva Jerusalen del Erene, Caballococha Province, near the 
Colombian border. 
  Cruz Ayala also mentioned "Vaticano" and Bertha Chavez 
Penaherrera, alias "La Calena" or "Perla Fina" arrested by the 
Antidrug Division on 24 September 1993 in her home in Surco, 
Lima. 
  At the moment of her arrest "La Calena," who was born on 30 
July 1959 in Saposoa, was accompanied by her lover Marco Ivan 
Luna Victoria Rivera, 26, summoned by El Callao Supreme Court 
for illegal drug trafficking. 
  Luna Victoria Rivera, a member of the gang of Julio Cesar 
Rodriguez Hurtado, is at large. Rodriguez Hurtado was turned in 
by Belgian citizen Michel Depoorter Decroos who was arrested in 
March 1990 at the Jorge Chavez International Airport with 10 kg 
of pure cocaine, "merchandise" he intended to transport to 
Luxembourg. 
<H5>  The Contact </H5>
  Since then, Luna Victoria Rivera has been wanted by the 
police but "La Calena" has told "LA REPUBLICA" that she did not 
know he was wanted by justice. 
  "He never told me that," she said. 
  But that was not the only amorous relationship she had with 
people linked with the drug trafficking business. According to 
the Dirandro [Antidrug Division] she also lived with Colombian 
citizen Jorge Rodriguez, a drug trafficker with whom she had two 
sons and who died as consequence of a vendetta in Cali in 1980. 
  Personal documents belonging to "Vaticano" were also found 
in 
the home of Bertha Chavez Penaherrera. These documents include 
his voting document, his birth certificate, and a false penal 
certificate in which he appears clean from any police record. 
  "La Calena" told our newspaper that she has not seen her 
brother Demetrio Limonier for 10 years and Jose Humberto for 
eight years and that a stranger had left "Vaticano's" documents 
in her house although she refused to receive them. 
  In the same Dirandro report of March 1993, Bertha Chavez is 
linked with the activities of her brother Demetrio. 
  Army sources state that she "moved nearly 500 kg of cocaine 
base every 15 days, taking the drug from one place to another, 
but within the same zone, in an operation which drug traffickers 
call `disorientation'" [trasteo]. 
  According to the same information obtained in the Upper 
Huallaga region, Saposoa was the operations center of "La 
Calena" who competed in the area with drug trafficker "Lucho 
Culon," of Cajamarca, "Nino" and "Clavo," of Pucallpa, and 
"Tolima," "Azul," and "Leo," of Colombia. 
  In a paid ad published only a few weeks ago in some Lima 
newspapers, Bertha Chavez denied any link with the drug 
trafficking business and maintained that the Dirandro had forged 
this lie about her by inventing information linking her with 
"Vaticano." 
  She said that if she were wanted by justice "I would present 
myself immediately" but "La Calena" has left Lima and her family 
will not provide any information about her current whereabouts. 
  Bertha Chavez, who upon being arrested was transferred to 
the 
Iquitos prison because she had been summoned by the court of 
Maynas, was released on 26 November 1993. Prosecutor Teresa 
Porras Carrion and Maynas Provincial Judge Jaime Cardenas 
Fonseca agreed that the testimony of Colombian citizen Cruz 
Ayala was "not enough evidence" to keep her under arrest, so she 
was released. 
  But the documents that were found with her provided the 
police with more details about the movements of "Vaticano" who 
was preparing his Colombian naturalization. 
  Another piece of information that compromises "La Calena" is 
the testimony of "Juan Pablo," an Army major who carried out 
antidrug operations in the Upper Huallaga region in 1992. 
  According to "Juan Pablo," she came to his house in Lima and 
invited him to go to a restaurant in Costa Verde for a drink. 
There, Bertha Chavez Penaherrera offered: "To move the 
helicopter (he was responsible for) and money to protect 
Campanilla. She told me: `Do not touch Campanilla and we will 
give you a monthly payment.'" 
  The officer's testimony was passed to U.S. Embassy officials 
in Lima who in turn reported it to U.S. Assistant Secretary for 
Inter-American Affairs Alexander Watson, who is visiting Peru on 
a special mission. 
  Another sister of Demetrio is Bersabe, born on 7 November 
1956, also in Saposoa, San Martin, and also a member of his drug 
trafficking gang. 
  According to police sources, she was the link between the 
coca producing zones and Lima, where she carried out financial 
duties and purchased chemical components to manufacture cocaine 
paste. 
  When asked about her sister "La Calena" she said that "she 
always visits me" and that she had told her that their brother 
"Calavera" owns "a cattle ranch and a musical band." 
  On that occasion Bertha had told "LA REPUBLICA" that 
"Vaticano" is the fourth of 13 brothers and sisters and that he 
had left home when he was 14 years old. 
  Another member of the family is Elias Chavez Penaherrera 
also 
identified as a member of the gang by the Antidrug Division. 
  Elias uses the alias "Lan Chile" and is in charge of 
stocking 
cocaine base balls. He is currently at large. 
  The Dirandro has also established that another Chavez 
Penaherrera known as "Fierro" is involved in his brother's 
organization. 
  U.S. Embassy antinarcotics officials have told LA REPUBLICA 
that they have information about the Chavez Penaherrera family's 
network but they refuse to give any details in order to 
guarantee the investigations carried out in coordination with 
the Dirandro. 
  The Chavez Penaherrera family, like many other Andean 
immigrants, was one of the first to settle in Saposoa. 
  The parents, Juan Pablo Chavez Vargas and Rosa Penaherrera 
Izquierdo, began as modest farmers and cattle raisers on a small 
plot of land. 
  Only a few of their children dedicated themselves to cattle 
raising and agriculture. Faced with the flourishing drug 
business, Demetrio Limonier, Jose Humberto, Bertha, Bersabe, 
Elias, and the "Fierro" preferred, according to the 
antinarcotics forces, to organize the most powerful drug 
trafficking gang. 
  There are still some other organizations run by families, 
like that of Waldo Simeon Vargas Arias, alias "El Ministro" and 
that of Abelardo Cachique Rivera, both as important as that of 
"Vaticano" and still untouchable. 

