CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by O. Lystopad: "A Morgue with 900,000 People"] </F>
  [Text]Everything looks decent on the outside. There 
are no corpses on the streets and no one is writhing in terminal 
agony. The residents of the city go about their affairs or wait 
patiently in queues. You can see smiles and lovers kissing in 
oblivion of their surroundings. But you have merely to glance at 
the famous Zaporizhstal, a factory devoted to iron alloys, and 
Dnieper electrode works to be convinced that the city has no 
future. 
  Zoporizhzhya is squeezed between two industrial malls. From 
whenever the wind blows it carries poison. In calm times all the 
effluent from the smokestacks settles on the plants themselves. 
Viewing the passing scenery in going to Pavlo-Kichkas by a 
trolley you'll see the irregular plant building covered by white 
powder, changing to gray, black, brown or green, depending on 
what is being produced. 
  A lot of people live close to the plants thanks to Stalin's 
dictum that "The Soviet worker should be able to walk to work." 
As if that is not enough, the location of a children's 
sanatorium and a tuberculosis hospital in such a setting 
underscores this lunacy. 
  While other parts of the city appear cleaner, entering any 
of 
the industrial plants is not recommended. At the plant producing 
abrasives you'll encounter, in addition to black- and red-dyed 
workers, skin colors that evolution has not been able to produce 
in a million years. 
  Statistics confirm the visual impression of a terminally ill 
city. The "National Lecture on Environmental Conditions in 
Ukraine" shows that during the past decade air levels of dust, 
nitrogen dioxide, phenols, benz(a)pyrene, and formaldehyde in 
Zaporizhzhya exceeded threshold limit values. Formaldehyde 
emissions increase every year, showing an almost three-fold jump 
in 1991. 
  I shall use formaldehyde to explain what is happening. My 
career started at the Chair of Topographic Anatomy of the 
Zaporizhzhya Medical Institute where students came to improve 
their surgical skills on cadavers. The department had its own 
little morgue and used formaldehyde to preserve the cadavers. 
Because we had to work with formalin, a highly toxic 40 percent 
solution of formaldehyde in water, we received extra milk and 
pay. By analogy, when it rains, Zaporizhzhya is bathed in 
formalin and transformed into a huge morgue. 
  Interestingly enough, official and unofficial findings 
coincide. The spring before last Greenpeace Ukraine borrowed 
mobile laboratories and personnel from Germany for a week of 
round-the-clock air monitoring for dust, and sulfur, nitrogen 
and carbon oxides. In Zaporizhzhya the concentrations of 
nitrogen oxides were lower than in Hamburg, Munich and 
Berlin--cities with greater industrial development--but dust 
levels were far greater in Zaporizhzhya. At the "Zaporizhstal" 
ferroalloy and electric blast furnace plant some 30 percent of 
the emissions are untreated, a figure reaching 70 percent at the 
coke chemical plant. At other plants pollution control equipment 
is in disrepair: at the aluminum plant 30 percent of the 
equipment is either not working or ineffective. Moreover, such 
equipment is often turned off for reasons of economy. 
  In some advanced countries pollution control measures simply 
consisted of taking water at a safe distance from the site of 
sewage discharge. In view of the volume of waste waters in 
Zaporizhzhya such an approach is virtually impossible. Municipal 
water treatment plants are overwhelmed and inefficient, and an 
accident a couple of years ago led to direct discharge of 
untreated sewage into the Dnieper, resulting in some very fat 
bullheads. 
  There is a tributary of the Dnieper called red river, which 
is spelled with a small letter to reflect its color since it 
carries effluent from a metallurgical plant. Combined with the 
contributions from other plants, the Dnieper reservoir now 
boasts concentrations of copper and zinc that exceed threshold 
limit values 15- to 25-fold, while the excess of phenols is on 
the order of 2- to 6-fold. When you drink this water you can 
almost physically feel the development of intestinal cancer. 
Then, of course, petrochemicals add an aroma all of their own. 
These factors led the Ministry of Nature Protection to describe 
one of the local rivers, Mokra Moskovka, as having an "ecosystem 
with elements of regression." In other words, the river is dying 
and taking the popular "Dubovyy Hay" park with it. 
  Only Khortytsya, an island in the middle of the city is left 
for recreation. But it is suffering from an overabundance of 
visitors, a factor not lost on children. They proposed a project 
to protect Khortytsya and won a prize at the All-Ukrainian 
Children's Ecological Congress. But they don't make the rules, 
their recommendations don't count, and the island continues to 
deteriorate. Kaniv Reservoir has also made it presence felt: 
700-year old oaks in "Dubovyy Hay" are dying because of 
inundation. 
  Finally, veritable acid rain factories have been located in 
the proximity of Zaporizhzhya. They include the Zaporizhzhya 
DRES which annually emits 50 tonnes of nitrogen oxides and 130 
tonnnes of sulfur oxides into the atmosphere, and the 
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power station that continually provides a 
powerful head of steam. A slight wind in the right direction 
assures the city an acid cocktail! 
  Those living in Zaporizhzhya have grown used to these 
horrors. But what are they to do if their living depends on the 
industry and the cost of pollution control measures are 
prohibitive? Our pockets are empty and foreign investors are 
reticent to invest if the economic climate is uncertain. The 
parliament could care less about these conditions and ecology. 
Everything boils down to who is more patriotic and whether their 
work is hindered more by the president or the cabinet. 
Hopefully, the new deputies will be more ecologically aware. 

