Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 16 Mar (PL) -- Ricardo Alarcon and Pedro 
Ross, the top leaders of the parliament and of the Cuban Workers 
Federation (CTC), respectively, today expressed their confidence 
that current consultations with the labor union rank and file 
will contribute to resolving the nation's finances. 
  When questioned on this issue, Alarcon told PRENSA LATINA: I 
think these have facilitated reaching a consensus on certain 
actions of a national character that must be taken, and, with 
this goal in mind, identifying solutions in each work center. 
  Since the end of January, the CTC has been holding 
assemblies 
in its more than 80,000 rank and file organizations so the 
workers may express their opinions and make proposals on facing 
up to Cuba's serious financial woes. 
  Official figures indicate that more than 10 billion pesos -- 
equal to the same amount in dollars at the official exchange 
rate -- in excess cash and a fiscal deficit of more than 4.2 
billion are factors that have turned into major destabilizers of 
the Cuban economy. The economy is facing its most difficult 
moment in the past 30 years. 
  In practical terms, the president of the National Assembly 
said the consultation process has allowed thousands of specific 
measures to emerge while other ideas are currently being applied 
in many parts of the Island. 
  Meanwhile, Ross stressed that the process has surpassed the 
labor leaders' expectations given the depth of the workers 
suggestions and the proposals to solve the problems. 
  He indicated that there was a high rate of attendance at the 
assemblies, more than 86 percent. He explained that important 
solutions have already been adopted to specifically solve the 
companies' finances, thanks to their own workers' initiative. 
  Ross added that the matters of national character are being 
analyzed and collected to be handed over to the government's and 
parliament's highest levels for consideration. 
  All suggestions will be taken into account, from those that 
counted in the opinion of the majority to those that were 
proposed by a single worker, he noted. 
  The National Assembly has slated for this year one special 
session to analyze the situation of internal finances and to 
adopt measures to correct these. These measures, according to 
legislators and government, are not removed from the principles 
of social justice currently in force in Cuba. 

