CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Patricia Winckelmann-Zilliacus: "Prototype for </F>
Finland's First Satellite Ready"] 
  [Text] The aerospace technology laboratory at the Technical 
University is well on its way toward constructing and building 
Finland's first satellite. It involves a microsatellite which, 
according to preliminary plans, will be launched in 1998 with 
the European launch rocket Ariane 4. 
  The microsatellite, which is called HUTSAT (Helsinki 
University of Technology Satellite), already exists in the form 
of a prototype which at the moment is on public display, hanging 
from the ceiling of the Heureka Science Center in Vanda. 
  "The prototype is the first phase of the project. Now we 
will 
conduct negotiations with our financial backers, the Technical 
University and Finland's Academy, regarding resources for phase 
number two. It involves 10 million markka and the resources will 
be used to build the final satellite construction, the fuselage, 
fuselage parts and the facilities, as well as to obtain space on 
board the A 4 launch rocket, says Dr. of Engineering Matti Brax, 
head of the project group. 
  HUTSAT is a microsatellite which weighs 50 kg. Its size is 
reminiscent of a traditional television set. The popularity of 
microsatellites around the world has increased in recent years, 
due to the development of microelectronics. Nowadays, 
complicated measuring instruments can be built so small that 
satellites weighing 1,000 kg are not needed for transporting 
them in space. 
<H5>  Space Research </H5>
  Satellites are generally used in order to measure and record 
phenomena in space, chart the surface of the earth or link 
telecommunications. The Finnish satellite is to carry out space 
research. The measuring instruments, which are built into the 
satellite, will measure the earth's magnetic field and radiation 
in space. 
  However, the most important objective for the satellite 
project is to train Finnish space engineers and develop research 
in the field. This type of know-how increases the ability of 
Finnish companies to compete for international space projects. 
In 1995 Finland will become a member of the European space 
organization ESA. 
  Matti Brax points out that Finland already has companies 
which are competitive regarding orders for various space 
projects. He mentions, among others, Vaisala, Outokumpu and 
Finnyards. 
  "What is technically demanding with space satellites is that 
all electronics built into the satellite must require extremely 
little energy. The satellite has a low electrical output, only 
30 watts, since the surface of the solar panel is very small. 
The satellite should also be very durable, since it cannot be 
repaired. We have estimated that it should last for two years," 
says Dr. of Engineering Juha-Pekka Luntama, one of the 
participants in the project group. 
  He says that the launch is also a critical phase for the 
satellites. One reason in that the parts are subjected to 
considerable shaking when the launch rocket takes off. Even the 
loud noise can cause satellite parts to come off. 
<H5>  Space on Ariane 4? </H5>
  "England is the country that has come farthest in 
microsatellite technology. Finland is approximately at the same 
level as Denmark and Israel. These countries are also planning 
to launch their first microsatellites," says Matti Brax. 
  A launch rocket can transport 4-6 microsatellites. The 
launch 
rocket Ariane 4, on which it is hoped that the Finnish satellite 
will be able to reserve space, will be launched in 1998 from the 
European space agency ESA's space center at Kourou, which is 
located in French Guyana in South America. When the launch 
rocket reaches the correct orbit, the microsatellites are 
released by means of explosive bolts. The orbit for the 
microsatellites launched at that time is a course that takes 
them over the North and South Poles. 

