BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Dolinin "First Hand" report: "When Missiles </F>
`Die'"] 
  [Text] Support centers for implementing arms reduction 
treaties exist in every branch of the Armed Forces but a special 
place is occupied by the Strategic Missile Forces' center, given 
the political realities that exist in the world. So when it 
became necessary to create such centers in Belarus and the 
Ukraine, it was no wonder that they turned to the missile troops 
in particular for their experience. And there is no denying 
that such experience exists there. 
  Suffice it to recall that since the founding of the support 
center -- this dates back to the time of the implementation of 
the Treaty on Intermediate-and Shorter-Range Missiles -- 826 
deployed and non-deployed intermediate-range RSD-10, R-12, and 
R-14 missiles, 608 launchers for those missiles, 60 missile 
operational bases, and dozens of auxiliary installations have 
been scrapped under the organizational control of the Strategic 
Missiles Forces High Command and officers from the center and 
with their direct participation.... 
  The forthcoming work involved in the reduction of strategic 
offensive arms is even larger in scale. The intensity of the 
center's activity is now determined by the fact that missile men 
began the planned destruction of obsolete missile complexes last 
year without even waiting for the ratification of START-I and 
START-II. 
  More than 200 silo-based missile launchers were removed from 
service and then destroyed. A lot of work, notably by the 
center's specialists, went into the creation of the Russian 
destruction bases in Surovatikha and Pibanshurye and the 
preparation of sites for the reception and stationing of U.S. 
inspection groups at Strategic Missile Forces installations.... 
  "The missile troops," Colonel General Aleksandr Petrovich 
Volkov, first deputy commander in chief of the Strategic Missile 
Forces, who heads the entire destruction project, believes, "are 
absolutely ready to ensure the successful fulfillment of all the 
commitments made under the treaty." 
  Who are they, these people who bear the burden of the 
destruction program on their shoulders? Colonel Anatoliy 
Murashenkov, the center's chief, now takes up the story: 
  "Officers of the Support Centers for Implementing Arms 
Reduction Treaties are real missile men. They only employ 
people who have a wealth of military experience, who know 
missile work and technology inside out, and who have years of 
alert duty behind them." 
  Col. Murashchenkov himself, incidentally, was chief of a 
combined unit's operational department prior to his appointment 
to the Support Center (it was called the Center for Destruction 
Management [Tsentr upravleniya likvidatsiyey] then). Prior to 
that he had to learn all there is to know about missile service 
from many posts. Like all the other officers he learned the 
science of weapon destruction "from scratch" and by practical 
experience. No one in the missile forces at that time knew as 
much as he did. 
  I met with other specialists at the center. Colonel Valentin 
Romashev, Colonel Georgiy Khristoforidi, Lieutenant Colonel 
Anatoliy Pavlov, Lieutenant Colonel Nikolay Shpirko, Lieutenant 
Colonel Viktor Yakunin.... They, like other officers, have 
clearly defined duties. Some are responsible for the planning 
and coordination of destruction work and monitoring the 
fulfillment of treaty obligations, others are busy with the 
arms-destruction related problems of the military economy 
[voyskovoye khozyaystvo] and the use of the funds thus 
released.... 
  Much time is spent on preparing and providing support for 
the 
inspection work. During the center's six years' existence 316 
inspection groups have visited the Missile Forces alone. They 
monitor progress in implementing the Treaty on Intermediate- and 
Shorter-Range Missiles (reciprocal inspection activity under the 
treaty will not end until the next century) and of conventional 
arms agreements.... 
  "After the completion of special courses," Colonel Vladislav 
Alekseyev says, "the center's officers themselves work in 
inspection groups in the United States, Belgium, Britain, 
Germany, and Italy." 
  Vladislav Arseniyevich, for example, has twice done 
inspection work at the Hercules plants in Salt Lake City. 
  I did not catch the demolition engineers at home that day. 
Colonel Vasiliy Orzhekhovskiy and Colonel Mikhail Kiryushin 
together with their subordinates were busy organizing and 
providing backup for the unique job of destroying silo 
missile-launchers, which KRASNAYA ZVEZDA has already written 
about and which people have been able to see for themselves in a 
recent Radar TV movie for Ostankino Television. 
  But the duty shift was there that day, as it was supposed to 
be. Lieutenant Colonel Sergey Kirshkovskiy and Major Andrey 
Titov were busy with current operational work, maintaining 
communications with the National Nuclear Risk Reduction Center 
and receiving information from the CSCE.... 
  The work at the center seemed to me to be routine and free 
of 
fuss. Even when the latest notification of an inspection from 
the United States arrived I did not see any change in the pace 
of work there. They did not know which Strategic Missile Forces 
installation would be inspected or what scale the inspection 
would be on (there is a memorandum stipulating this), but the 
officers knew well what they had to do in these circumstances. 
Just as they do in all other situations connected with the 
destruction of nuclear missiles, furthermore. 
<H5>  Strategic Missile Launch Postures Examined </H5>
<F P=106> [Article by Major General (retired) Vladimir Semenovich </F>
Belous, head of the Department of Military-Political Studies of 
the Committee of Scientists for Global Security: "Principles of 
Russia's Nuclear Strategy"] 
  [Text] "Political statements of the presidents of the 
two countries about the onset of a new era in relations between 
Russia and the United States cannot in an instant transfer 
relations between the two countries to a fundamentally new 
level." 
  The "Basic Provisions of the Military Doctrine of the 
Russian 
Federation" maintain: "The purpose of the policy of the Russian 
Federation in the sphere of nuclear weapons is the elimination 
of the danger of nuclear war by way of deterring the unleashing 
of aggression against the Russian Federation and its allies." An 
even more complex and multilevel mission is propelled to the 
forefront now -- infusing military doctrine with real content. 
  Russia does not consider as its enemy a single country, 
including its recent potential enemy -- the United States. But 
the two countries' possession of vast nuclear arsenals 
determines the great time lag of the process of disarmament and 
transition to genuine partnership. The political statements of 
the presidents of the two countries about the onset of a new era 
in relations between Russia and the United States cannot in an 
instant transfer relations between the two countries to a 
fundamentally new level. This will take time. 
  The effective model of the composition, structure, and 
functioning of Russia's strategic nuclear forces, therefore, 
will be constructed on the basis of a policy of deterrence of 
the United States. We would note that, as this condition is 
fulfilled, any other potential enemy is deterred also. Nuclear 
weapons are not regarded as weapons of war here, and their sole 
rational function is deterrence. 
  The future composition and structure of Russia's strategic 
nuclear forces will be determined by several basic factors: the 
present composition of the nuclear forces; the status of the 
nuclear arsenals of other states; the limitations imposed on the 
strategic nuclear forces by the Russian-American agreements; 
states' economic possibilities; strategic concepts in respect to 
the use of strategic nuclear forces. 
  As we all know, the operational use of strategic nuclear 
forces is possible by of the delivery of: 

  -  a first or preemptive strike; 
  -  a launch on warning 
[otvetno-vstrechnyy udar]; 
  -  a launch under attack [otvetnyy 
udar]. 

    During the Cold War period the main form of operational use 
of strategic nuclear forces in the event of a conflict was 
considered the delivery against the aggressor of a 
launch-on-warning strike, that is, a firing of missiles prior to 
the moment of impact of enemy warheads on the territory of the 
USSR. A particular role was performed here by the high 
operational readiness of the strategic nuclear forces and their 
flexibility [operativnost] and the dependability of the system 
of operational command and control and communications and also 
the efficiency and dependability of the missile-attack warning 
system. The particular relevance of this form of combat 
operations for the Soviet strategic nuclear forces was 
determined by the great relative significance of ground-based 
ICBM's and their relatively low survivability in the event of a 
nuclear attack against them. At the same time, on the other 
hand, this concept increased the risk of an accidental nuclear 
conflict arising, primarily as a consequence of the 
less-than-absolute dependability of the warning systems. The 
strict time limit at the disposal of our country's leadership in 
the event of a signal having been received from a missile-attack 
warning system (10-12 minutes in the case of an attack by 
submarine-launched ballistic missiles -- SLBM's) creates a 
difficult stress situation. A study of various crisis situations 
shows how great is the uncertainty and the probability of an 
inappropriate assessment of the intentions and actions of the 
other side and, as a result, the adoption of the wrong 
decisions. But the operational efficiency of a launch on warning 
is extraordinarily high, which makes it a very powerful means of 
deterrence. 
  The Russian-American agreement on not targeting ballistic 
missiles against one another (it is uncertain as yet whether 
this applies to SLBM's or not, it is true) reduces the risk of 
an accidental nuclear conflict. From the operational-strategic 
viewpoint the agreement also reduces the efficiency of a launch 
on warning. This is particularly sensitive for Russia, for which 
ICBM's account for more than half the nuclear warheads 
(approximately one-fourth for the United States), and the 
off-site restoration of targeting is possible only for new 
classes of missiles. 
  Under the conditions of the lowering of the military 
opposition, the reduction in strategic arms, and the improvement 
in the overall political climate, the probability of the 
delivery of a first nuclear strike is very slight. It would seem 
expedient both for Russia and the United States in the present 
situation, therefore, to renounce the launch-on-warning concept 
and to switch to the launch-under-attack concept. True, this 
form of combat operations is very complicated for the defending 
party and entails great losses of strategic offensive arms and 
the breakdown of facilities of the system of state 
administration and military command and control. As a 
consequence, the efficiency of the retaliatory actions could 
prove very low. A potential aggressor's modeling of such a 
situation could prompt him to take preventive action. An 
orientation in the organizational development of strategic 
nuclear forces solely toward a launch under attack, as some 
analysts are proposing, would make increased demands of their 
quantitative makeup and could create serious impediments in the 
way of a further reduction in strategic nuclear forces. 
  In addition, who could guarantee that complications in 
relations between Russia and the United States will not arise 
and that their interests will not clash in some region of 
geostrategic importance? Consequently, the launch-on-warning 
concept has a right to exist also, and to renounce it 
conclusively would be imprudent. 
  Let us consider one further possible scenario of a military 
conflict. Let us imagine that as a result of territorial claims 
against Russia a country in an alliance with a nuclear power has 
mounted combat operations. Enemy aviation is striking with 
precision weapons at most important targets, including the 
position of the strategic nuclear forces, endeavoring to put 
them out of action. The Strategic Missile Forces Main Staff is 
reporting losses: 15 percent of ICBM launchers have been put out 
of commission. In three days losses have amounted to 25 percent. 
The legitimate question arises: What should Russia's Supreme 
Command do in this situation? What is the permissible limit of 
losses of strategic nuclear forces? The simplest analysis of 
such a situation shows that in the course of combat operations, 
conditions could take shape wherein Russia's strategic nuclear 
forces are forced on pain of destruction to be the first to use 
nuclear weapons. This, inter alia, determines Russia's 
abandonment of the USSR's former undertaking concerning no first 
use of nuclear weapons. 
  At the present time, when the probability of a nuclear 
conflict is very slight, priority significance belongs to the 
launch-under-attack concept, which, most likely, will be 
pertinent in the immediate future also. In the event of a crisis 
situation arising, the launch-on-warning concept could become 
paramount. And, finally, in the event of combat operations being 
unleashed against Russia with the use of conventional weapons, 
conditions objectively determining the need for first use of 
nuclear weapons could take shape. 
  It should be noted that the American strategic nuclear 
forces, both at the present time and following the planned 
reductions, will be oriented toward the accomplishment of the 
entire set of operational assignments. The retention of 500 
highly accurate Minuteman III ICBM's, which are ready within 30 
seconds, assures the delivery of a launch-on-warning strike. In 
addition, according to J. Lynch, captain of the U.S. Navy, the 
system of command and control of America's missile-firing 
submarines permits them to take part in a launch on warning even 
at the present time. The Minuteman III ICBM's in conjunction 
with the Trident II SLBM's, which are fitted with W-88 warheads 
of increased accuracy (400), are also capable of delivering an 
effective first, counterforce strike. For purely retaliatory 
operations the United States would have approximately 1,750 
warheads on SLBM's and some of the weapons on heavy bombers that 
had managed to get airborne on a tactical warning. 
  The main conclusion, therefore, is that the concept of the 
operations of the Russian strategic nuclear forces should be 
multivariant and adaptive and proceed not from scholastic 
deductions but correspond in each period of time to the 
unfolding geostrategic situation and the degree of the military 
threat to Russia. Consequently, the composition and structure of 
the strategic nuclear forces should in any situation assure the 
efficient performance of all forms of combat operations in 
accordance with the said strategic concepts. What does the 
future composition of the strategic nuclear forces of Russia 
look like from these positions? 
  The priority in the organizational development of Russia's 
strategic nuclear forces has thus far been assigned ground-based 
ICBM's, on which up to 65 percent of the nuclear weapons have 
been deployed. Approximately 25 percent of the nuclear weapons 
have been installed on SLBM's, and 10 percent, on heavy bombers. 
The United States has traditionally put the emphasis on the 
sea-based component (55 percent of the nuclear weapons), and the 
remainder of the warheads have been shared approximately equally 
between the ICBM's and SLBM's [as published]. This asymmetry in 
the structure of the two countries' strategic nuclear forces has 
come about by no means accidentally, it has reflected the 
particular features of their geostrategic position, basic views 
on the nature of a possible nuclear conflict, and the scientific 
and technological level of the armaments. 
  The START II Treaty determined only two control figures -- 
the overall number of warheads on strategic delivery systems (up 
to 3,500) and no more than half of them on SLBM's, which affords 
each side the possibility of a display of wide-ranging 
initiative in determination of the composition of its strategic 
offensive arms. Particular significance is attached here for the 
grouping of strategic offensive arms targeted at the delivery of 
a first, counterforce strike to the high accuracy of guidance of 
the warheads to target, which cannot be compensated either by 
their quantity or, even less, by the yield of the weapon. For 
the strategic offensive arms systems intended for retaliatory 
operations, assurance of survivability is the priority. As the 
strategic nuclear forces are reduced, not the quantitative 
parameters of the components of the nuclear triad but their 
operational possibilities and indicators according to the 
"cost-efficiency" criterion will increasingly become paramount. 
  As a result of the structural reorganization of Russia's 
strategic nuclear forces there could be a significant increase 
in the proportion of weapons on SLBM's, which would be 
approximately the same as for the United States. But the 
numerical equality of SLBM weapons of Russia and the United 
States obviously assures for the latter, by virtue of the 
qualitative superiority of the American sea-based component, an 
appreciable military advantage. As experience shows, there are 
no more than 20-25 percent of Russia's missile-firing ships on 
operational patrol in the seas at any one time, whereas for the 
United States, up to 40-50 percent. The submarines in base 
become a highly tempting target inasmuch as hundreds of warheads 
deployed on the tied-up missile carriers could be destroyed with 
one or two warheads. 
  Recently the United States and its allies have noticeably 
upgraded the means of observation and the tactics of combating 
submarines. Acoustic antennas, many kilometers long, laid on the 
ocean floor make it possible to keep under constant supervision 
three-fourths of strategically important areas of the Atlantic 
and the Pacific, in which Russian submarines might be operating. 
American multipurpose attack submarines are engaged in constant 
tracking and are perfecting the tactics of combating Russian 
missile carriers in direct proximity to their bases. American 
submarines' repeated encounters with Russian submarines in 
proximity to Russia's shores are convincing testimony to this. 
  The results of the modeling of operational situations in 
ocean expanses performed by Western experts have shown that up 
to 30-40 percent of Russian submarines could be destroyed in the 
course of ASW operations of the initial period of a war. If it 
is considered here that, in the event of a surprise attack, the 
probability of the destruction of the boats in base is very 
high, overall losses in the initial period could amount to 70-80 
percent. Russia's possibilities in the destruction of U.S. 
submarines are far fewer. 
  The fate of the aviation component of Russia's strategic 
nuclear forces, which has traditionally been assigned a 
secondary role in all previous nuclear conflict scenarios, will 
remain highly problematical in the coming decade. This is 
explained by the particular features of Russia's geostrategic 
position; the lack of military bases on territory contiguous to 
the United States; the vulnerability to air defense systems; the 
relatively low indicator according to the "cost-efficiency" 
criterion. 
  The situation is further complicated by the fact that a 
substantial portion of the HB (heavy bombers) came to be on the 
territory of Ukraine and Kazakhstan, which hastened to declare 
them their property. This has led to Russia being left with only 
27 heavy bombers capable of carrying cruise missiles and 52 
bombers fitted with nuclear bombs. The extraordinarily high cost 
of a heavy bomber, which is particularly sensitive under the 
conditions of economic crisis, does not permit the expectation 
of a serious increase in its aviation component. But its 
preservation as part of the strategic nuclear forces would seem 
necessary inasmuch as heavy bombers with strategic weapons 
possess a number of properties increasing the flexibility of the 
use of the strategic nuclear forces: the presence on them of a 
system of varied nuclear arms, the possibility of hitting 
unplanned targets, and their return to base in the event of a 
change in the situation or a false alarm. 
  The relatively low efficiency of the sea- and air-based 
components of Russia's strategic nuclear forces objectively 
determines the need for the continuation of the lead role of 
ground-based ICBM's. The Strategic Missiles Forces, which are 
armed with ICBM's, stand out to best advantage among the other 
components of the strategic nuclear forces in terms of their 
hardware provision, operational readiness, dependability of the 
system of operational command and control and communications, 
and developed infrastructure. For almost four decades Russia's 
ICBM's have in terms of their technical level and operational 
efficiency not only not been inferior to the U.S. missiles but 
have frequently been superior to them. The upkeep and 
maintenance of the ICBM's cost far less than the other 
components of the triad. In terms of the "cost-efficiency" 
criterion, the Strategic Missile Forces are unparalleled: 
Possessing 65 percent of the warheads, they consume no more than 
10-12 percent of the military budget. 
  There is a serious debate among specialists about the 
structure of the future ICBM grouping. The supporters of mobile 
ICBM's, referring to their alleged high survivability, propose 
that the proportion of these weapons in the Strategic Missile 
Forces' grouping be raised to two-thirds. 
  At the present time even the United States knows the 
coordinates of all the shelters in which the mobile SS-25's 
(Topol) are deployed, and highly sensitive reconnaissance 
apparatus, which covers several frequency bands, has been 
installed on reconnaissance satellites. This permits the 
detection on Earth of objects the size of a football. The 
detection, therefore, of multiple-axle truck tractors moving out 
to the combat patrol area and their further tracking represent a 
perfectly feasible task. It is known also that the United States 
is working on the creation of maneuverable warheads with the 
correction of their flight trajectory at a command from 
reconnaissance satellites, which is particularly relevant for 
destroying moving targets. It was confidence of success in 
combating Russia's mobile ICBM's that prompted the United States 
to lift its objections to their continuation as part of the 
Strategic Missile Forces' grouping. 
  A significant increase in the survivability of mobile ICBM's 
may be achieved only in the event of their being dispersed and 
moved in vast patrolling areas according to the law of chance, 
which would be very hard to accomplish. 
  An increased risk of accidents during movement in the 
patrolling areas, the limited nature of motor capacity, and 
inadequate protection against sabotage and terrorist actions 
should also be attributed to the shortcomings of mobile ICBM's. 
Five or six times more personnel are needed for their 
maintenance than for stationary systems per launcher. Therefore, 
several tens of thousands of additional personnel would be 
required for the creation of a grouping of 600 mobile ICBM's (as 
some specialists are proposing), which under the conditions of 
the difficulty of fully manning the armed forces is of 
considerable importance also. 
  The upkeep and maintenance of mobile ICBM's costs far more 
than silo systems. It needs to be considered also that mobile 
ICBM's are weapons of retaliatory operations and that their 
possibilities in the delivery of first and launch-on-warning 
strikes are highly limited. 
  The attitude toward mobile ICBM's in the United States is 
highly indicative. Previously the Pentagon had planned the 
deployment of MX missile railroad mounts and ground-based 
Midgetman ICBM's. But after a careful analysis of 
operational-strategic, economic, and environmental factors, it 
abandoned its original intentions. The continuous cruising 
around the country's territory of mounts carrying nuclear 
warheads was considered there to be absolutely unacceptable. 
  In accordance with the arguments cited, it is proposed to 
keep the lead position of stationary ICBM's and have a Strategic 
Missile Forces' grouping composed two-thirds of nuclear weapons 
on stationary systems and one-third on mobile systems. This is 
explained by the following considerations. 
  According to the START II Treaty, Russia is entitled to keep 
105 SS-19 ICBM's, leaving on them one warhead each, and also to 
deploy 90 single-warhead missiles in SS-18 ICBM silos converted 
to accommodate them. In addition, it is necessary to convert for 
this same purpose approximately 400 silos on the territory of 
Russia that are currently housing the obsolete SS-11, SS-13, and 
SS-17 missiles. Thus, with the minimum possible economic outlays 
necessary for modernization of the silos and the gradual 
replacement of the missiles, the stationary ICBM grouping would 
number approximately 600 units. 
  This part of the Strategic Missile Forces' grouping would 
have relatively low survivability, but the high operational 
readiness and accuracy of guidance of the warheads would assure 
for these ICBM's, the only ones of Russia's strategic offensive 
arms, the possibility of the delivery of first, counterforce, 
and launch-on-warning strikes, reducing thereby the asymmetry in 
the operational possibilities of strategic offensive arms with 
the United States. This in itself would be a powerful factor of 
deterrence. It would be expedient here to preserve the existing 
grouping of SS-25 mobile ICBM's (approximately 300), with no 
increase. 
  The impending ratification of the START II Treaty by the new 
parliament of Russia will hardly be cloudless, and an acute 
political struggle over it is to be expected. For the successful 
passage through parliament of this most important 
military-political document it is essential that the Government 
of Russia present convincing operational-strategic, 
military-technical, economic, and environmental justification. 
  Unfortunately, it has to be stated that this was not done 
during the hearings on the START II Treaty in the old 
parliament, and the arguments of its opponents frequently 
appeared quite convincing. Therefore, its fate seemed highly 
problematical. Time will tell whether account will be taken of 
the mistakes of the past. 

