BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Xu Jingyue (1776 0079 6460) and correspondent </F>
Zhang Xiaolin (1728 1420 2657)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 16 June (XINHUA) -- China will use a Long 
March-III rocket to launch the "Asia-Pacific One" communications 
satellite for the Hong Kong Asia-Pacific Communications 
Satellite Company Ltd [APCSC] in July this year. This will mark 
a new stage in China's international commercial satellite 
launching service. By 2000, China will have launched 30 
satellites for overseas countries or regions. 
  According to a briefing by an official of the China Great 
Wall Industrial Corporation, a number of commercial satellite 
launching contracts are being implemented, and new contracts are 
under negotiation. This year, China will also use Long March-II 
E rockets to launch another satellite, the "Asia-Pacific Two," 
for the APCSC and the (?Plutus) B 3 communications satellite for 
Australia. In 1995 China will launch three satellites for 
overseas clients -- it will use a Long March-II E rocket to 
launch the "Asia Two" communications satellite for the Asia 
Communications Satellite Company Limited; a Long March-III B 
rocket to launch the "International Satellite 7 A," a heavy-duty 
communications satellite, for the International Satellite 
Organization; and a Long March-II E rocket to launch "(?Aicosda) 
One," a high-power, direct- transmission satellite for the 
United States. In 1996 China will use a Long March-IV B rocket 
to launch a resource probing satellite, developed jointly by 
China and Brazil and use a Long March-II E rocket to launch 
"(?Aicosda) Two," a high-power, direct-transmission satellite 
for the United States. After 1996 China will use an improved 
version of the Long March-II C rocket to launch a number of 
low-orbit iridium communications satellites for Motorola 
Corporation of the United States. 
  The China Great Wall Industrial Corporation official said: 
China's commercial satellite launching service and cooperation 
in the manufacture of satellites constitute a useful supplement 
to the international market, and also provide a new choice for 
international satellite clients. This is also a responsibility 
and obligation China should undertake for the peaceful 
development and utilization of outer space resources. 

