BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Victor Cardoso] </F>
  [Text] As of this month, the Communications and 
Transportation Secretariat (SCT) will be able to detect and 
locate -- almost immediately anywhere in the country -- any 
radio station transmitting unauthorized telecommunications 
signals, including those of the Zapatist National Liberation 
Army (EZLN), or any equipment seized from drug traffickers. 
  In order to do this, last year, the SCT began to install 42 
radio monitoring stations that cover all national territory. 
Two or more stations were installed in seven states where there 
are high crime rates or social problems (Baja California, 
Chihuahua, Sinaloa, Guerrero, Veracruz, Tamaulipas, and 
Chiapas), while the rest will have only one station. 
  A high-ranking SCT official also confirmed that these 
actions 
will detect and locate the communications signals of the EZLN, 
which has been illegally using the microwave network owned by 
the Mexican Telephone Company. 
  It was unofficially learned that work was being done to 
replace the internal telephone network of the federal government 
(also known as the red telephone) with safer, more reliable 
technology less susceptible to interception. All federal 
government offices agreed to this change in November of last 
year, but the Government Secretariat raised many obstacles when 
the SCT technicians tried to do their work. 
  Through the National Radio Monitoring Network (RNR), which 
is 
part of the National Board for Assigning Frequencies, the SCT 
will be able to determine the location of any transmission that 
is made within national territory. This network has the most 
advanced equipment in radio communications and computer 
technology. 
  Officially, the goal is to regulate and normalize radio 
communication services in the nation, and it is the result of 
continuous efforts by the SCT to modernize, organize, and 
regulate telecommunications in the country. 
  The provisions established in Radio Communication 
Regulations 
of the International Telecommunications Union as well as other 
factors that result when one's own needs are met were taken into 
consideration in order to begin operations. These are actions 
related to national security, and therefore some were made in 
absolute privacy at the highest level of the government. 
  It is justified in everyday activities since it regulates 
the 
broadcasting of signals used by industry, business, medical and 
educational services, transportation, and so forth through the 
entire radio electric spectrum by microwave, fiber optics, and 
satellites in frequency, both VHF (Very High Frequency) and UHF 
(Ultra High Frequency), that is, ranging from 10 kHz to 18 
gigahertz. 
  Likewise, through the RNR, which will begin operations this 
month, one will be able to locate the source of any unauthorized 
broadcast or broadcasts that interfere with any frequency 
throughout the country. "Coordinating emergency assistance in 
cases of disaster or national emergency," as well as "improving 
surveillance and controlling services through the use of mobile 
units in coordination with stationary equipment for data 
processing and inspection," are among the objectives of the SCT 
with respect to the RNR. 
  "The radio electric spectrum is a common good that is used 
in 
the systems of radio communications such as radio, television, 
microwaves, radio telephone system, air and maritime radio 
navigation, space communications, and military communications, 
among others," says a SCT document based on the implementation 
of the National Board for Assigning Frequencies. 
  It considers other important aspects of the use of the radio 
electric spectrum, inasmuch as telecommunications "promotes the 
integration of Mexico; strengthens the institutions of the three 
levels of government; supports and promotes employment and 
national industry; supports and coordinates agricultural, 
livestock, fishing, and mining activities, as well as trade, 
transportation, and communications; and provides entertainment 
and disseminates news and information." 
  According to the document issued by the General Directorate 
of Telecommunications, an office of the Undersecretariat of 
Communications and Technological Development, that refers to the 
National Board for Assigning Frequencies of Mexico 1993, the RNR 
will be organized as follows: 
  The RNR will have a control center located in Mexico City 
for 
its administration and control. It will have fixed primary and 
secondary stations, remote stations, and mobile stations 
assisted by a computer as well as by portable survey equipment. 
  The RNR will be organized with a Control Center, fixed 
stations (primary and secondary), and remotes (Group "C.2") as a 
star type which will enable remote access of data and 
operational control, when necessary, from the above mentioned 
Control Center. 
  Likewise, four secondary stations will have remote ancillary 
stations to control, including the transfer of 
data. 

  -  Communication, information, and voice links to 
transfer data from remote control sites will use the SCT 
telecomputer network and the Mexican Telephone [Telemex] public 
network to access the database on the radio spectrum and 
coordinate it. 
  -  The RNR stations will monitor the LF [low 
frequency] to UHF bands (from 10 kHz to 2.0 gHz) at fixed 
stations and mobile units, and with portable inspection 
equipment up to 18 gHz. 
  -  The RNR stations will cruise radio 
broadcasts using interferometry in MF [medium frequency] and HF 
[high frequency] and direction finders in VHF and UHF in fixed 
stations and from MF to UHF in mobile units. 
<H5>  RNR Operations </H5>
  According to the document, the RNR stations will operate 24 
hours a day, 365 days a year. The Control Center will be 
responsible, at a national level, for the RNR's radio monitoring 
and radio cruising activities. The Control Center will be the 
channel to access the information obtained on the radio 
spectrum, thereby establishing an effective correlation with the 
available radio information. 
  The Control Center's computers will be interconnected to 
operate as a local area network (LAN) so that any computer 
station can be used to control the equipment, the communication 
network, triangulation, supervision, and analysis separately as 
well as to operate any radio monitoring station by remote 
control. 
<H5>  Radio Monitoring </H5>
  Each of the stations, according to their classification, 
will 
automatically carry out the assigned tasks assisted by the 
computer. At any time, the operators will be able to analyze 
the information obtained from several of the regular parameters 
against the anomalies presented by one or several broadcasts; 
repeatedly gauging the broadcasts; and storing, taping, and 
preparing a report on the information from the located broadcast. 
<H5>  Radio Cruising </H5>
  This task, according to the document, will be carried out if 
any of the RNR stations, the Control Center, or the central 
office of the SCT and its centers, or an office of another 
country, requests a search for an interfering or unauthorized 
broadcast source. The coordination of this activity will be the 
responsibility of the Control Center, which can require the 
intervention of all the stations that have a radio cruising 
system (Group "A.") The information (coordinates and 
identification of the station, readings obtained from the 
interfered: distance, coordinates, etc.) will be fed into the 
triangulation system where the broadcast location area will be 
displayed automatically, producing a printed report on digitized 
maps. 
  The "B.1" Group stations tasked with radio monitoring and 
radio cruising in VHF-UHF will be supported by remote urban 
stations (Group "C.1") linked through the Telmex telephone 
network. The remote stations' control will be automatic. 
  For the triangulation task at the Control Center and Group 
"B.1" stations, the software [previous word in English] will 
present cruising of the broadcast location area and will produce 
a report on the printer or plotter [previous word in English]. 
In the case of the Group "B.1" stations, they can transfer this 
information to the Control Center. 
<H5>  Primary Stations </H5>
  Group "A" comprises fixed stations that will monitor radio 
stations in the bands from LF to UHF (10 kHz up to 2.0 gHz) and 
cruise with interferometry from MF up to HF (1.0 MHz to 30 MHz). 
They are located in Cerrillo, Mexico; Hermosillo, Sonora; 
Merida, Yucatan; San Fernando, Tamaulipas; and Tapachula, 
Chiapas. 
<H5>  Secondary Stations </H5>
  To carry out their tasks, those stations will be subdivided 
into: 
  Group "B.1." -- Fixed radio monitoring stations within the 
bands LF to UHF (10 kHz to 2.0 gHz) and radio cruising with 
direction finders in the VHF and UHF bands (20 mHz to 1.0 gHz). 
They are located in Guadalajara, Mexico City, Monterrey, and 
Tijuana, and they will also control subnetworks in the remote 
stations (urban) mentioned in Group "C.1." 
  Group "B.2." Fixed radio monitoring stations in the bands 
from LF to UHF (10 kHz up to 2.0 gHz). They are located in 
Acapulco, Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Leon, Mazatlan, Morelia, 
Oaxaca, Puebla, Tampico, Torreon, San Luis Potosi, Veracruz, and 
Villahermosa. 
<H5>  Remote Stations </H5>
  Group "C.1." Remote radio monitoring stations (20 mHz to 2.0 
gHz) and radio cruising in the VHF and UHF bands (20 mHz to 1.0 
gHz). They form urban networks controlled from the fixed 
stations of Group "B.1," located in Guadalajara, Mexico City, 
Monterrey, and Tijuana. 
  Group "C.2." Remote stations are only for radio monitoring 
in 
the VHF and UHF bands (20 mHz to 2.0 gHz). They are located in 
Aguascalientes, Campeche, Ciudad Victoria, Colima, Cuernavaca, 
Culiacan, Cancun, Chilpancingo, Durango, Jalapa, La Paz, 
Mexicali, Nuevo Laredo, Pachuca, Queretaro, Saltillo, Tepic, 
Tlaxcala, Tuxtla Gutierrez, and Zacatecas. 
<H5>  Mobile Units </H5>
  This type of mobile unit will work as a fixed station in 
places where, because of topography, the propagation of 
electromagnetic waves, the curvature of the earth, and other 
factors, it is impossible to detect broadcasts from a fixed 
place. They will be distributed throughout the republic of 
Mexico. They will mainly monitor in the bands from LF to UHF 
(10 kHz to 2.0 gHz) and cruise with interferometry (1 mHz to 1.0 
gHz), including television broadcasts. 
  Finally, the document mentions that the telecomputer network 
is essential to complete the radio monitoring network and to 
establish a compatible network throughout the country, as well 
as the primary countries with which Mexico has relations. 
  To this end, in August 1993, the installation of 32 
satellite 
stations, Very Small Aperture Terminal type, was completed; 62 
computer systems were installed with the appropriate software 
[previous word in English] and collateral equipment; and Mexican 
engineers were trained in the management and optimal use of this 
equimpment. 
  The network was designed to work in coordination with other 
modern devices to be able to efficiently broadcast the 
information from directional beacons, multiplexers, modems, and 
leading radio technology equipment. 
  The computer's central node is in the metropolitan area; it 
uses fiber optic and satellite communication, ensuring quick and 
reliable broadcasts to the SCT centers and central offices. 

