BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of the "PRC Foreign Trade Law" approved on 12 May by </F>
the seventh meeting of the Eighth National People's Congress 
Standing Committee] 
  [Text] Chapter I. General Principles 
  Article 1. This law is established to develop foreign trade, 
to maintain order in foreign trade, and to ensure that the 
socialist market economy develops in a healthy manner. 
  Article 2. Foreign trade, as defined under this law, refers 
to the import and export of goods, the import and export of 
technology, and the international trade in services. 
  Article 3. Departments of the State Council in charge of 
foreign economic relations and trade are in charge of the 
nation's foreign trade according to this law. 
  Article 4. The state adopts a standardized foreign trade 
system and maintains according to the law a fair and free 
foreign trade order. 
  The state encourages the development of foreign trade, 
encourages localities to take the initiative in developing 
foreign trade, and upholds foreign traders' rights to run their 
businesses on their own. 
  Article 5. Based on the principle of being fair and mutually 
beneficial, the PRC promotes and develops trade relations with 
other countries and regions. 
  Article 6. According to the international treaties or 
agreements on foreign trade that the PRC has signed or to which 
the PRC is a contracting party, the PRC accords 
most-favored-nation status or national treatment to other 
signatories or contracting parties to the treaties or 
agreements, or, according to the principle of being mutually 
beneficial and equal, accords the status or treatment to the 
other party to the treaties or agreements. 
  Article 7. Based on the actual situation, the PRC may take 
similar measures against countries or regions that have adopted 
discriminatory trade bans or restrictions or similar measures 
against the PRC. 
<H5>  Chapter II. Foreign Trade Operators </H5>
  Article 8. Foreign trade operators, as defined under this 
law, refer to legal persons or other organizations engaging in 
foreign trade activities according to this law. 
  Article 9. Foreign trade operators engaging in the import 
and export of goods and technology must meet the following 
requirements and must have the approval of a State Council 
department in charge of foreign economic relations and trade: 
  1. have their own organizations and names; 
  2. have a clearly defined business area of foreign trade; 
  3. have the business sites, funds, and specialized personnel 
required for the foreign trade they engage in; 
  4. the amount of imports and exports carried out by others 
on 
their behalf has reached the specified amount; or having secured 
the sources of required import and export goods; 
  5. other requirements specified by relevant laws and 
administrative regulations. 
  Regulations for the implementation of the aforementioned 
provisions are to be formulated by the State Council. 
  According to relevant laws governing enterprises invested in 
by foreign companies and according to relevant administrative 
regulations, enterprises invested in by foreign companies are 
exempted from complying with provision No. 1 in importing goods 
that are not for production purposes and that are for the 
companies' own use; in importing equipment, raw and processed 
materials, and other materials needed for their own companies' 
production use; and in exporting their own products. 
  Article 10. The establishment and business activities of 
international service trade enterprises and organizations should 
conform to the stipulations of this law and other relevant laws 
and administrative regulations. 
  Article 11. Foreign trade operators run their businesses on 
their own and are responsible for their own profitability and 
losses, as specified by the law. 
  Article 12. In conducting foreign trade activities, foreign 
trade operators should fulfill their contractual 
responsibilities, ensure the quality of their commodities, and 
ensure after-sale service. 
  Article 13. Organizations and individuals without foreign 
trade permits may authorize domestic foreign trade operators, 
within the scope of their business, to conduct foreign trade 
business on their behalf. 
  Those authorized foreign trade operators should faithfully 
provide the authorizers with information concerning market 
conditions, commodity prices, their clients' situations, and 
other relevant information. The two sides should sign a 
commitment contract which should contain stipulations on both 
sides' rights and obligations. 
  Article 14. To comply with the regulations of State Council 
departments in charge of foreign economic relations and trade, 
foreign trade operators should submit to the departments 
concerned documents and other materials in connection with their 
foreign trade activities. The departments concerned should keep 
the business secrets of foreign trade operators who submit 
relevant information to them. 
<H5>  Chapter III. Imports and Exports of Commodities and </H5>
Technology 
  Article 15. Except when otherwise specified in provisions of 
other laws and administrative regulations, the state permits, 
without any restrictions, the import and export of commodities 
and technology. 
  Article 16. The state may restrict the import or export of 
commodities and technology that come under any of the following 
circumstances: 
  1. The state may impose restrictions on the import or export 
of commodities and technology that are required to safeguard 
state security or social interests. 
  2. The state may impose restrictions on the export of 
commodities and technology that are in short supply in China or 
in an effort to effectively protect domestic resources that are 
exhaustible. 
  3. If the absorptive capacity of a nation or region in 
importing certain commodities and technology is limited, the 
state may need to impose restrictions on exports. 
  4. The state may impose restrictions on the export of 
commodities and technology that are required to establish, or to 
accelerate the establishment of, specific industries in China. 
  5. The state may restrict, as necessary, the import of 
agricultural, pastoral, and aquatic products in any form. 
  6. The state may restrict the import of commodities and 
technology that are required to safeguard China's financial 
status in the international community or to ensure a balance in 
its international trade accounts. 
  7. The state may restrict the import or export of certain 
commodities and technology as required by the provisions of 
international treaties or agreements that the PRC has signed or 
joined. 
  Article 17. The state may ban the import or export of 
commodities and technology that come under any of the following 
circumstances: 
  1. Commodities and technology that jeopardize [wei hai 0604 
1364] state security or social interests. 
  2. The import or export of commodities and technology that 
must be banned so as to protect human lives or health. 
  3. Commodities and technology that are destructive to [po 
huai 4275 0975] the ecological environment. 
  4. The state may ban the import or export of certain 
commodities and technology as required by the provisions of 
international treaties or agreements that the PRC has signed or 
joined. 
  Article 18. The department in charge of foreign trade and 
economic cooperation under the State Council shall work jointly 
with other State Council departments concerned to formulate, 
readjust, and promulgate, in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 16 and Article 17 of this Law, the catalogue of goods 
and technologies restricted or banned from import or export. 
  If with State Council approval, the department in charge of 
foreign trade and economic cooperation under the State Council, 
either alone or in conjunction with other State Council 
departments concerned, may decide to temporarily restrict or ban 
from import or export certain goods or technologies not listed 
in the catalogue, provided the restriction or ban is within the 
limits of Article 16 and Article 17 of this Law. 
  Article 19. Goods subject to import or export restrictions 
shall be controlled by means of import-export quota or permit. 
Technologies subject to import or export restrictions shall be 
controlled by means of import-export permit. 
  In order to import or export any goods or technologies 
subject to the import-export quota or permit control, prior 
approval must be obtained in accordance with the State Council 
provisions, and approval or disapproval shall be given either by 
the department in charge of foreign trade and economic 
cooperation under the State Council alone or by that department 
and other State Council departments concerned jointly. 
  Article 20. The import-export quotas shall be allotted by 
the department in charge of foreign trade and economic 
cooperation under the State Council or by other State Council 
departments concerned according to their functional duties. The 
allotment shall be made in accordance with the applicant's 
import-export achievements and ability, and on the a principle 
of efficiency, impartiality, openness, and fair competition. 
  The methods and procedures for the quota distribution shall 
be stipulated by the State Council. 
  Article 21. Cultural relics, wild life and related goods, 
and articles that are restricted or banned from import or export 
by other laws or administrative regulations shall be handled 
according to those laws and administrative regulations. 
<H5>  Chapter IV. International Service Trade </H5>
  Article 22. The state promotes a gradual development of 
international service trade. 
  Article 23. The People's Republic of China, in accordance 
with the international treaties or agreements of which it is a 
signatory or participant, will give other signatories and 
participants market access and national treatment in 
international service trade. 
  Article 24. The state may restrict international service 
trade for any of the following reasons: 
  (1) to safeguard state security or public interests; 
  (2) to protect ecological environment; 
  (3) to establish or accelerate the establishment of special 
domestic service trades; 
  (4) to ensure balance of foreign exchange receipt and 
payment; or 
  (5) restrictions prescribed by other laws and administrative 
regulations. 
  Article 25. The state bans an international service trade on 
any of the following conditions: 
  (1) if it jeopardize state security or public interests; 
  (2) if it violates the international obligations of the 
People's Republic of China; or 
  (3) if it banned by other laws or administrative 
regulations. 
  Article 26. The department in charge of foreign trade and 
economic cooperation under the State Council and other State 
Council departments concerned manage international service trade 
according to this Law and other laws and administrative 
regulations. 
  Chapter V. Foreign Trading Order 
  Article 27. Foreign trade operators shall carry out foreign 
trading activities according to law and participate in fair 
competition; they may not commit the following acts: 
  (1) counterfeiting, altering, or trading in certificates of 
origin for export and import products and in export and import 
licenses; 
  (2) infringing on intellectual property rights protected by 
PRC laws; 
  (3) eliminating rivals through improper means of 
competition; 
  (4) obtaining tax refunds on exports from the state through 
fraudulent means; and 
  (5) other acts that violate laws and administrative rules. 
  Article 28. In carrying out foreign trading activities, 
foreign trade operators shall settle or use foreign exchange in 
accordance with relevant state provisions. 
  Article 29. Where an increase in imports gravely harms or 
threatens serious harm to the producers of similar domestically 
produced goods or goods that directly compete with such imports, 
the state may institute necessary protection measures to 
eliminate or diminish such harm or the threat thereof. 
  Article 30. Where goods are imported below normal costs and 
thus substantially harm relevant domestic industries already in 
place or threaten such harm, or substantially impede the 
establishment of relevant domestic industries, the state may 
take necessary measures to eliminate or diminish such harm, the 
threat thereof, or relevant impediments. 
  Article 31. Where import goods are directly or indirectly 
subsidized in any form by the countries that export them and 
thus substantially harm relevant domestic industries already in 
place or threaten such harm, or substantially impede the 
establishment of relevant domestic industries, the state may 
take necessary measures to eliminate or diminish such harm, the 
threat thereof, or relevant impediments. 
  Article 32. Where the circumstances specified in Articles 29 
through 31 arise, departments or organs designated by the State 
Council shall investigate and deal with such circumstances in 
accordance with laws and administrative rules. 
<H5>  Chapter VI. Foreign Trade Promotion </H5>
  Article 33. In keeping with the needs of foreign trade 
development, the state shall establish and improve banking 
institutions that serve foreign trade, and create funds for 
foreign trade development as well as risk funds. 
  Article 34. The state shall develop foreign trade through 
export and import credit, tax refunds on exports, and other 
measures for promoting foreign trade. 
  Article 35. Foreign trade operators may establish or join 
export and import chambers of commerce in accordance with the 
law. 
  Export and import chambers of commerce shall coordinate and 
guide the foreign trading activities of their members in 
accordance with laws, administrative rules, and their articles 
of association; provide consultation; relay suggestions made by 
their members on foreign trade promotion to relevant government 
departments; and actively carry out activities aimed at 
promoting foreign trade. 
  Article 36. China's international trade promotion 
organizations shall, in pursuant of their charters, sponsor 
foreign liaison activities and exhibitions, provide information 
and consultation services, and carry out other activities for 
promoting trade with foreign countries. 
  Article 37. The state assists and facilitates autonomous 
regions of minority nationalities and economically 
underdeveloped areas to develop foreign trade. 
<H5>  Chapter VII. Legal Responsibilities </H5>
  Article 38. Whoever commits a crime of smuggling goods 
prohibited or restricted for importation and exportation shall 
be affixed with criminal responsibilities in accordance with the 
supplementary regulations governing punishments for smuggling 
offenses. Where importation or exportation does not constitute 
a crime, it shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions 
of the Customs Law. The State Council's department in charge of 
foreign trade and economic relations may revoke the foreign 
trade license of anyone penalized. 
  Article 39. Whoever forges or alters certificates of origin 
of exports or imports or export and import licenses, and whoever 
buys or sells forged or altered certificates of origin of 
exports or imports or export and import licenses shall be 
affixed with criminal responsibilities in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 167 of the Criminal Law. 
  A unit which has committed the crime mentioned in the 
preceding paragraph shall be penalized with a fine, and the 
unit's personnel directly responsible for the crime shall be 
affixed with criminal responsibilities in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 167 of the Criminal Law. The State 
Council's department in charge of foreign trade and economic 
relations may revoke the unit's foreign trade license. 
  Whoever knowingly imports or exports goods with a forged or 
altered export and import license shall be penalized according 
to the provisions of Article 38 of this law. 
  Article 40. Whoever commits the crime of importing or 
exporting technology prohibited or restricted for importation or 
exportation in violation of this law shall be affixed with 
criminal responsibilities according to the supplementary 
regulations governing punishments for smuggling offenses. 
  Article 41. Dereliction of duty, favoritism, or power abuse 
by state foreign trade functionaries, which constitutes a crime, 
shall be affixed with criminal responsibilities. Where such an 
act does not constitute a crime, administrative disciplinary 
action shall be given. 
  Solicitation or unlawful acceptance of money and goods by 
state foreign trade functionaries taking advantage of their 
positions, which constitutes a crime, shall be affixed with 
criminal responsibilities according to the supplementary 
regulations governing punishments for offenses in embezzlement 
and bribery. Where such an act does not constitute a crime, 
administrative disciplinary action shall be given. 
<H5>  Chapter VIII. Appendix </H5>
  Article 42. The state adopts flexible measures and give 
preferential treatment to trade between Chinese and foreign 
border cities and towns, as well as market trade fairs of border 
residents. Specific procedures shall be drawn up by the State 
Council. 
  Article 43. This law does not apply to independent tariff 
zones inside the People's Republic of China. 
  Article 44. This law enters into effect on 1 July 1994. 

