Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Xinjiang News" program] </F>
  [Text] The Sixth Enlarged Plenary Session of the Fourth 
Xinjiang Autonomous Regional CPC Committee met this morning. 
Song Hanliang, secretary of the autonomous regional party 
committee, presided over the meeting. Leading Comrades Abulaiti 
Amudurexiti, Zhang Fusen, Jin Yunhui, Wang Lequan, Keyum 
Bawudun, (Guo Gang), Zhou Shengtao, Hailiqiemu Silamu, Pan 
Zhaomin, and (Li Fengzi) attended the meeting. [Video shows 
closeup and medium shots of Abulaiti Amudurexiti, Zhang Fusen, 
Jin Yunhui, Wang Lequan, Keyum Bawudun, (Guo Gang), Zhou 
Shengtao, Hailiqiemu Silamu, Pan Zhaomin, and (Li Fengzi), and 
wide shots of several hundred attendees in a hall, as well as 
closeups of Abulaiti Amudurexiti delivering a speech] 
  Abulaiti Amudurexiti, deputy secretary of the autonomous 
regional party committee and acting chairman of the autonomous 
region, delivered a report entitled "Comprehensively Implement 
the Guidelines of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee and Accelerate Xinjiang's Reform, Opening Up, 
and Modernization." 
  He said: In 1993, the people of all nationalities in 
Xinjiang thoroughly implemented Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
important talks and the guidelines of the 14th national party 
congress and actively carried out the tasks put forward by the 
fifth enlarged plenary session of the fourth autonomous regional 
party committee. Our economy continued to maintain a fairly 
high growth rate. The gross product for 1993 is expected to be 
37.7 billion yuan, or up about 10 percent from 1992. The 
autonomous region enjoys economic development, political 
stability, unity between nationalities, and social progress. 
The general situation is good. However, we have soberly 
realized that while other parts of the country are accelerating 
their reform and development, the gap between Xinjiang and the 
interior and coastal provinces and regions is constantly 
widening. This year is a year of reform, and the state is 
comprehensively promoting fiscal and tax, banking, investment, 
and planning systems reforms. We are facing a rigorous test in 
accelerating the establishment of a socialist market economic 
structure. We must strive to adapt ourselves to the situation. 
Party committees and governments at all levels should fully 
understand the situation, formulate concrete measures while 
considering realities, turn passivity into activity, and change 
unfavorable conditions into favorable ones. At the same time, 
we should know that during the shift from the old to the new 
structure, new circumstances and new problems will inevitably 
emerge in our economic and social life, and they will create 
some difficulties for our work. 
  Abulaiti Amudurexiti said: In light of the new situation 
created in the process of establishing a socialist market 
economy and taking Xinjiang's specific conditions into 
consideration, our guiding ideology for accelerating economic 
development is: Under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, we 
will implement in an all-around way the guidelines of the 14th 
National Party Congress and Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee; take reform as an impetus to focus our 
efforts on development; make use of our favorable natural 
resource conditions to adjust our industrial structure; open 
ourselves wider to the outside world; and increase economic 
efficiency to bring about the rapid and highly efficient 
development of the national economy [shi xian guo min jing ji 
kuai su gao xiao fa zhan] and raise Xinjiang's overall economic 
strength to enable it to enter the level of a comfortable life 
along with the rest of the country. Based on this guiding 
ideology, our development strategy is to orient toward three 
markets, seize three major Opportunities, take advantage of our 
strong position in two aspects, and achieve breakthroughs in 
four aspects. Specifically, we must orient ourselves toward the 
domestic and international, as well as Xinjiang's regional 
markets; seize the Opportunities brought by a national policy of 
encouraging industrial development in Western China, by the 
completion of the second Eurasian Continental Bridge, and by the 
development of our petroleum industry; take advantage of our 
strong position in natural resources and in geographical 
location; and achieve breakthroughs in the transformation of 
traditional industries by focusing primarily on improving 
state-owned large and medium-sized enterprises and changing 
enterprise operating mechanism, in the development of the local 
economy by concentrating on mass-scale agriculture and secondary 
and tertiary industries, in foreign trade and international 
economic and technological cooperation by opening our doors wide 
on every side and diversifying the international market, and in 
services and other industries related to oil exploration and 
development. From now on, we need to concentrate on carrying 
out the following tasks: Continue to strengthen the position of 
agriculture as the foundation of the economy, and accelerate the 
development of agriculture and the rural economy; vigorously 
develop the rural economy and revitalize the local economy by 
focusing on secondary and tertiary industries; step up the 
construction of infrastructure and basic industries to improve 
our ability to achieve sustained economic growth; accelerate 
technological transformation of our enterprises by orienting 
ourselves toward the market; open wider to the outside world and 
do a good job in foreign trade and economic relations; step up 
the development of oil and other industries in which we have 
strong resources to promote local economic development; and show 
concern about the masses' well-being and bring tangible benefits 
to them. 
  Speaking of all-around in-depth reform to increase the 
motive 
force and vitality of economic development, Abulaiti Amudurexiti 
said: We must further emancipate our minds, change our way of 
thinking, and based on the tasks laid down in the decision of 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
keep in step with the rest of the country in terms of the 
general reform programs while boldly blazing new trails and 
advancing in a pioneering spirit to tackle major problems of 
economic development in light of Xinjiang's reality. We must 
earnestly conduct experiments to build a modern enterprise 
system and carry out basic work to change the operating 
mechanism of state-owned enterprises. We must change the 
government's functions, strengthen and improve our ability to 
macroeconomically adjust and control the regional economic 
operation. We must step up the cultivation and development of a 
regional market system based primarily on the market of 
essential factors of production. We must deepen our foreign 
trade structure and open ourselves wider to the outside world. 
We must continue to deepen rural reform and establish a rural 
economic operation and management system that meets the 
requirements of a socialist market economy. We must step up the 
reform of our social security and housing systems to create a 
favorable condition for our region's reform to advance in depth 
and breadth. We must further deepen our scientific and 
technological and educational structural reform. 
  Abulaiti Amudurexiti also gave specific instructions on 
earnestly strengthen party leadership to ensure the smooth 
progress of reform, opening up, and modernization. 

