BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by David Marsh: "Bonn Casts Doubt on Monetary </F>
Union Timetable"] 
  [Text] Mr Gunter Rexrodt, the German economics minister, 
yesterday appeared to cast doubt on the Maastricht timetable for 
economic and monetary union by saying that a single European 
currency might take until 2001 to realise. 
  Speaking in London, Mr Rexrodt stressed that individual 
European economies had to show "more convergence" before EMU 
[economic and monetary union] would be feasible. 
  "From the German side we are keeping the goal of a common 
currency. But we will not get excited if it takes five, six or 
seven years," he said. The Maastricht Treaty lays down 1997 and 
1999 as the earliest and latest possible dates for introduction 
of EMU. Mr Rexrodt made clear his overall commitment to 
monetary union. "We have to go that way there is no 
alternative." 
  Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank 
president, have both emphasised recently that maintaining 
currency stability is more important than sticking rigidly to 
the Maastricht timetable. However, Mr Rexrodt is the first 
senior member of the German economic policy establishment to say 
publicly that EMU could be delayed until the next century. He 
made the comments at a conference on investment in Germany 
organised by the German-British Chamber of Commerce. 
  Both Mr Rexrodt and Mr Michael Heseltine, the UK trade and 
industry secretary, who also spoke at the conference, underlined 
the importance of further measures to free European businesses 
from unnecessary regulation. However, the two ministers admitted 
that Britain and Germany had made little progress on setting up 
an Anglo-German panel of business experts to review EU 
legislation. The initiative was announced when the two 
ministers met in London on April 27, but Mr Rexrodt said the two 
sides were still exploring the "structure" of such a body. 
  Mr Heseltine said the delay was partly due to the 
intervening 
six weeks of campaigning for the European elections. 
  Mr Rexrodt painted a relatively optimistic picture of German 
economic recovery. The 1994 German growth rate could top the 
official target of 1.5 per cent, and expansion next year could 
be around 2 per cent, he said. 
  The two ministers showed divergence on the importance of the 
European social chapter, from which the UK won an opt-out in the 
Maastricht treaty. 
  Mr Heseltine claimed that Britain was attracting investment 
from Germany partly because German companies were trying to free 
themselves from onerous EU social legislation. "German 
companies are looking to invest here to shed themselves from the 
responsibilities of the social chapter," he said. Mr Rexrodt 
said the problem of German labour costs and social policy 
rigidities was not linked to the social chapter. 

