Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by David Gutierrez Lopez] </F>
  [Text] Approximately 7,000 weapons of various calibers have 
been diverted from Nicaragua to drug traffickers in exchange for 
drugs, marine products, clothing, and household appliances, 
according to Lieutenant Colonel Ramon Arnesto Soza, chief of the 
Special Disarmament Brigade (BED). 
  To protect their merchandise, the drug traffickers use AK-47 
rifles, grenade launchers, and RPG-7's manufactured in the 
former Soviet Union. Lately, there has been fear that they may 
even have in their hands the dangerous surface-to-air missiles, 
known as Redeyes, produced in sophisticated U.S. weapons 
factories. 
  It was estimated that in 1991 in Nicaragua there were 
approximately 80,000 weapons dispersed in the hands of civilians 
and armed groups. The disarmament process has secured 53,000 
weapons of all types, said Ramon Arnesto Soza, during an 
exclusive interview with BARRICADA. It is also estimated that 
there are more than 150,000 explosive devices throughout the 
nation. There are still areas in the country that are 
completely mined where EPS [Sandinist People's Army] sappers 
have discontinued their operation due to lack of funds. 
  The military chief said: "The traffic of weapons diverted to 
drug traffickers is carried out in the Nicaraguan Atlantic area. 
Groups of Miskitos [Indian group] exchange rifles for drugs and 
other things." He added that thousands of weapons have escaped 
over the Honduran and Costa Rican borders. These weapons had 
arrived in Nicaragua through what is now Russia in the last 
decade to defend the nation from the war financed by the U.S. 
Government at that time. 
  Based on these numbers, there are still 27,000 weapons that 
have to be recovered; most of these are AK-47's. To secure 
these, approximately "3 million cordobas are required to offer 
cash in exchange for the weapons," said the BED chief who has 
led the disarmament of all the rearmed groups. This mission will 
conclude with the disarmament of the 3-80 Northern Front. 
  There are still approximately 700 armed men organized in 
small groups devoted to thievery and the kidnapping of peasants 
on the roads and highways, particularly in the northern part of 
the country. 
  The BED has disarmed 130 groups of rearmed men who operated 
in different parts of the nation's territory, among them 9,000 
pro-Sandinist and 14,000 recontras of the Nicaraguan Resistance, 
Yatamas [Indian group], etc. 
  Disarming in exchange for cash, food, and other benefits 
supported by several nations is at a standstill due to a lack of 
funds. Currently, endeavors are being undertaken to secure 
enough cash to resume the program. 
  The 3-80 Northern Front members will be allowed to keep 
their 
small weapons--pistols and revolvers. They will be allowed to 
carry these legally once they turn in their war weapons. 
Subsequently, some will join the police, while others will go 
the fields to work. 
  In the coming months the BED that was initially comprised of 
619 men--between EPS soldiers and former contras -- will 
definitely disappear after they disarm El Chacal's men. These 
men are considered the last remnants of the recontras who took 
up arms again as a result of President Violeta Chamorro 
government's nonfulfillment of commitments. 
  Currently the BED has been reduced to barely 70 men who, 
once 
the last demobilization is carried out on 8 April, will be able 
to join the EPS to engage in other missions, Arnesto Soza said. 

