CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksey Kirichenko and Azer Mursaliyev under the </F>
heading "Situation": "Water Wars"] 
  [Text] If you enter the Uzbekistan Ministry of Water 
Resources building, go up a marble staircase and flip a switch, 
you will see an electric "river" flow from the Ob River into the 
Central Asian deserts. This "Diagram Map of Ob-Irtysh Water 
System Diversion to Central Asia" was built in the 1980's, and 
apparently built to last. 
  A curious metamorphosis: it seemed that the plan to divert 
northern rivers had finally been buried almost 10 years ago. 
Outraged articles in NOVYY MIR and the closing of the 
intelligentsia's ranks against changing the course of rivers 
proved the obvious to everyone: decisions on super-projects, no 
matter how alluring they might seem, are most often made without 
consideration for the long-range effects of introducing the 
particular boon of civilization in question, whether it be the 
greening of the Sahara or a dike across the Bering Strait... 
  The USSR Ministry of Water Resources was shut down with 
great 
pomp. 
  Yet just as soon as the passions accompanying the turbulent 
breakup of the former union republics had died down a bit, new 
sprouts of old ideas once again struggled toward the light. 
<H5>  They Prefer To Discuss the Aral Sea in a Whisper </H5>
  In the East, power is a matter of who owns the water, not 
the 
land. It is this simple idea that is demonstrated over and over 
at every historical juncture. Following that idea, Central Asia 
has already lost its struggle for power. 
  At one time it was supposedly concern for the region's 
socioeconomic development that justified the decision to carry 
out large-scale irrigation in Central Asia. Behind the slogans 
lay much simpler ambitions: the desire to earn huge amounts of 
money that were then successfully invested not in canal linings, 
but instead in individuals' own dachas and estates. 
  In the late 1950's, when the water balance was still being 
maintained, 64 cubic kilometers of water flowed into the Aral 
Sea each year, with 63 cubic kilometers of that subsequently 
evaporating. By 1980, as the result of the development of 
irrigation-based agriculture and increasing irretrievable water 
consumption, the water flow had fallen to 11 cubic kilometers. 
In 1985-86 not a single drop of water flowed into the sea. 
  In Uzbekistan alone canals extend 183,000 km. According to 
calculations done by Academician Aleksandr Yanshin, only 
two-three percent of those canals are reinforced and lined with 
concrete or other binders. That means that water is literally 
draining away into the sand. Experiments have proven that it 
only takes seven-10 cubic meters of water to irrigate one 
hectare of farmland, yet two or three times that much is 
currently being used. 
  The "third Central Asian river," the river of poor 
management 
and irrepressible ambitions, has created swamps and four million 
hectares of salinated, uninhabitable land that has been given a 
name that evokes nearby deserts: the Aralkum. 
  On its way to the Aral Sea the Amu Darya is quite simply 
drained to its very riverbed. Despite what geography textbooks 
say, it has long since ceased to flow into the sea or, more 
precisely, what was once called a sea. Just as the Zeravshan 
River no longer flows into the Amu Darya. 
  The highest rate of infant mortality rate in the world is 
found in the Aral region, at 80 per 1,000 newborns. The summers 
have gotten hotter, there are 90 days of dust storms every year, 
and winters are colder -- not just in Central Asia, but also 
along the lower Volga, in the southern Urals, in Western 
Siberia, Afghanistan, India, Pakistan... 
  In Uzbekistan I heard it said several time that "the death 
of 
the Aral Sea is an accomplished fact." The universal cries of 
"The Aral Sea can still be saved!" are supposedly misleading 
people, even though now is the time we should be urgently 
working on another problem that can still be solved: the problem 
of lands that must be saved from the "heavy breath" of the dying 
Aral Sea. But no one was willing to say that into a microphone 
-- just in private, and then only in a whisper. 
  My trip to Uzbekistan coincided with severe high water 
levels, the thawing of mountain snows, and the inundation of 
areas adjoining rivers. I just could not understand how 
Uzbekistan could have a water shortage. Hydroelectric power 
station managers begged the Ministry of Water Resources to 
permit controlled discharges from overfilled reservoirs: if the 
water were released evenly, on several different occasions, then 
flooding could be avoided. But the Ministry of Water Resources 
had its own opinion about that, or rather it had its approved 
plans, which nature somehow never seems to take into account. 
  All rivers have a planned flow capacity. The Chirchik, for 
instance, can carry 1,000 cubic meters per second. But therein 
lies the rub: even if actually carrying only 700 cubic meters it 
floods all the adjoining dachas, roads and even enterprises such 
as the Tashkent Motor Plant. 
  If everyone is aware of these facts, then why is the problem 
of the Aral Sea portrayed as unsolvable? It would seem that what 
needs to be done is to reinforce the sides of canals, prevent 
water from running off into low-lying areas and lakes, regulate 
the watering schedule and, finally, follow long-standing cotton 
cultivation technologies that make it possible to avoid several 
unnecessary waterings... 
  It turns out that this is not the solution. In order to save 
a single cubic kilometer of water it would be necessary to pay 
(in Soviet prices) R2.5 billion [rubles]. It is perhaps for that 
reason that water resource managers are still obsessed with 
completely different projects. 
<H5>  The Most Cherished Dream of the Karakum </H5>
  My interview with Georgiy Balayanets, chief expert with 
Uzbekistan's Main Administration for Water Resource Monitoring, 
was almost over when my interlocutor (up until that point very 
cautious in his assertions and assessments) stood up and, going 
over to a huge map of Central Asia, suddenly remarked: "The 
entire region's most cherished dream has been and remains the 
diversion of the Ob-Irtysh water system. Including for the 
purpose of saving the Aral Sea." 
  The Aral Sea was long ago entered in Uzbekistan's balance 
sheet as the price that had to be paid for "cotton 
independence," and it was said that this was just something that 
had to be accepted. Now people are reckoning which is cheaper: 
to conserve their own water or bring in "outside sources"? 
  A canal 2,320 km long, the brainchild of the Soviet Ministry 
of Water Resources, was assigned the glorious mission of saving 
the Aral Sea from death and solving the problems of a rapidly 
growing region (incidentally, it was the demographic 
justification that was promoted as primary). It was assumed that 
with the aid of Siberian rivers it would be possible to find 
timely ways to provide food, employment and a positive 
environmental situation for future residents of Central Asia and 
Kazakhstan. 
  Work was done on this project by more than 100 union-level 
institutes, and the canal-digging machinery had already been 
purchased. On a human level one can sympathize with the 
planners, who spent years of their labor designing unique 
engineering projects. But did anyone ever stop to think about 
the kind of future awaiting the areas that were to be developed 
in the process of the canal building? 
  "It was proposed that 25 cubic kilometers of water be 
diverted to the south each year," says Academician Yanshin. "But 
that amount would not even be sufficient to maintain the Aral 
Sea's current level! Nevertheless they wrote that the water 
diversion would increase total agricultural yield by two-three 
percent in comparison to the `Food Program'. Meanwhile, more 
than 20 percent of the crop is being lost during harvesting, 
transportation and storage -- these are the untapped resources 
that could be going into water conservation and infrastructure 
development. And has anyone ever calculated how much it will 
cost just to operate the canal?" 
  But it appears there is no point in answering even these 
obvious questions, because Russia does not have the money to 
revive the river diversion project, and the prospects of the 
Central Asian countries and Kazakhstan doing so are even dimmer. 
  According to our information, in the early 1990's some 
Central Asian states placed this condition before the Soviet 
Government: they would sign the Union Treaty only if the 
northern river diversion project were revived. It appears they 
even got approval for that... But the Soviet Union collapsed, 
and the issue went away on its own. 
  Today the water problems of Central Asia and Kazakhstan are 
exacerbated by "feudal fragmentation." Everyone is his own boss. 
In the opinion of Aleksandr Yanshin, Kazakhstan's Lake Balkhash 
has been spared precisely because the lake does not have several 
owners, each prepared to take as much as they like and more than 
likely leave their neighbors without... 
  At the Ministry of Water Resources I was told in strictest 
secrecy about another astounding project developed by 
Uzbekistan's water resource managers. For several kilometers the 
Amu Darya flows along the border between fraternal Turkmenistan 
and Uzbekistan. So why not shift the river's channel to Uzbek 
territory? Never mind that it would take more than a hundred 
pumping stations to divert the water to a new channel. 
  Incidentally, the Ukrainians, within whose territory 
Russian-owned gas pipelines are located, have already figured 
out ways to attach taps to them and siphon off fuel. Just 
imagine what would happen to a river from which one could draw 
as much water as one wanted without having to resort to any 
tricks... 
  Relations with Afghanistan are a separate issue. Right now a 
war is being fought "beyond the river," and water consumption 
there does not exceed three cubic km. But as soon as hostilities 
are over at least three times that much water will be needed. 
<H5>  When the Indus Flows to Central Asia... </H5>
  But there is no plan to compare with an idea put forward by 
Nadzhim Khamrayev, director of the Institute for Water Problems, 
a division of the Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences. In his 
opinion, the "issue of water diversion is only tangentially 
related to the issue of saving the Aral Sea," no more than that. 
The most important thing is how to feed a growing population. 
How? Uzbek water specialists cannot stop thinking about the huge 
and, most importantly, unutilized water resources in the Indus 
River -- 220 billion cubic meters. Currently the institute 
headed by Khamrayev is promoting the idea of diverting a portion 
of the flow of rivers that rise in the Pamir-Tyanshan mountain 
range. This plan includes not only the Central Asian countries, 
but also Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran and even India. 
  In the pages of the respectable Tashkent newspaper 
BIZNES-VESTNIK VOSTOKA the academician describes in detail three 
alternatives for diverting water from the Indus River to Central 
Asia. The first two options are technically complex, requiring 
the building of tunnels through mountains. But the third is 
supposedly deserving of "the greatest attention." The plan is to 
raise the water flow by 600-700 meters not far from the 
Pakistani port of Karachi, from which the water will flow by 
force of gravity across Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan. At the 
Afghan-Turkmen border the water of the Indus would flow into the 
Amu Darya. 
  The proposed distance: 2,600 kilometers! Then we would have 
flowering gardens like the gardens of Semiramis, and heavenly 
groves of trees. The only thing not indicated is how much all 
this could cost and where the money will come from. Not to 
mention the political interests of the states involved in this 
"project"... 
<H5>  How About a Water Tax? </H5>
  Academician Khamrayev never ceases to remind us that the 
solution to the water problems of Uzbekistan and all of Central 
Asia is not up to local governments, but rather Russia. It would 
be impossible to divert the Ob-Irtysh system without the consent 
of the Russian Federation. Just as it is impossible to resolve a 
single dispute involving water within Central Asia itself. It 
was toward this end that the Interstate Water Management Council 
and the International Fund To Save the Aral Sea were 
established, with Russia participating as an observer. 
  Let us examine the "Decision by the Central Asian Heads of 
State To Establish Funding for the `International Fund To Save 
the Aral Sea'," which was adopted in Nukus in January and signed 
on behalf of the Government of the Russian Federation by Yuriy 
Yarov. At first glance a quite unremarkable decision that merely 
states an intention and essentially decides nothing. The four 
Central Asian states and Kazakhstan pledge to pay up to one 
percent of their state budgets into a joint "water" fund. But 
thus far not a single sum-kupon, manat or tenge has been 
deposited in it. Kazakhstan's water managers have announced that 
they will go their own way altogether. 
  Back in the days of the USSR, Central Asia repeatedly 
returned to the idea of instituting a water tax, something that 
has been practiced since ancient times. Now this idea is making 
the rounds again. But today it would be even more difficult to 
implement. Now that each area is independent one can imagine the 
kind of money that Tajikistan, which is at war and essentially 
not working, or even Kyrgyzstan, might demand in payment for 
water from Uzbekistan, for example. Uzbekistan's annual water 
consumption is 115 cubic km, 105 of them flowing out of 
neighboring mountains. 
  The World Bank has also gotten involved in saving the Aral 
Sea, but only one condition: that the "Decision..." be 
immediately amended to exclude Point 8, which mandates (albeit 
in a very cautious and Eastern way) "the implementation of a 
compilation of technical and economic studies pertaining to the 
issued of donor augmentation of rivers in the Aral Sea basin 
from external sources." 
  The World Bank was deferred to and the point dropped. But 
for 
how long? 

