 
<!-- PJG STAG 4702 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=4 -->
The survey also provides information on the number of buildings with heating and air conditioning systems. Total
number of heated buildings is estimated to be 3.9 million. Heating systems include boilers, furnaces, individual
space heaters, and packaged heating units. Almost one-half of all the buildings are heated by forced-air central
systems. Air-distributing heat and cooling systems are most prevalent in office, mercantile and service buildings.
The survey reveals that 70 percent of the buildings have air conditioning. It also shows that 80 percent of the buildings
have heat and air conditioning, and 12 percent have heat, but no air conditioning. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Over 40 percent of the floorspace built since 1986 was in a building with a computerized energy management and control
systems (EMCS). EMCS is an energy conservation feature that uses mini/micro computers, instrumentation, control
equipment and software to manage a building's use of energy for heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting
and/or business related processes. These systems can also manage fire control, safety and security. Overall, EMCS
are present in buildings accounting for 23 percent of floorspace. EMCS controls HVAC in only 251,000 buildings or
6 percent of total number of buildings.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
However, the DOE survey [Ex. 4&hyph;303] does not provide data by two-digit Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC). The number of buildings by SIC will determine subsequent costs. OSHA applied the DOE estimates of the number
of buildings by type of occupancy (single or multi-tenant) to the number of establishments by two-digit SIC given
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. First, OSHA allocated non-government single tenant buildings (estimated at 3.1
million) across the relative two-digit SIC using the relative two-digit SIC distribution of the number of establishments.
Then, OSHA allocated the 0.8 million non-government multi-establishment buildings across two-digit SIC using
the relative two-digit SIC distribution of the number of establishments in multi-establishment buildings (2.8
million). All government buildings were considered single tenant buildings. OSHA recognizes that this methodology
of classification of buildings by two-digit SIC code may not reflect the fact that establishments in multi-tenant
buildings should be allocated across several SICs or the fact that some single establishment buildings may be concentrated
in certain SICs instead of all SICs. This is particularly true for the agricultural sector for which farms and farm
buildings (silos, grain elevators and barns) are outside the scope of the IAQ portion of the proposal. However, OSHA
does not have the data to provide such delineation at this point. Table VI&hyph;2 presents OSHA's estimate of the number
of buildings by two-digit SIC and by characteristics of occupancy and ventilation system. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
