 
<!-- PJG STAG 4700 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
While OSHA supports the need for training requirements, OSHA agrees with the position of the majority of commenters
that the competent person criteria contained in &sect;1915.7 achieve the same result, that is, a highly trained individual
who has knowledge of the unique aspects of shipyard operations and the ability to carry out and perform the required
atmospheric tests. The criterion in paragraph (c) of &sect;1915.7 requires the shipyard competent person to have
the skill and knowledge necessary to perform atmospheric testing. Because each shipyard is unique, how much training
a shipyard competent person must have and how often it must be repeated is left to the employer who is in the best position
to determine what skills and knowledge must be reinforced and what resource information needs to be presented. As
such, OSHA is of the opinion that by continuing the previous competent person criteria, employers will ensure that
the necessary training will continue to be provided to shipyard employers who are so designated as competent persons.
Furthermore, OSHA believes that this performance-oriented approach will allow the most flexibility in ensuring
the availability of competent person services and in ensuring that the unique conditions in each shipyard can be addressed.

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Paragraph (c)(1) is the same as previous paragraph (b)(1) except that the competent person is now required to be able
to understand and carry out the written or oral instructions left by the Certified Industrial Hygienist as well as
the Marine Chemist and the Coast Guard Authorized Person. Certificates issued by the Marine Chemist, Certified Industrial
Hygienist, or Coast Guard authorized person are written instructions. OSHA had proposed to separate the requirements
to understand certificates and to carry out verbal instructions left by the Marine Chemist or Certified Industrial
Hygienist or Coast Guard authorized person but the Agency has concluded that the requirements are sufficiently interrelated
that they can continue to be listed together in paragraph (c)(1). 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Paragraph (c)(2) continues the requirement of previous paragraph (b)(3) that competent persons have a knowledge
of Subparts B, C, D, and H of part 1915. OSHA did not propose to change this requirement, and has made only an editorial
change in order to improve clarity. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Paragraph (c)(3) is the same as old paragraph (b)(4), requiring that competent persons have a familiarity with the
structure and knowledge of the location and designation of spaces on the types of vessels on which repair work is done.
OSHA did not propose to change this requirement but in the final rule reflects OSHA's decision to expand the scope of
Subpart B to cover all phases of shipyard employment. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
In paragraph (c)(4), OSHA continues to require competent persons to have the ability to use and interpret the readings
of oxygen indicators, combustible gas indicators, and carbon dioxide indicators, but consistent with the proposal,
the Agency has added a requirement that the competent person be able to calibrate the testing equipment and that the
equipment not be limited to these monitors. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The proposed language in paragraph (b)(3) was performance-oriented in that it did not limit the testing equipment
to the types recognized specifically in paragraph (b)(2) of the previous rule. As new technologies develop and new
chemical hazards are encountered in the shipyard working environment, it becomes necessary for competent persons
to use new types of environmental monitors and detectors. Skill in the use of this new equipment is necessary for competent
persons to be able to identify sources of hazardous exposures in shipyard employment. In addition, OSHA believes
that in order for the competent person to have the ability to read and interpret the readings of any type of chemical
indicator that may be needed to test atmospheres in the shipyard, a competent person must be familiar enough with the
instrumentation to capably calibrate it. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
In paragraph (c)(5), OSHA continues the requirement contained in the first portion of paragraph (b)(5) in the previous
rule. Paragraph (b)(5) of the previous rule contains two requirements and OSHA has decided to divide the previous
rule into two separate requirements in the final rule: Paragraphs (c)(5) and (c)(7). Paragraph (c)(5) requires that
competent persons must have the capability to perform the tests and inspections required by Subparts B, C, D, and H
of part 1915. The requirement in the final rule is consistent with the language proposed in paragraph (b)(6) of the
proposal. There were no comments objecting to this change and OSHA considers it to be editorial. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
In paragraph (c)(6) OSHA is adding a new requirement to the final rule that coincides with shipyard industry practice.
Paragraph (c)(6) requires competent persons to have the ability to evaluate spaces after a test to determine the need
for further testing by Marine Chemists, Certified Industrial Hygienists, or by the U.S. Coast Guard authorized persons.
OSHA has added this new language to make it clear that there may be atmospheric conditions present in the shipyard that
can not be evaluated effectively by a person trained only to the competent person level and that more highly trained
individuals may be needed to accurately evaluate an atmosphere. In such cases, OSHA believes this new language would
make it clear that an individual such as a Marine Chemist, a Certified Industrial Hygienist, or a Coast Guard authorized
person must be called for assistance. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The State of Washington, Department of Transportation (WADOT) (Ex. 6&hyph;26) noted the ``tremendous responsibility''
placed upon the competent person and even recommended further training. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
WADOT commented, 
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG QTAG 04 -->
<!-- PJG /QTAG -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
