 
<!-- PJG STAG 4702 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
TRAFFIC USA submitted a detailed analysis of international trade in all species of bluefin tuna, including species
not recommended in the proposal for listing. The data indicated that a large quantity of bluefin tuna is traded by countries
that are not parties to ICCAT, although not all the bluefin tuna analyzed by the document are caught in the Atlantic.
However, the basis for this analysis was import data from three countries that report customs data in a uniform way,
Japan, New Zealand, and the United States. Although Japan is identified in the report as importing the majority of
bluefin tuna (perhaps two-thirds), statistics for other major consuming nations, including some non-ICCAT countries,
are not available.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The NAS felt that adding Atlantic bluefin tuna to Appendix II would help provide information needed for population
assessment models and effective management, but would not alter or reduce current traffic in tuna. Although they
were encouraged by ICCAT's catch-quota recommendations, they were discouraged by the lack of data from non-ICCAT
countries, such as Italy and Mexico. They believe that a CITES listing would elicit data from non-ICCAT countries,
which would facilitate assessment of fishing by non-ICCAT countries, particularly in spawning areas. The Wisconsin
Audubon Council, the Audubon Council of New York State, the Napa-Solano Audubon Society, the Cape Arago Audubon Society,
the New York Sportfishing Federation, ICCAT Watch, the New York Zoological Society, Environment Liaison Centre
International, the Connecticut Coastal Fishermen's Association, the HSUS, Defenders, the CMC, and the EIA all reiterated
these sentiments. The Animal Protection Institute indicated a lack of faith in ICCAT's ability to manage the Atlantic
bluefin tuna, and felt that a CITES listing would provide a better opportunity to monitor the effects of trade, especially
because it would include all non-ICCAT countries.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
NMFS does not believe that Atlantic bluefin tuna should be proposed for inclusion in Appendix II of CITES at this time,
and has concluded that ICCAT members should be given adequate time to implement appropriate fishery controls, to
implement fully the Bluefin Statistical Document Program, and to develop procedures for the use of enforcement-enhancing
trade measures with respect to ICCAT's conservation program. After that time the incremental benefits of a CITES
listing could be assessed. NMFS feels that preliminary analysis of data collected through the Bluefin Tuna Statistical
Document will allow evaluation of the effectiveness of this program in calculating and monitoring trade in Atlantic
bluefin tuna.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Given the possibility of ecological extinction, and/or the vulnerability to significant population losses due
to trade or overexploitation, the Atlantic bluefin tuna would qualify biologically for listing in Appendix II of
CITES. However, based on available information on management measures to conserve the species, the Service believes
that a listing should not be proposed at this time. Significant quota reductions have occurred in 1994 and additional
reductions are planned for 1995. The eastern Atlantic population of bluefin tuna appears to be more productive than
its western counterpart. Eastern Atlantic bluefin tuna mature at about age 5 while western Atlantic bluefin tuna
reach maturity at about age 8, and recruitment is relatively much higher in the eastern Atlantic. However, fishing
mortality rates on immature fish in the eastern Atlantic are exceedingly high, with 30&hyph;60 percent of the landings
in recent years comprising fish less than the minimum size of 6.4 kg. recommended by ICCAT in 1975. The most recent estimate
of a overall fishing mortality is 4&hyph;6 times the levels that would be expected to produce the maximum sustainable
yield. An assessment of the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean stocks is scheduled by the SCRS in preparation for
discussions at the 1994 Regular Meeting of ICCAT.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Implementation of the Statistical Document Program now required for all imports into ICCAT countries will provide
more information on Atlantic bluefin tuna harvests than would CITES certificates or export permits, although ICCAT
has not yet required the collection of such information for imports/landings in non-ICCAT countries. Harvest information
would be further enhanced if non-ICCAT countries, and the European Union, became members.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The decision of the Service to forgo proposing a CITES listing is significantly influenced by the Atlantic bluefin
tuna conservation measures adopted at the 1993 annual ICCAT meeting in Madrid. In opposing the listing of the Atlantic
bluefin tuna at the 1992 CITES meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP8) in Kyoto, Japan, representatives for
ICCAT argued that ICCAT, not CITES, was the appropriate international vehicle for implementing necessary conservation
measures for Atlantic bluefin tuna. In response to this approach, the United States delegation to the 1993 ICCAT meeting
proposed and secured significant quota reductions for the western population of Atlantic bluefin tuna.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Another factor supporting the decision of the Service is the progress made by the Permanent Working Group of ICCAT
in April 1994 in fashioning a proposal (to be discussed further at the ICCAT plenary meeting in late 1994) for trade
measures to be used as an ICCAT enforcement tool.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
From the point of view of NMFS, the adoption of quota reductions for 1994 and 1995 demonstrated ICCAT's resolve to maintain
the leadership role in the conservation of the bluefin tuna. However, in the event that appropriate conservation
measures are not adopted by ICCAT or prove to be inadequate, the Service will reconsider proposing this species for
listing in a CITES Appendix, through a postal procedure if listing is thought to be necessary prior to the next Conference
of the Parties.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
5. Requiem (
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=3 -->
Carcharhinidae
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
) and hammerhead (
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=3 -->
Sphyrnidae
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
) sharks. Requiem and hammerhead shark species occur in pelagic and/or coastal waters worldwide, mostly in tropical
to temperate regions. Sizes range from the white, mako, and great hammerhead at over 3 m, to smaller coastal species
as the sandbar and scalloped hammerhead sharks. They are predators of various types. Fertilization and development
of young is, in most species, internal, and young are born as active, fully developed, and relatively large individuals.
The number of young in a brood is usually small (about 2 to 25), but the relative maturity at birth usually results in
high survival rates. Often gestation periods are long (up to 1 year). There are no population size estimates over large
areas for sharks.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
