 
<!-- PJG STAG 4702 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
The San Lorenzo River coho salmon population is primarily a hatchery maintained population that has been extensively
stocked with coho salmon from numerous other northern watersheds for over 70 years. Although the loss of other coho
salmon populations south of San Francisco Bay has isolated these populations, the distance of the Scott and Waddell
Creeks populations to other north-coast coho salmon streams is well within their migration range based on their reported
straying over the last 50 years. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Many small coastal streams in California and Oregon are closed by sand bars at their mouths during a portion of the year.
Generally, fish cannot enter the stream until the sand bar is broken, usually by the first heavy rains. Although the
formation of a sand bar may temporarily act as a migration barrier, it does not represent a reproductive isolation
mechanism. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The timing of coho salmon spawning runs may be partly genetically based, but it is also subject to modification by streamflow,
water temperature, and other environmental variables. Data from other river systems indicate that the timing of
spawning migrations is generally attributed to an increase of stormflow runoff (usually occurring earlier in the
northern range of coho salmon populations), which allows the salmon to migrate through the lagoons/estuaries and
higher up the river systems to their natal tributaries. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Since studies in the 1930's and 1940's, there has been an apparent shift in peak spawning migration timing by coho salmon
in Scott and Waddell Creeks to several weeks later in the season. Spawning migrations in most California coastal streams
and rivers have shifted to later in the spawning season, possibly due to degraded conditions within the watersheds,
rivers, and estuaries. The loss of large woody debris within stream systems which helps flush out sediment and creates
deep holding pools, excessive diversion of drought limited flows which increases water temperatures, and a reduction
in area and volume of most estuaries and rivers due to filling with sediment, may have created conditions in which coho
salmon can no longer access or survive in rivers until the start of heavy winter rains. Although other explanations
are possible, the year-to-year variation in the timing of coho spawning migrations in Scott and Waddell Creeks are
similar and within the range of run times reported for other coho salmon populations in California and Oregon. The
modest difference in peak spawn timing cited by the petitioner may reflect (or may be the result of) reproductive isolation,
but the best available data is inconclusive regarding the cause of this difference. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The petitioner cited evidence for the existence of a genetic difference between the Scott and Waddell Creeks coho
salmon populations and other coho salmon populations in California.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
However, the results from the genetic study cited by the petitioner showed that the greatest differentiation, though
quite low, was between Scott Creek and Waddell Creek, the two California populations that are in the closest proximity.
The results from the limited number of allozyme studies conducted on coho salmon populations in California are similar
to those obtained for coho populations in Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Little pattern in the distribution
of variant alleles or genetic variation was observed, and only weak associations between genetic identity and geographic
location were found. The estimated average number of individuals exchanging genes among the California populations
of coho salmon studied was greater than 1.0 fish per generation, which is large enough to prevent the tendency for fixation
of different alleles in different populations. Overall, the genetic data compiled for this status review failed
to demonstrate that the Scott and Waddell Creeks coho salmon populations as a group are distinct from other coastal
coho salmon populations. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
