 
<!-- PJG STAG 4700 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
The primary purpose of accident damage protection is to prevent the release of hazardous lading from a cargo tank in
the event of an accident. For example, during an accident involving the maximum level of longitudinal deceleration
expected, if the front head of a cargo tank experiences stress levels above the yield point of the material of construction,
the head will bulge or distort. However, if that deformed head continues to contain the lading, the intent of this requirement
has been met. In a practical sense, good engineering practice provides for factors of safety when analytical methods
are not well established and when safety considerations call for reducing the probability of failures. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
When an accident imposes loads on the cargo tank wall, the material of the wall, however, must be stronger than the accident
damage protection device. For example, in a rollover accident, the portion of the cargo tank wall to which a rollover
protection device is attached should not fail before the rollover protection device fails. The design stresses in
the protection device itself can be based on the ultimate strength of the material, but the loads transmitted to the
cargo tank wall must be based on a more conservative value. This can be achieved by use of factors of safety. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Accordingly, paragraph (a)(3) is revised to base design stresses on the ultimate strength of the material with a 1.3
safety factor (i.e., the reciprocal of 0.75 times ultimate, rounded). 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Commenters have stated that most impacts on bottom damage protection devices in accidents occur directly from the
side of the vehicle. TTMA has stated that any piping at the bottom of a tank is protected fore and aft by the running gear
of the cargo tank motor vehicle or its towing vehicle. Contending that reduced forces of impact can be expected from
front and rear, TTMA petitioned for a reduction from 155,000 pounds to 27,000 pounds fore and aft along the longitudinal
axis of the vehicle. RSPA believes, however, that the possibility of impacts from the front is very real for trailers;
for example, during turning maneuvers, or in the event that the towing vehicle rides over an obstacle such as a guard
rail. On the other hand, impacts from the rear are less likely on trailers because of the rear suspension. Therefore,
RSPA has revised paragraph (b)(1) to recognize that suspension components and structural mounting members can provide
all, or part, of bottom damage protection. Additionally, in paragraph (b) introductory text, a second sentence is
added to clarify that a single protection device may be used to protect outlets, projections and piping grouped or
clustered together. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
