 
<!-- PJG STAG 4702 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
The proposed regulations include criteria for evaluating whether the test results of the gasoline samples from the
foreign refinery loading port match the test results of the gasoline samples from the U.S. port of entry. The test results
would have to agree, for each parameter included in the evaluation of reformulated gasoline, within the limits used
for comparing domestic refiner and independent laboratory test results, which are specified in &sect;80.65(f).

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The volume of gasoline contained in each shipment of imported gasoline claimed to be subject to an individual foreign
refinery baseline also would have to be confirmed. The inspection at the foreign refinery loading port would have
to establish the volume loaded onto the ship, which would be compared to the volume determination at the U.S. port of
entry. EPA is proposing that these two volume determinations, corrected for temperature and density, would have
to agree within one percent. EPA believes this level of correlation is appropriate, because it is well within the level
of correlation normally expected in commercial transactions. EPA understands that protests normally are initiated
if ship volume determinations in commercial dealings differ by 0.5%. Nevertheless, EPA requests comment as to the
appropriate level of correlation which should be required, and as to any other approach to confirming volumes that
would be preferable to that proposed. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
In the event any single parameter, or the volumes involved, would not agree in the manner proposed, the individual
foreign refinery baseline could not be used by the importer for the specific batch of imported gasoline for which there
is parameter value or volume disagreement. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
EPA believes that in most cases the gasoline contained in each compartment of a ship would constitute a separate batch,
because the gasoline would not be homogeneous across more than one compartment, and would therefore not meet the batch
definition of &sect;80.2(gg). In consequence, EPA believes that in most cases the sampling, testing, and volume
determinations would have to be performed separately for each of a ship's compartments. In addition, it is EPA's understanding
that the current practice for inspecting the gasoline transported by ship is to separately sample each compartment,
even when the same grade of gasoline is being transported in more than one compartment of a ship. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
EPA also is proposing that the independent laboratory would be required to determine the refinery of origin, and thereby
establish whether the gasoline loaded onto the ship was in fact produced at that refinery. The laboratory also would
determine whether the foreign refinery's gasoline has been combined with gasoline produced at any other refinery.
Only gasoline that is produced at the foreign refinery or origin would be eligible for use with the foreign refinery's
baseline, yet it is possible that gasoline loaded onto a ship at a port serving a foreign refinery could have been produced
at a different refinery. For example, two refineries could be linked to a port by a common pipeline, or gasoline could
be produced at a foreign refinery and then transferred by ship to storage tanks located at a second foreign refinery.

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The proposed requirements related to determining the refinery of origin would confirm that gasoline loaded into
a ship at the port serving a foreign refinery was in fact produced at the foreign refinery and therefore that the foreign
refinery's individual baseline would be applicable. This confirmation of the source refinery by the independent
inspector normally would require the review of documents that reflect all transfers and storage of the gasoline in
question from the point of production at the source refinery to the point of ship loading. The inspector thus would
be required to establish the refinery of origin and that there was no fungible mixing of the gasoline in question with
any gasoline produced at any other refinery prior to loading onto the ship. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
An additional proposed requirement that relates to establishing the refinery-of-origin for imported gasoline
is the proposal for attest engagements at the foreign refinery. This attest requirement would supplement the requirements
regarding an independent laboratory determination of the source refinery of gasoline. The focus of the attest engagement,
however, would be on the refinery operations while the independent laboratory's primary focus would be on the transportation
and storage of gasoline from the refinery to the point of ship loading. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
Under the proposed procedures, the attester would be required to confirm the overall production for the refinery
in question, and to confirm that the portion claimed to have been transferred to ships for shipment to the United States
was a part of that overall production. The attester also would be required to confirm the transfer of gasoline from
the refinery to the ships, and to identify the ships into which the gasoline was transferred. EPA requests comment
on whether these proposed attest procedures are appropriate and adequate. 
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
