<P>
Author of scores of learned books and articles; prolific journalist, novelist 
and short-story writer; founder of two academic journals; editor of the 
"Encyclopedia of Religion"; cultural, political and religious visionary in his 
native Romania; celebrated professor at the University of Chicago; the most 
influential voice in the study of religion in the United States -- and perhaps 
the world -- for at least a generation, Mircea Eliade died in 1986 at age 79. 
Because he insisted on the reality of humanity's experience of the 
transcendent, Eliade rubbed against the grain of secular sensibilities. This 
gentle man affirmed those often revolutionary claims of great prophets and 
mystics: "History" was conditioned by the non-historic; meaningless everyday 
time was awash in a timeless time of cosmic significance. A historian of 
religion, he studied historical claims of encounters beyond history; in doing 
so, he tried to make the sacred real in an age that he believed suppressed it. 
A novelist, he sought to evoke this saving sense of the sacred by mastery of a 
literary art that hid eternity behind the mask of mere becoming, offering 
itself to those blessed with eyes willing to see. 
</P>
<P>
In normal times, Eliade's achievements would be judged remarkable. But in 
Eliade's "Autobiography" we learn the miraculous ways they were won against 
scarcely imaginable hardships visited by the "terror of history" -- the wartime 
slaughter of countless loved ones, perilous political persecution and 
internment, the cancer death of his first wife, refugee flight and 
resettlement, followed by years of chronic, humiliating poverty, and sometimes 
just palpable physical hunger. But discovered behind the profanity of these 
evils is the regular grace of loving friends -- the offer of small academic 
jobs, rent money, membership in the charmed circle of a learned society, or 
just a simple place to work. 
</P>
<P>
Sometimes Eliade even sees cosmic providence in the disruptions that have 
plagued his life. In 1940, Hitler's Rohmputsch was replayed in Bucharest. Gen. 
Antonescu's "party of order," the fascist National Legionary State, triumphed 
and forced Eliade and other more "spiritual" radicals associated with 
Codreanu's adventurist Legion of the Archangel Michael, off the high road of 
history. Codreanu's right-wing political and religious revolution, defended to 
our day by Eliade in his autobiography, was effectively liquidated. Many 
legionnaires were killed; others, like Eliade, whether overt members or mere 
suspects, were imprisoned. Yet getting thrown off the Romanian political track 
only spurred Eliade to universalize his revolutionary ambitions. On the plane 
of international academic life, Eliade became a kind of prophet of the 
trans-historical, hiding within historical documents. A true cultural 
revolutionary to the end, Eliade challenged the whole secular bourgeois world's 
comforting belief in the adequacy of its own works of science, politics and 
economics. 
</P>
<P>
But, worthy ambition or not, Eliade decided to shut us out of his 1930s mind. 
Eliade's account of his (at least) profound sympathy for the political and 
cultural revolution of Codreanu's Legion is rife with equivocation, leaving us 
ignorant of the meaning of this vital phase of his life. Eliade persistently 
distinguishes Codreanu's Legion from so-called "political" movements; the Iron 
Guard is "ethical and religious." Yet Eliade must know that for Codreanu's 
Legion, the distinction between "politics" and "religion" is one without a 
difference. 
</P>
<P>
Eliade tells us of the legion's electoral triumphs. Not "political?" Likewise 
Eliade confounds the balance of historical judgment by representing the 
latter-day Iron Guard as embarked on "the path of nonviolence" and as urging 
"passive resistance." Yet about the years of the legion's bully-boy 
anti-Semitism, Eliade is totally silent. As for his own involvement, Eliade is 
equally unclear: he refused to dissociate himself from the legion, first 
because he says he was not a "political man," but then -- confusingly a few 
pages on -- because it was "unacceptable" and "absurd" to do so, because he 
could not conceive of dissociating himself from the "new generation" while it 
was being "unjustly" persecuted. 
</P>
<P>
Thus, readers with an eye for history or for certain questions about the 
precise meaning of Eliade's political beliefs in the Romania of the 1930s will 
be left with questions unanswered. Whatever the real truth is about what Eliade 
calls his "imprudent acts and errors committed in youth," he has carried them 
to his grave. 
</P>
