<P>
The tragic case of Lisa Steinberg cries out for closer attention to other cases 
of child abuse, one of the most shocking crimes in America. The victims are so 
young, so dependent on the ability of adults to restrain rage, and so 
defenseless when mental illness, drugs, alcohol or other pressures render 
adults incapable of that restraint. Lisa Steinberg's father, convicted of 
manslaughter in her brutal death, seemed outwardly a successful person. The 
case is an all-too-vivid reminder that child abuse obeys no economic 
boundaries. It occurs in middle-class apartments, even when neighbors suspect 
what is happening, as well as in urban slums or isolated farmhouses where no 
one is watching. 
</P>
<P>
Americans are more aware of child abuse today than they were a decade or two 
ago, but the ability of social services to cope with the problem has not kept 
pace with awareness. Social workers often have such heavy caseloads that they 
cannot pursue every report or watch out for every child. 
</P>
<P>
Even when social workers are aware of potential or actual child abuse, they 
must contend with society's basic belief that children belong with their 
parents and that aberrant behavior can be changed. If they don't act, they risk 
the life of the child and possible lawsuits. Sometimes they do act based on 
potential risk, as occurred when a 2-month old child was taken away from his 
parents in Polk County, Iowa, last year. But in those cases government is in 
effect judging some people as unfit parents based on past behavior that may 
indeed have been changed. Social agencies can't possibly remove all the 
children in homes where parents abuse drugs or alcohol; where does one draw the 
line? 
</P>
<P>
When a social worker's instinct says that a child should be removed from his 
home, and from harm's way, it is often impossible to find proper alternative 
shelter. Los Angeles County, for example, has too few foster-care homes. In 
fact, across the country the majority of the 1.6 million children abused in 
1986 did not receive protective services because local agencies didn't have 
enough money to provide them, according to a report by the House Select 
Committee on Children, Youth and Families. 
</P>
<P>
Communities and individuals around the country do what they can to supplement 
government efforts. In Santa Monica, for example, Stuart House coordinates 
medical, psychological and law-enforcement aid for children who have been 
sexually abused. These efforts require dedicated individuals and compassionate 
financial donors. Imitation would be more than flattery; it would mean hope for 
children whose lives may otherwise be hopelessly marred. 
</P>
<P>
There is no apparent quick cure for a national plague that afflicts so many 
young people and kills too many like Lisa Steinberg. But governments, 
individuals and foundations must continue to strive where they can to curb the 
causes and ease the pain. Shining the spotlight on the dark corners of life, as 
the Steinberg trial has done, exposes sickness but may have a healing effect as 
well. 
</P>
