<P>
Children, as harried parents often complain, have an insatiable curiosity about 
the world. They never seem to tire of asking questions and are particularly 
adept at posing ones that adults have trouble answering. Why is the sky blue? 
Why are girls different from boys? 
</P>
<P>
Children, parents also frequently observe, have vivid imaginations. They can 
tell the most astounding lies with the most wide-eyed expressions of innocence. 
Children's love of exaggeration is part of the same process as their quest for 
facts. It is one of the ways they test the limits of their world, explore the 
boundaries of the possible. The separation between fact and fantasy, the real 
and the imaginary, is a common thread in several new children's books. 
</P>
<P>
In There's a Hippo in My Bath! (Doubleday: $12.95; unpaginated) Kyoko Matsuoka 
uses a child's power of imagination to transform a bath into magical adventure. 
Children often have fears about bath time. One of Mister Rogers' more memorable 
songs addresses one of them: "You can never go down, never go down, never go 
down the drain." Matsuoka's delightful picture book speaks to another concern 
of the very young -- what may be lurking in the bathwater. 
</P>
<P>
A mother leaves her son alone to take a bath. The boy climbs into the tub with 
his rubber duckie. The duck dives to the bottom of the bath and surfaces to 
report company. A sea turtle pops his head out of the water. The duck protests 
that the tub isn't an ocean, but that doesn't prevent a pair of penguins from 
bobbing up next. They are followed by a soap-eating seal, a hippopotamus, and 
finally a gigantic whale. They all cavort in the bathtub until the boy's mother 
comes to investigate. The animals immediately vanish. The boy wisely decides to 
keep his bathmates a secret. 
</P>
<P>
Matsuoka uses exaggeration the way children often do -- to show their mastery. 
You can only kid about creatures swimming in your tub if you know the idea is 
impossible. Akiko Hayashi's golden-hued drawings playfully convey the steamy, 
shimmering bathroom and the benevolent animals who emerge. 
</P>
<P>
Samuel Marshak's funny poem, The Pup Grew Up!, translated by Richard Pevear and 
illustrated by Vladimir Radunsky (Henry Holt: $13.95; unpaginated), uses 
exaggeration in another way familiar to children. It is the kind of tall tale a 
child might tell when forced to explain an occurrence he can't account for. The 
story concerns a lady who boards a train with a tiny Pekingese and gets off 
with a Great Dane. The book's title is the explanation officials give for the 
discrepancy. Adults will appreciate Marshak's sly dig at bureaucracy, which is 
still as fresh as it was when the book was first published in the Soviet Union 
in 1926. Children will delight in Marshak's sense of absurdity. Vladimir 
Radunsky's illustrations catch Marshak's tone perfectly. Radunsky's exaggerated 
people, bold colors, and graphic use of space reinforce the lunacy of this 
tale, written by Russia's best-known children's author. 
</P>
<P>
Stephanie Waxman's What Is a Girl? What Is a Boy? (Thomas Y. Crowell: $10.95; 
unpaginated) is a different kind of picture book for 3- to 7-year-olds, a 
volume of straightforward text and photographs that address the basic 
biological differences between the sexes. As Waxman writes in her foreword, 
"Enlightened adults are apt to play down the difference between the sexes and 
encourage the similarities in an effort to foster equality and non-sexist 
attitudes. Yet in doing so, we may be disregarding the child's need for 
elementary information." 
</P>
<P>
Children are naturally curious about sexuality. Since many adults are 
uncomfortable discussing the subject, though, they often don't give children 
the straight facts they want to know. As a result children are left to their 
own imaginations (and society's sexist stereotypes) to explain the differences 
between the sexes: "Boys are ugly!" "Girls are dumb!" "Boys don't cry!" "Girls 
aren't strong!" 
</P>
<P>
Waxman begins by raising and then discarding some of these familiar 
stereotypes: "Some people say a girl is someone who plays with dolls. But Noah 
is taking care of his doll. And he's a boy." She then goes on, in a 
matter-of-fact and non-threatening way, to present the simple biological 
distinction between the sexes. "A boy is someone with a penis and testicles. A 
girl is someone with a vulva and vagina." The photographs show naked children, 
and a naked man and woman, all unself-conscious and comfortable in their 
nudity. The book won't end children's sexual curiosity, but it can help diffuse 
the embarrassment that surrounds the discussions of sexuality. By providing the 
simple facts that children desire, it may even lay the subject to rest for a 
while. 
</P>
<P>
The Magic School Bus: Inside the Human Body (Scholastic Inc: $13.95; 
unpaginated) is also about biology. Written by Joanna Cole and illustrated by 
Bruce Degen, the book is the third of their very popular Magic School Bus 
science series. Cole and Degen combine fact and fantasy to provide a clever, 
comic-book style approach to science education. Ms. Frizzle and her class go on 
a field trip to the science museum to see an exhibit about the human body. On 
the way (stop me if you've seen this at your local movie theater!), the magic 
school bus is mysteriously shrunk and accidentally swallowed. The field trip 
becomes a wacky voyage inside the human body. 
</P>
<P>
Cole and Degen borrow from comic books, sci-fi movies, and Saturday-morning 
cartoons to create a hip pastiche of information and humor. Like sitcom 
regulars, Ms. Frizzle's class keeps up a steady patter of jokes. "You mean this 
body thinks we're food?" "That's better than being waste." It's humor-coated 
facts for the TV generation who, supposedly, can't concentrate longer than the 
span between commercials and are incapable of digesting their information 
straight. Whether or not that unhappy assumption is true, I found the book long 
on humor and short on science. The comic-book style of joining pictures with 
text in boxes and balloons also makes some of the anatomical drawings, 
especially the workings of the lungs, difficult to read. Despite these 
objections, I'm sure many children will enjoy this. But I think the book is 
more useful at provoking curiosity about the body than explaining how it works. 
Those already curious may find this book as unnourishing as Saturday-morning 
cartoons. 
</P>
