<P>
The destruction of the world's forests is one of the major concerns of our age. 
Each year the world loses about 37 million acres of forests. According to 
United Nations' estimates, nearly 40% of Central America's forests were 
destroyed between 1950 and 1980. During the same period, Africa lost 23% of its 
forests and the Himalayan watershed 40%. 
</P>
<P>
The problems associated with deforestation include depletion of firewood 
supplies (still the primary source of energy for 2 billion people, or 
three-quarters of the population of the developing world), severe flooding, 
accelerated loss of soil, encroaching deserts, and declining soil productivity. 
</P>
<P>
In many parts of the developing world these problems have assumed disastrous 
proportions. Fuel wood shortages plague 57 developing countries, adversely 
affecting more than a billion people. Torrents from monsoons pouring down 
deforested Himalayan slopes kill thousands in India and Bangladesh every year. 
Denuded Nepal's biggest export is its soil, which falls into rivers at an 
alarming rate and ends up in the Indian Ocean. Many scientists suspect that the 
spread of the Sahara Desert and the resulting famine in countries of western 
Africa have been brought about, at least partially, by deforestation. A further 
consequence of rapid deforestation can be seen in Haiti, where a continual 
decrease in the amount of arable land has resulted in smaller harvests even as 
the population grows -- no doubt a prescription for disaster. 
</P>
<P>
The worst has yet to come. If the current rate of deforestation continues 
unabated, much of the world's remaining tropical forests will disappear by the 
year 2000, and with them, many of the Earth's plants and animals. The loss of 
these forests will create an energy crisis for 2 billion human beings who will 
lack sufficient quantities of wood with which to cook their meals and heat 
their dwellings. In their desperate search for fuel, they will destroy more 
distant forests, thereby accelerating erosion, climatological changes, and 
desertification, and possibly bringing about widespread famine. 
</P>
<P>
People living in the developed world face an equally catastrophic future if 
worldwide deforestation continues. New research suggests that the loss of 
forests exacerbates the greenhouse effect, which is caused by carbon dioxide, 
emitted by burning fossil fuels, building up in the atmosphere and retaining 
solar heat that would otherwise escape, resulting in global warming. Leaves of 
trees, on the other hand, absorb carbon dioxide, removing it from the 
atmosphere. Adapting to such global climatic changes will prove costly, 
especially for the mid-latitude regions of the Northern Hemisphere, where it is 
predicted that drying trends will severely cut crop yields. Furthermore, the 
cure for dreaded diseases such as AIDS and cancer may reside in some plant as 
yet undiscovered that grows in the rain forest -- if destroyed, humankind will 
be forever denied such help. 
</P>
<P>
The future state of the world's forests, especially our tropical forests, seems 
so bleak that one commentator rues, "There appears to be no way civilization 
and rain forest can share space; the former devastates the latter." John 
Perlin's new book, "A Forest Journey: From Mesopotamia to North America" (W. W. 
Norton: $19.95) shows us that we can delete the word rain and this statement 
rings true whenever and wherever civilizations have risen and flourished. 
</P>
<P>
Sadly, the present assault on our forests, as Perlin chronicles so ably, is 
part of the same cycle begun thousands of years ago. Every Old World starts out 
as virgin land attractive to human settlement. Subsequent exploitation by 
humans wears out the land, forcing them to move on to their next "New World." 
This quest for new frontiers, which many have thought peculiar to the American 
experience, is but a repetition of an age-old process that has occurred again 
and again in the course of time, beginning in Mesopotamia more than 5,000 years 
ago and continuing today. But "A Forest Journey" does not merely prophesy 
disaster. It also presents hope: that we can learn from past mistakes and break 
out of the cycle of deforestation and land degradation that undermined earlier 
civilizations. 
</P>
<P>
"A Forest Journey" is more than just a chronicle of devastation. It describes 
the movement of Western civilization in a most unique and fascinating manner. 
The book takes one resource, wood, the principal building material and fuel of 
past societies, as its starting point, showing how wood served past societies 
and demonstrating its influence on their behavior. 
</P>
<P>
Perlin shows, for example, that the urgent need to find new sources of wood has 
been an important cause -- insufficiently noted -- of large population 
movements throughout history. England's attraction to North America during the 
17th and 18th centuries was in great part due to the paucity of its own timber 
supply and an awareness of the great store of trees in the New World. Similarly 
motivated colonization movements had already occurred in more ancient times. 
One of the chief reasons the Romans colonized Gaul and Spain was to take 
advantage of the abundant forests they could use to fuel mining operations and 
industries. 
</P>
<P>
Scarcities of wood also have triggered major technological changes and 
advances. Insufficient quantities of fuel forced Late Bronze Age metallurgists 
on the island of Cyprus to develop many ingenious methods of conserving energy: 
For instance, they recycled scrap bronze to reduce their consumption of wood. 
Eventually, acute shortages of wood impelled these metalworkers to manually 
remove iron from copper slag, resulting in an important human step, our entry 
into the Iron Age. Wood shortages in ancient Greece and Rome taught architects 
to exploit solar energy. Thousands of years later, the scarcity of timber 
forced the English to enter the fossil fuel era, substituting coal for wood as 
the principal fuel. 
</P>
<P>
Wood scarcities have forced governments to take an active role in the 
allocation and protection of this precious resource. Hammurabi, the great 
codifier of laws in Babylon, saw to it that government officials regulated the 
felling of timber and the distribution of its end products so as to put a stop 
to the profligate use of wood by his subjects. Authorities on wood-less Delos 
in Hellenistic times monitored the sale of imported firewood and charcoal, 
believing that the distribution of such valuable sources of energy should not 
be controlled by a few powerful fuel merchants, who otherwise would have had 
consumers at their mercy. To ensure the availability of sufficient quantities 
of firewood for those living in Rome, the government commissioned an entire 
fleet of ships for the sole purpose of gathering wood from the dense forests of 
France, Spain, and North Africa. The Venetian Senate of the 15th and 16th 
centuries passed a number of laws aimed at protecting its dwindling forests, as 
did the English Parliament of the 16th and 17th centuries. 
</P>
<P>
Before 1900 BC Crete was merely another island in the Aegean, until its rich 
forests attracted traders from the deforested area of Mesopotamia. The commerce 
in wood between Crete and the Near East injected such wealth into the economy 
that Crete was transformed swiftly into one of the region's most powerful 
states. Likewise, Macedonia, an insignificant backwater country on the fringes 
of the Greek world, became the immensely rich and influential power of the 
Mediterranean after the Greeks had exhausted their own supplies of wood and had 
come to depend on Macedonia's forests for fuel and building material. The 
Macedonians soon translated their wealth into political and military power, 
resulting in the conquest of nearly the entire known world by their king, 
Alexander the Great. Millennia later America's untouched forests laid the 
foundation for its allure as the land of opportunity. 
</P>
<P>
Conversely, lack of wood has brought about the economic and social decline of 
civilizations when alternative wood sources could not be found. Once the 
Classical Greek states lost their hold on accessible supplies of timber, they 
became subservient to wood-rich Macedonia. England, by contrast, forestalled 
decline by developing its coal resources. 
</P>
<P>
The causes and objectives of many wars and revolutions become clearer when we 
take the presence or absence of wood supplies into account. The Athenian Empire 
and the Peloponnesian League fought for possession of northern Greece and 
Sicily's forests. Conflict over rights to timber between the American colonists 
and Great Britain helped lead to revolution. England reserved America's best 
stands of trees for its navy while the Americans wanted the freedom to cut down 
whatever woods they wished. Without its wood resources, America's bid for 
independence would surely have failed. All of America's ships were built 
locally and there was an abundance of charcoal to produce iron for weaponry. 
</P>
<P>
Ecologically concerned voices are loudest and most heeded when important 
resources such as wood appear to be on the verge of depletion. Plato vividly 
warned the Athenians in the Critias of the consequences of deforestation. Cato 
taught the Romans the best ways to husband their scarce wood supplies. Many 
years later, John Evelyn campaigned to save the few remaining forests in Stuart 
England, writing his famous conservation tract, "Sylva." The destruction of 
America's great Eastern forests served as the stimulus for the development of 
American ecological concern. 
</P>
<P>
Deforestation throughout history has left soil at the mercy of the erosive 
forces of nature. Formerly productive lands turned into sterile, 
drought-plagued regions. Famine ensued, bringing down powerful and prosperous 
societies. Stripped of its forest cover, the magnificent civilization of 
Knossos declined. Such a change in vegetation and soil conditions assured that 
this region would never again support the population or enjoy times as 
prosperous as it had in its "Golden Age" when Cretan power held sway over much 
of the eastern Mediterranean. The loss of soil on deforested hillsides also 
caused a sharp decline in agricultural production in the great Mycenaean 
Kingdoms of Bronze Age Greece, resulting in reduced crop yields, 
impoverishment, and depopulation of the area. Rome, too, came to depend on 
others for food when its farmlands were cleared on the tree cover that had 
nourished the soil for ages. 
</P>
<P>
Throughout "A Forest Journey" we see a similar process repeated time and time 
again. Blessed by easy access to forests and rich soil, a society develops 
materially and people grow confident that nature will always provide for their 
needs. Prosperity and population invariably increase for a time. The faster an 
area develops demographically and economically, the greater are its demands on 
the remaining forest and agricultural lands. To ensure the continued flow of 
adequate amounts of wood and food, societies rely on colonization, diplomacy, 
and military ventures. Ultimately, however, the attempt to maintain high 
economic and population growth over time, in the face of dwindling resources, 
results in decline. Substitute wood for oil in today's world and the parallel 
becomes sobering. 
</P>
<P>
These are just glimpses of what's in store for the reader of "A Forest 
Journey." Each page is replete with valuable information on the important role 
that wood played through the ages -- its influence on the development and 
decline of societies through judicious use or depletion of this valuable 
resource. The book is a treasure trove of knowledge. In my opinion, "A Forest 
Journey" is destined to become a classic and stand alongside such important 
works as George P. Marsh's "Man and Nature" and Ken Butti and John Perlin's "A 
Golden Thread." What's more, "A Forest Journey" makes great reading. 
</P>
