<P>
Michael Crichton, the doctor (Harvard Medical) turned novelist ("The Andromeda 
Strain") turned moviemaker ("Coma"), is a worry wart, and like most excessively 
anxious people he feels duty-bound to make the rest of us as edgy as he is. His 
many novels and movies form an extended brief explaining why we, as a nation, 
race and planet, should have a serious case of the willies. 
</P>
<P>
The theme that preoccupies him is nothing less than the hubris of man and the 
heedlessness of science. Our capacity for technological innovation, in his 
view, has outstripped our capacity to deal maturely with the power it affords, 
carrying us inexorably to the yawning abyss of annihilation. Crichton's first 
novel, "The Andromeda Strain," told the story of a 
life-as-we-know-it-destroying bacterium uncorked by money-grubbing scientists; 
likewise, his movie "Westworld" featured a rampaging amusement-park automaton 
(played by Yul Brynner) who turns on his feckless human creators and, Yul 
Brynner-like, pumps them full of hot lead. 
</P>
<P>
Only time will tell whether Crichton's worries about rampaging bacilli and 
deranged automatons are justified -- even now, after all, an irritable Third 
World dictator is hoarding untold stashes of bacteria, and you never can tell 
when the talking Abraham Lincoln at Disneyland might go berserk during some 
matinee, lifting skirts and making rude noises with his armpits. But so far the 
Crichton prognostication average has not been good -- zero, in fact. We should 
hope it stays that way. Otherwise, having read Crichton's fat new novel, 
"Jurassic Park," I have a word of advice for anyone owning real estate within 
10 miles of La Brea tar pits: Sell. 
</P>
<P>
What sets Crichton's teeth to chattering these days is biotechnology, the 
manipulation of DNA to create new forms of life or -- the premise of "Jurassic 
Park" -- re-create old ones. The novel opens with a documentary-like sketch of 
how this new technology has come to be corrupted by slithery commerce. Once 
scientists were pure, disinterested; now they -- unlike, say, the directors of 
sci-fi movies and the authors of pulp fiction -- have lowered themselves to 
making a buck. "Suddenly," Mr. Crichton writes, "it seemed as if everyone 
wanted to become rich." 
</P>
<P>
"Jurassic Park" is the story of how this ignoble ambition, married to 
biotechnology, results in the beginning of the end of the world as we know it, 
or at least of Costa Rica. That hapless Central American country is the site of 
the eponymous park, developed by one John Hammond, a money-grubbing and devious 
American entrepreneur, on an island off the coast. There money-grubbing 
scientists, working in secret, have managed to cull dinosaur DNA from ancient 
amber and re-construct living versions of the beasts, so that they might serve 
as tourist attractions for wonder-struck Americanos. 
</P>
<P>
Things, as you can imagine, quickly go awry. A few months before the park is to 
open, an unspecified number of the smaller dinosaurs escape to the mainland, 
where, on a deserted beach, they maul the vacationing family of a Dallas 
real-estate developer -- a tragedy all the more horrifying because the 
real-estate developer escapes unharmed. The authorities remain unaware of the 
danger through a series of amazingly convenient botches, giving Hammond the 
chance to summon a handful of experts to set matters in order. 
</P>
<P>
This is a risky plot device for Mr. Crichton, since it requires him to 
introduce characters into his elaborate fictional architecture, and the 
creation of plausible characters is not, to speak generously, his strength. Our 
hero is a paleontologist called Grant; we are signalled his hero status early 
on when Mr. Crichton informs us that Grant eschews the stuffy tweeds of the 
common prof in favor of jeans and sneakers -- even when he lectures! He is 
joined on the island by a mathematician named Malcolm; a sexy assistant called 
Sattler; a candy-bar-scarfing computer jockey, Nedry by name, who designed the 
island's labyrinthine security systems, and two insufferably precocious 
grandchildren of the evil Hammond. 
</P>
<P>
The mutilations begin in earnest not long after this group arrives at Jurassic 
Park. The computer expert (note that a single letter's transposition makes 
Nedry nerdy -- a typical Crichton subtlety) neutralizes the island's electronic 
fences for his own devious purposes, mostly of the money-grubbing kind. His 
comeuppance follows shortly after, for with the fences down the dinosaurs roam 
freely, and before long they've put on the old feed bag and are dining on 
Nedry's innards. Hungry creatures, dinosaurs. 
</P>
<P>
Nedry's intestines are neither the first nor the last to be spilled and gnawed 
in Jurassic Park. In these scenes, Crichton's prose, usually rough-hewn and 
business-like, takes on an almost sensual vividness. "Nedry stumbled, reaching 
blindly down to touch the ragged edge of his shirt, and then a thick, slippery 
mass that was surprisingly warm, and with horror he suddenly knew . . . his 
guts had fallen out." The vividness increases when you remember that Nedry has 
spent the afternoon eating Mars Bars. 
</P>
<P>
As unattractive as these passages are, they're almost Johnsonian compared with 
the dithering of the mathematician Malcolm, who serves as Crichton's Greek 
chorus. Hubris-of-man and heedlessness-of-science soliloquys flow from him like 
intestines from a computer nerd. Our "Western training" saps our appreciation 
of nature, Crichton-Malcolm announces ponderously, and encourages us to conquer 
nature rather than live harmoniously with it -- a tired if once again 
fashionable idea that has been far more cogently expressed elsewhere. 
</P>
<P>
My pre-publication copy of "Jurassic Park" bears the ominous phrase "Soon to be 
a major motion picture," raising the suspicion that this fat novel is really a 
screenplay larded up with a few tons of exposition. A movie would have the 
advantage of being without Malcolm's dime-store philosophizing, but it would 
lack too the book's only real virtue: its genuinely interesting discussions of 
dinosaurs, DNA research, paleontology and chaos theory. 
</P>
<P>
Crichton could have performed a service by using this material to write books 
of popular science. Instead, he's written a ponderous novel soon to be a major, 
and undoubtedly trashy, motion picture. Suddenly it seems as if everybody wants 
to become rich. 
</P>
