<P>
For all those who have wondered what happens to a famine when it leaves the 
front page or if children stop dying just because cameras stop recording, 
photojournalist Sebastiao Salgado provides an answer. Surprisingly, it's not a 
completely sad revelation, as we see in "An Uncertain Grace: Photographs by 
Sebastiao Salgado," an exhibition of more than 120 images from 1977 to the 
present. Organized by the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the show is now 
presented by UCLA's Grunwald Center at the Frederick W. Wight Art Gallery (to 
Jan. 27). It's a penetrating, emotional, romantic and exhilarating look at 
lives shaped by survival by an artist who finds beauty and dignity amid the 
desperate poverty of Third World nations. 
</P>
<P>
This collection of images was gathered from scattered locations around the 
world, but it has an amazing depth. It's the kind of firsthand thoroughness 
that can only be harvested from prolonged stays in troubled areas. Salgado 
frequently spends weeks in refugee camps where other photojournalists may work 
for a couple of hours. Instead of providing one or two touching images on 
newsworthy subjects, Salgado, in dozens of photographs, builds a cumulative 
portrait of a dignified people sustained by faith. This subjective immersion 
gives his black and white pictures an uninhibited intimacy. It also softens, 
though it can't completely mitigate, the camera's voyeuristic intrusion on 
private moments of anguish over an emaciated child's slow death or hopelessness 
brought on by overwork or starvation. 
</P>
<P>
Salgado came to photography after beginning a career as an economic adviser to 
developing nations. At 29, while working on assignment in Africa, he made some 
photographs with his wife's camera that persuaded him of the power for social 
change inherent in revealing the faces of the people behind disaster and poor 
public policy. Since then, he has roamed the world, mixing newspaper and 
magazine assignments with photography work for relief groups, such as the 
all-volunteer Medecins sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders), which treats 
people in remote areas when catastrophe strikes. Ironically, his work came to 
global prominence with a single, dynamic image that was published worldwide 
showing Ronald Reagan and James Brady felled in John W. Hinckley's 
assassination attempt. 
</P>
<P>
Salgado's photojournalistic mission on behalf of the invisible people of the 
Third World recalls the emotional, potent images of Dorothea Lange's Depression 
photographs of migrant workers taken for the Farm Securities Administration, 
but he is more directly related to Henri Cartier-Bresson, founder of Magnum 
Photos, the agency through which Salgado works. Both Salgado and 
Cartier-Bresson favor somewhat narrative, dramatic images but seem equally 
aware that they are conjuring up distinctly edited versions of reality. 
Salgado's pictures, with their emphasis on the self-respect lighting the faces 
of tired sugar cane cutters in Cuba, or the athletic beauty of bodies 
struggling on slippery ground in Brazil's Serra Pelada gold mine, cast these 
men and their labor in a noble light. 
</P>
<P>
As a contradiction to the Western notion that heavy exertion is always without 
dignity, Salgado's photographs are powerfully didactic. Yet they are also 
decidedly biased, ignoring extended social conditions such as the alcoholism 
and crime that are also part of the men's marginal existence. But Salgado is 
giving the faceless -- known only to developed countries by the depths of their 
depravation -- a more rounded identity. Though he now lives in Paris, he was 
born and raised in Brazil and is forever aware of the "otherness" that the poor 
rural peasant feels within that country's social structure. Because he spends 
time with the people he photographs, he knows them as people, not simply 
statistics. His pictures reveal their unwavering, stoic endurance of the 
harshness of their environment. Their labor flames with Social Realism's brand 
of evangelism. The depths of their faith has an almost mystic aura: Children in 
procession are more angels than mortals; a father holding his child has the 
same soulful eyes as the Christ poster on the wall beside him. 
</P>
<P>
Discussing only the social content of Salgado's photographs leaves unspoken the 
power of the images themselves, however. Each picture is an arresting 
composition that uses the full potency of light and dark to create mood and 
sculptural mass. His compositional skill is so finely developed that it is 
frequently difficult to remember that these pictures are taken spontaneously in 
the most isolated of areas, under challenging conditions. Were it not for the 
harsh reality of the subjects, the elegance of the forms and the beauty of the 
photographs would be a pure delight. 
</P>
<P>
Salgado's skill as an artist illuminates the lives of the Third World poor. His 
photographs are elegant, thought-provoking statements that repeatedly make 
issues like starvation or poverty confrontational, instead of abstract. It's 
not pity you feel when you see a an emaciated Ethiopian father carrying the 
skin and bones body of his child into the refugee center, it's an incredible 
sense of waste. Their humanity is commanding, their capacity to survive 
awesome. 
</P>
<P>
It has often been observed that adversity brings out the best in all of us. 
Perhaps, but it also brings out anger. The subtext to Salgado's photographs, 
only peripherally hinted at in the abbreviated information appended to each 
photo, is the political shenanigans and economic policies responsible for so 
many of these "natural" disasters/social realities. Salgado doesn't make a 
point of damning the infrastructures his work necessarily describes. He simply 
lets the image and a few facts open up questions. 
</P>
<P>
As potent as this kind of photojournalism is, it is also singularly absent from 
much of the media coverage that makes up the daily news. An AIDS patient here, 
a homeless family there, the news skims its subjects with sound bites and 
on-the-spot superficial coverage. It's been ages since Americans were 
confronted with the innumerable, searing pictures that unmasked the futility of 
Vietnam or the desperation of Bangladesh. Only a few of Salgado's beautiful, 
haunting pictures from the Ethiopian Sahel were published in Newsweek and the 
New York Times at the time they were made. The rest were considered "too 
tragic" to be marketable by U.S. literary publishers or gallery owners, so the 
complete series was never seen in this country, until now. Time may have 
rendered these news images "safe" for American sensibilities, but they are 
still potent. And their breadth of involvement offers a dynamic model for art 
working with a social conscience. 
</P>
<P>
"An Uncertain Grace: Photographs by Sebastiao Salgado," Frederick S. Wight Art 
Gallery, UCLA, (213) 825-1461), to Jan. 27. Closed Mondays. 
</P>
