CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yukio Suzuki, economic commentator: "Major </F>
Turning Point for Bureaucratic Nation; Merits, Demerits of 
Hosokawa-Style Dependence on "Ministry of Finance (MOF) and 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI)"] 
  [Text] Even though the draft legislation of the 
Political Reform Law was rejected in the House of Councilors, 
the enigmatic government was somehow able to handle difficult 
issues after a fashion only because it had the support of an 
"allied force" composed of two mainstream economic agencies. 
<H5>  Mysterious Stability of Government </H5>
  The Hosokawa government was launched amidst the widespread 
use of popular terms such as "collapse of the 1955 political 
structure" and, with the exception of the slogan "non-Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDP)" and "political reform" dedicated almost 
solely to election system debate, without developing hardly any 
clear-cut basic policy concerning matters such as diplomacy, 
security, and the economy. As generally expected, the Hosokawa 
government, which was initiated with the public's vague and 
diversified "hope for reform," is continue to falter in the face 
of intracoalition government conflict (especially friction 
between Shinseito and Komeito versus the Social Democratic Party 
of Japan [SDPJ]) and attacks from the LDP, which has now become 
a formidable opposition party. 
  Notwithstanding, Prime Minister Hosokawa himself--without 
showing any superficial signs of being affected by such 
"internal friction and external attacks"--has somehow survived 
the last year with a backdrop of favorable mass media commentary 
and a still high approval rating inspired by such commentary. In 
fact, the fuzzy personality and public popularity as his 
strength, Hosokawa has unconcernedly fended off criticism of his 
unstable political base and lack of specifics relative to policy 
matters and has managed to prolong the life of his government in 
a shrewd, resilient, and bold manner. 
  Ever since its installation, the Hosokawa government has 
been 
criticized by professional politicians for its dubious, 
amateurish performance during the policy decisionmaking process. 
It has also been repeatedly attacked by businessmen who are 
extreamely impatient and upset because of the worst recession of 
the post-World War II period. Additionally, those domestic and 
international sources hopeful of reform and who empathize with 
bold Clinton-style reform concepts harbor strong dissatisfaction 
because of the lack of specifics of his government's reform 
concept, although some similarities exist in the performance 
between the two leaders. 
  If it were the LDP government days, any single 
incident--such 
as, the undeniable "failure to deliver on a public pledge" of 
political reform draft bill to be carried over from 1993 to 
1994, the major delay in budget processing and economic 
countermeasures owing to the turmoil over political reform, and 
ineptness at handling the partial liberalization of rice 
imports--would have had the strong potential of forcing the 
government into resignation en masse or dissolution. However, if 
one were allowed a bit of vulgarity, the Hosokawa government 
appears to be unconcerned and skillfully manages to "barely" 
survive. 
  Even as I prepare this article, the fate of the Political 
Reform Law faces chaos, but eventually government will have to 
focus on the compilation and submission of the budget for fiscal 
year 1994 which include a package of economic measures. The 
problem lies with what will come next. Regardless of the outcome 
of the draft legislation on "political reform," in addition to 
acceleration of moves to reorganize the political sector (more 
precisely to reorganize political parties), the Clinton 
administration, which until now has given support to the 
reformist stance of the new government and avoided any action 
that might force Prime Minister Hosokawa into a predicament, 
will surely accelerate a barrage of attacks on Japan in an 
effort to conclude the economic framework negotiations that have 
come to a complete impasse. The strong statements issued by 
Treasury Secretary Bentsen when he visited Japan recently are 
vividly reflecting that prospect. 
  Moreover, there is the strong possibility that the 
employment 
situation will sharply worsen in early spring, without any 
prospect for breaking out of the recession. The voices of 
resentment from businesses because of the slowness of policy 
response will probably go up higher. The question is: How will 
the government survive this "dismal spring?" The crucial stage 
for the Hosokawa government lies in the future. 
  Of course, the main issue to be addressed in this article is 
not concerned with a prediction of future problems. One item 
this writer wishes to address here concerns that why this 
coalition government with complex interparty relations has been 
able to somehow manage to solve difficult national government 
issues including the rice problem and being able to survive, and 
politically and diplomatically almost unscathed at that. In that 
respect, this writer perceives a strange sense of stability. In 
addition, it appears that Prime Minister Hosokawa seem to be 
enjoying a considerable degree of calmness and confidence. The 
question is what is the real factor that sustains that 
confidence; i.e., what sustains the prime minister and his new 
government's "shrewdness." 
  As examples of main factors sustaining such strange sense of 
stability, we might facetiously mention the irresolute 
collaboration of the SDPJ which has lost all significance for 
existence beyond sustaining the government and which moves about 
in utter confusion in the face of intraparty turmoil, the 
powerful leadership and manipulative abilities of 
behind-the-scenes strongman Ichiro Ozawa and "princely" 
characteristics of Prime Minister Hosokawa himself. Another 
factor that might be mentioned is the "opposition offensive" of 
the LDP which lacks luster and drive because of the ineptness at 
handling intraparty coordination. 
  However, a factor which I wish to emphasize more than 
anything else is the very close interdependence between the new 
government versus the mainstream economic agencies represented 
by the MOF and MITI. It was this very factor that enabled the 
new government to somehow survive the past half year or so in 
managing policy matters without committing major errors, while 
serving as the foremost factor in backing up the strange 
stability of the new government. It was probably that very 
factor which enabled Prime Minister Hosokawa to exercise a 
degree of mental composure. 
<H5>  Belated Economic Measures </H5>
  The Hosokawa government in its initial days had 
energetically 
espoused slogans such as "down with the bureaucracy" and 
"decentralization of government" with the goal of "eliminating 
the collusive politicians-government-industry relationship." 
However, in reality, it has been almost entirely dependent on 
legislative, decisionmaking, and implementation of policies by 
mainstream agencies in charge of macroeconomics such as the MOF 
and MITI, and in substance, it is more dependent on bureaucratic 
leadership than was the case during the LDP government days. 
That is the very reason the mainstream agencies extend their 
absolute support. 
  On the other hand, because of that very reason, a 
significant 
gap exists in viewpoints between the government leaders and 
private economists concerning perceptions of the current 
economic conditions and the timing and methodology of economic 
measures including reduction in income taxes, causing the 
widespread criticism that the Hosokawa government relies heavily 
on bureaucratic judgments. In reality, ideas of the prime 
minister and government leaders concerning economic conditions 
and tax reform are almost the same as those of the MOF 
bureaucrats and the majority of the Tax Commission. Of special 
note is that the prime minister, Shinseito, and Komeito leaders 
clearly embrace ideas which side with the MOF on the timing and 
method to be followed in handling the reduction of income tax 
and offsetting the increase of consumption tax. 
  Although private sector's dissatisfaction and distrust have 
been inspired because of the nature of the policy response, the 
foregoing situation has not necessarily manifested itself in the 
basic distrust or sense of instability of the private sector 
against the government itself. Strange as it may seem, the 
mysterious sense of security held by the private sector for this 
government seem to rest with the fact that the latter relies on 
bureaucrats for the management of economic affairs. 
  If the government leaders were to engage in profligate 
spending, were individuals who recklessly intervened in policy 
matters in the private sector from one issue to the next, were 
extreme inflationists convinced that the only clever plan 
available were to resort to bubble economy measures, or, 
contrarily, were extreme deflationists espousing only the 
independent responsibility and restructuring of industry without 
approving any sort of government financial measures, the people 
and the economic sector would be overcome by a powerful sense of 
insecurity and would find it impossible to enjoy peace of mind. 
  Needless to say, from the standpoint of private sector 
sensibilities, bureaucratic policies are most likely incomplete, 
ineffective, too little, and too late. This writer is also one 
who has addressed the harmful effects of amateurish 
manipulations for many years and has repeatedly warned 
bureaucrats of the probable existence of "policy recession" and 
"bureaucratic recession" elements within the purview of current 
recessions which are referred to as "complex recessions" and 
"structural recessions." However, because of the sense of 
security that bureaucrats will continue to build steadily on the 
basic framework for financial and monetary policy and steer 
without major deviation from a basic structural policy (these 
words may reflect somewhat of an overvaluation), this writer may 
have expressed views that were derogatory relative to 
bureaucrats. It may be that some academicians and economists 
have had a tendency to voice criticisms because they felt a 
sense of security of such nature. 
  Many among the public should have been aware from some time 
back that Prime Minister Hosokawa, Chief Cabinet Secretary 
Takemura, Mr. Ichiro Ozawa, and the new government leaders, with 
the exception of one or two, are all lacking in knowledge and 
experience in management of the macroeconomics. Rather, logic 
tells us that it is only natural that the leadership is obtuse 
and fumbles on management of the economy because it is weak on 
the subject of economics and therefore it is essentially the 
bureaucratic assistants who are in the wrong. Such logic is more 
convenient for the government leaders. The imperturbable stance 
of government leaders probably emanates from this circumstance. 
  I will repeat myself, but this writer entertains strong 
dissatisfaction and doubt concerning economic measures based on 
MOF initiatives. The Hosokawa government's response to recession 
so far lacks flexibility to a degree greater than that of the 
former LDP government. One reason is that it has forced itself 
into a self-conceived predicament because it espoused a slogan 
of system reform from the beginning and is unable to form a 
recession countermeasure without coordinating its contents with 
the slogan. I am in favor of deregulation and opening of markets 
and, aside from method and timing, I do not disagree with the 
basic policy of the Tax Commission calling for tax reform 
including an increase in consumption tax. 
  Generally speaking, deregulation expands private sector 
activities, increases investment opportunities, and stimulates 
the economy as a whole. It has a major impact in providing a 
positive influence on the restructuring of industry. However, in 
those industry sectors that were resting on their laurels 
relative to vested interests, deregulation induces a transitory 
reduction in incomes and employment which conflicts with 
economic policies. This dilemma can be resolved only by a 
transitory expansion in government financial liability. 
  I can well appreciate MOF bureaucratic concern that the 
government has "Completely abandoned sound financial policies," 
resistance to simplistic hopes for expansion of financial 
liabilities and stubborn insistence on legally offsetting major 
income tax cuts with a hike in consumption tax, in the face of 
accumulated total emergency measures plans totalling 30 trillion 
yen, government bond debt totalling close to 180 trillion yen, 
and single-year government bond servicing costs reaching 15 
trillion yen. 
  The MOF stubbornly adheres to its position out of concern 
for 
the SDJP's "immature disposition" to oppose a hike in 
consumption tax under any circumstance and for the majority of 
politicians who promised, but in reality failed, to favor a tax 
increase in connection with elections and opted for the advance 
and sole reduction of taxes. MOF bureaucrats also have strong 
memories of the excessive stimulative influence that government 
financial measures had on the bubble economy. There are more 
than just a few in industry who now embrace the view that the 
economy is nearing a "turn for the better." They say that things 
look especially gloomy because we are nearing that turn. 
However, bureaucrats warn that, if we are so close to the 
turning point and we take excessive financial stimulative 
measures now, we just might regret doing so at a later date. 
  However, realities of the economy do not allow for much 
optimism. The current recession is a mixed bag of three 
conditions including the cyclical factor involving liquidation 
of excessive investments and excessive supply, structural 
factors involving response to changes in domestic and 
international market structures, and instabilities in financial 
systems occasioned by a sharp drop in stock and land values as a 
result of advances in an asset economy. There is no small risk 
of a spiraling shrinkage of final demand if we depend solely on 
restructuring of businesses resulting in additional personnel 
reductions. Financial policies which center on lower interest 
rates are no longer effective and it seems the economy is 
falling into a situation reminiscent of the early stages of the 
world and Showa-era panics. 
  A necessary move at this stage is action to counteract the 
shrivelled psychology of business, consumers, and investors as 
well as the insecure psychology for the future and it appears 
that we have no choice but to resort to bold Keynesian financial 
policies--based on the application of tax reductions and 
issuance of government deficit bonds--to cope with declines in 
stock prices, vicious cycle of accumulated debts, and the fear 
of a recurring rise in future yen valuations because of a drop 
in investments in the United States and persistent trade 
surpluses being accumulated against the United States. Even if 
we were to legally establish a hike in consumption taxes to 
offset income tax reductions, one wonders if we can suspend its 
implementation until prospects are clear for an economic 
recovery. The current government financial deficit is, in 
reality, serving, in a sense, as a real economic countermeasure, 
while the very fact that the government will have its hands full 
in an effort to redeem government deficit bonds will, as in the 
past, have the effect of restraining future profligate 
government spending and function to justify spending cuts along 
with deregulation and government reform. In that instance, we 
economists will assume responsibility in extending our humble 
support to the MOF. 
  Increasing arguments are being heard for the use of public 
funds or for establishment of a buy-out agency to purchase bad 
loans of financial institutions, but the public voices strong 
opinion that such action should be preceded by an inquiry into 
the responsibilities which reside with the financial 
institutions. Bureaucrats must keenly be awaken that, financial 
institution administration over the years, the MOF was 
responsible for pampering the financial institutions and that 
the assumption of makeshift policies relative to administrative 
guidance such as peacekeeping operations and restraints on 
issuance of additional stock without deployment of an adequate 
basic demand policy will make it difficult to avoid "adverse 
market reaction." 
<H5>  Background Relative to MITI's Household Disturbance </H5>
  Let us go back off to another facet. How are the other 
agencies coping in comparison to the close relationship between 
the agencies concerned with macroeconomics and the new 
government. As widely known, zoku Diet members of the LDP period 
have made a wholesale exit from the various agencies such as 
Construction; Transportation; and Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Fisheries. Needless to say, this does not mean that all contacts 
with former zoku Diet members have ceased. However, advantages 
of maintaining contacts with LDP Diet members who are no longer 
part of the ruling party are very limited. Moreover, since one 
can logically expect a "clampdown" from the ruling party, 
especially Shinseito, bureaucrat visits to LDP Diet members have 
clearly declined sharply. 
  Those changes, whether good or bad, have emancipated 
bureaucrats from intervention from politicians who were expert 
in the policies of the various ministries and agencies. At the 
same time, bureaucrats have provided thorough training to 
ministers who are now leaders of the former opposition parties 
and have done an excellent job in tailoring them into spokesmen 
for the ministries and agencies. It appears that the coalition 
government which does not possess a powerful policy research 
committee organization like the LDP has, in reality, delegated 
overall coordination of policy requests from such ministries and 
agencies to the macroeconomic agency comprised of MOF 
bureaucrats which is accustomed to handling assessments and 
overall coordination. 
  This writer does not believe the existence of zoku Diet 
members was wrong in every respect. Diet members with a lengthy 
history of involvement with a specific government sector possess 
greater knowledge as well as hands-on experience in the sector 
than bureaucrats who serve a limited tenure in the applicable 
specialty. Much respect probably should be afforded to judgments 
backed up by the experience of such individuals. The problem 
arises when such experience is used to distort fairness in 
government, to favor specific businesses and when such action 
leads to bribery. 
  The longer a government remains in power, the more prone it 
is to engage in corruption. Under the auspices of the long-term 
LDP administration, we cannot deny that intervention into 
government administration of zoku Diet members in recent years 
had a tendency to focus on the maintenance of special industry 
interests and to protect vested rights rather than respond to 
novel government needs covering the public's economic 
perspective. The ministries and agencies probably could have 
utilized zoku Diet members to their advantage to pressure the 
MOF or industry, but it is fact that the existence of zoku Diet 
members had, at times, the contrary effect of obstructing the 
response of ministries and agencies to new government needs. 
  The fact that bureaucrats in the various ministries and 
agencies displayed unusual enthusiasm in the reassessment of 
policies at one time under the new government probably was a 
reflection of such accumulated resentment. On the other hand, 
fear that uncertainty of the coalition government's policy 
stance would bring chaos to government financial and industrial 
policies inspired a pathetic sense of mission for MOF and MITI 
officials who showed signs of dedicating themselves to visit to 
the Prime Minister's Residence and ruling party leaders. 
  Speaking of coordination between bureaucrats and political 
leaders, we can say that the partial opening of rice markets 
agreed upon in the final phase of the Uruguay Round came about 
as a result of behind-the-scenes negotiations conducted in 
Geneva by special foreign and agriculture and forestry officials 
since the Miyazawa government days and close exchange of ideas 
between them and leaders of the current ruling parties. This 
effort can be labelled as a government-led solution which 
excluded intervention by zoku Diet members of both ruling and 
opposition parties to the very end. Such an approach resulted in 
considerable turmoil until the final phase of negotiations, but 
now that the decision has been made, it can be clearly treated 
as a victory of sorts. 
  However, among current ruling party leaders, there seems to 
be some who exercise strict caution over bureaucrats who do not 
take the ruling party intentions seriously, regardless of 
whether they are from a mainstream or non-mainstream government 
agency, or if they have excessive contacts with the LDP. Above 
all, there is the possibility that the ruling party will 
intervene in government agency personnel assignments to restrain 
such actions of bureaucrats and as a procedure to exercise 
maximum persuasion to directly eliminate such actions. 
  Most likely, even if we set aside the merits of the 
disposition of the case or any inquiry into MITI Minister 
Kumagai's true intention in connection with the demand for the 
resignation, the issue whereby the Industrial Policy Bureau 
director of MITI was forced to resign after assuming 
responsibility for promoting a son of a former MITI 
administrative vice minister to enhance his prospects as a 
political candidate must be assumed as having been used to warn 
bureaucrats as a whole by penalizing one official for a single 
infraction and to serve notice that any bureaucrat deemed 
intimate with the LDP is subject to disposal as a result of 
ruling party politician's intervention in bureaucratic personnel 
matters and to restrain their contacts with the LDP. However, 
unless one is the type to "favor control by force" or one that 
has the will to use such methods, he will probably hesitate to 
put them to use. Such methods are not compatible with 
politicians who use a gentle approach, such as in the case of 
Prime Minister Hosokawa or Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura. 
  There are more than a few bureaucrats in the MOF and MITI 
who 
are close to Mr. Ozawa. Among them are those who attended Mr. 
Ozawa's study group and participated in the compilation of his 
book titled, Blueprint for Building a New Japan. 
Many former and current bureaucrats of MITI surmised that among 
MITI bureaucrats close to Mr. Ozawa, there was a group which 
teamed up with a very limited group of former bureaucrats of 
MITI, who were unhappy with MITI personnel assignments in the 
days of the former vice minister and plotted the dismissal of 
influential personnel connected to the former vice minister and 
close to the LDP. That situation gave birth to the mysterious 
document which denounced the former vice minister, leading to 
talk of an indictment and to MITI Minister Kumagai's demand for 
resignation. 
  Kasumigaseki culture which provides for the practice of 
granting a promotion in name only to enhance the position of a 
political candidate is certainly not a desirable one from the 
standpoint of public sensitivities. It is not wrong to hold the 
chief cabinet secretary of the time responsible for the 
personnel action. Further, the issue and circumstances may make 
it unavoidable for a minister to take direct personnel action 
without following the normal personnel appointment and dismissal 
procedure of going through the vice minister and the chief 
cabinet secretary. However, the question is, is the issue of 
such a gravity as to call for resignation? 
  What is difficult to comprehend is that the incident 
originated with insidious intraministry manipulation emanating 
from a mysterious document and that the document has given the 
impression of having influenced personnel assignments. Above 
all, the only obvious reason for demanding the resignation was 
to assume responsibility for the promotion in name only. The 
reason had nothing to do with a disagreement in policy matters 
with another minister, a major policy error, or a grievous act. 
  If a personnel action of the foregoing nature is to be 
declared undesirable, we should question all personnel actions 
of this nature of the past. However, neither the prime minister 
nor other government leaders have made any move to take such 
action. The existence of a degree of tension at all times among 
politicians or cabinet officials and bureaucrats is in some 
respects desirable so as to serve as a mutual check. However, it 
is difficult to understand why a bureaucrat would be forced into 
resignation solely because of the aforementioned reason. The 
lack of an inquiry into similar cases in the past relative to 
other ministries is even more strange. It appears that the issue 
still leaves much to be debated from the aspect of guaranteeing 
employment status under the provisions of the National Public 
Service Law. 
  These comments are of a postscript nature, but as far as 
this 
writer understands, the former Industrial Policy Bureau director 
who resigned does not play golf, did not allow himself to engage 
in shady relations with merchants, and was a nice fellow who 
relied solely on personal abilities. He was an expert on the 
United States and had many friends in the United States. U.S. 
officials knew him as a tough negotiator and highly rated and 
respected his skills as a mediator. The Japanese Government has 
lost an essential human resource just when U.S. dissatisfaction 
with Japan is on the verge of explosion. Moreover, if it is true 
that his ideas and capabilities played a prominent role in 
forming MITI's economic measures, industry structural reforms, 
and deregulation, the question arises as to why he was suddenly 
discarded as a key bureaucrat in a very untimely manner just as 
the management of the economy and industrial policy are reaching 
a major turning point with a high degree of urgency. 
  In any event, the case just discussed has left a bad 
impression and has clearly impacted negatively on MITI's image. 
Internationalization and maturation of the economy will no doubt 
call for even more reductions and reorganizations in many past 
forms of government authority and systems designed to provide 
for the protection and growth of industry. That being the case, 
it is not unnatural for bureaucrats to exercise concern in 
personnel assignments and future position assignments and it is 
not difficult to understand the excessive sensitivities directed 
at rankings by those in charge of personnel evaluations. 
However, if such conditions served as the root cause for the 
recent case, it would not be an overstatement to say that not 
only the organization itself but both current and former 
bureaucrats have themselves reached a substantially advanced 
stage of mental degeneration. 
<H5>  MOF-MITI "Allied Forces" </H5>
  Let us change the topic. Just because we say the Hosokawa 
government is highly dependent on macroeconomic ministries and 
agencies does not mean that the prime minister is not surrounded 
by self-styled and third-party brains. Even among those 
individuals about whom this writer is familiar, they have 
contacts with private-sector economists who are leaning to 
anti-MOF and anti-bureaucratic group. However, in the interim, 
while his government base is fragile and under the situation 
where he has a shortage of human resources within the new 
parties with practical and theoretical policy capabilities, the 
prime minister probably will not be able to muster the frame of 
mind to deviate substantially from the policy path devised by 
bureaucrats. He will no doubt avoid making enemies out of the 
bureaucratic mainstream. 
  According to widely circulated reports, MOF bureaucratic 
leaders have met from early on and have established very close 
relations with Mr. Ichiro Ozawa who is the behind-the-scenes 
strongman of the new government. Further, it is said that 
leaders of the MOF and MITI maintain close personnel 
connections. The cooperative stance between the MOF and MITI has 
been especially obvious in the string of past debates on 
economic measures and tax system reform and the two ministries 
have been unmistakably and sarcastically referred to as "allied 
forces." 
  These two agencies once maintained a cat-and-dog 
relationship 
and one wonders what is at the bottom of this close connection 
and how long the "honeymoon" will last. Setting aside the 
personal relationships of the leaders of the two ministries, no 
doubt there is major advantage in maintaining the cooperative 
stance of the two ministries for the foreseeable future. 
  As an example, we can examine the issue concerning the 
distribution of public works funding. The MOF has for some time 
preferred to revise the method of distribution for public works 
funds which have been fixed for many years on the basis of 
Ministry of Construction (MOC) bureau breakout into a priority 
system which is responsive to government investment requirements 
in the areas of welfare, environment, education, and medical 
facilities. In other words, it was seeking a revision in the 
public works funds distribution process based primarily on civil 
engineering projects. Surfacing of the general contractor 
scandals has provided a favorable opportunity for such a change. 
However, resistance of engineers in the MOC is formidable, while 
the zoku Diet members became involved and made it impossible to 
proceed with the idea. 
  Meanwhile, MITI has been strongly dissatisfed with the 
previous system of distributing public works funding based on a 
central role played by the MOC. MITI bureaucrats entertain even 
the idea that public works investments should logically include 
technical development investments as a means of creating public 
assets which are common to humanity. Although immediate 
realization of such an idea may be difficult, an attempt is 
being made to surface it as a policy issue providing leverage to 
the electronic information industry where Japan now lags by 10 
years behind the United States, to promote computerization of 
universities and medical facilities, and to catch up even a step 
closer to the U.S. "Gore Concept" on a near-term basis through 
the formation of a nationwide multiplestage information network. 
The definition of "social infrastructure" as advocated by the 
MOC since the LDP days includes such items as discussed above. 
As beginners, MOC influenced the Ministry of Education, Ministry 
of Transportation, and Ministry of Health and Welfare into 
including funding for computerization and networking of schools, 
hospitals, and transportation facilities. Approval of future 
major funding for information systems, computerization and 
networking must be handled as a separate issue, but partial 
introduction of public works funding for "new social 
infrastructure" projects of this nature serve as desirable 
material for the MOF in revising the distribution of existing 
funds. And, as stressed by MITI, such projects have a greater 
impact on stimulating business activity in related industries in 
comparison to the comparatively declining multiplier effect of 
"civil engineering" projects. The "honeymoon" for the MOF and 
MITI found its beginning relative to these developments. Both 
the 13 trillion yen final LDP integrated economic plan as well 
as the 6 trillion yen initial Hosokawa government emergency plan 
involved many policies and the delicate distribution of public 
funds based on ideas furnished by MITI experts. 
  However, more deeply rooted reasons existed for the 
formation 
of the MOF-MITI alliance. Those reasons relate, as stated 
earlier, to the fact that MITI and MOF are facing a major 
turning point amidst progress in the deregulation and maturation 
of the economy. Although both ministries deal with issues of a 
differing nature and substance, both face a situation in which 
they must thoroughly reexamine their respective administrative 
systems and policy systems from a new perspective. 
  The MOF would probably like to borrow from the knowledge of 
MITI concerning micro-industrial information systems relative to 
how changes in future industrial and employment structures and 
international economic trends will affect systemic 
restructurings in management of financial and monetary policies, 
while MITI competes with the Ministry of Post and 
Telecommunications in the radiowave and communications sector 
and many sectors related to novel needs of industry affect 
regulating authority of other ministries and agencies, making 
affiliation with the MOF desirable in terms of exercising its 
authority relative to other ministries and agencies. 
  Deregulation and elimination of domestic and international 
price differentials which are basic policies of the Hosokawa 
government are as a matter of principle welcomed by MITI which 
has already assumed a basic theme calling for 
internationalization in terms of revamping the distribution 
systems and reducing manufacturing costs. Coordination with the 
MOF is also necessary in guiding changes in antimonopoly and 
financial policies so that MITI attain its own policy goals. 
  Of special note is that MITI is now in the position of 
taking 
the initiative in reinforcing the regulation of cartels and the 
implementation of the antimonopoly law, while actively 
collaborating with the Fair Trade Commission which has close 
personnel connections with the MOF to include a review of the 
group-escort format for exercising government control over 
administrative guidance to financial institutions. Concurrently, 
MITI is advocating policy aid for mergers and consolidations 
which are the fruits of industrial restructurings and the 
necessity to adopt the holding company system in attaining 
sophistication in making integrated strategic decisions by 
businesses and business groups under multinationalization and 
diversification moves, but the Fair Trade Commission is not in 
favor of the latter proposal which will remain as an important 
future issue for further coordination. 
  Although there is no need to mention this fact again, the 
"1955 System" has been tied in closely with the various economic 
systems, such as government financial administration, business, 
and monetary systems--which existed to a great degree as a 
mutually cooperative, mutually dependent system of political, 
bureaucratic, and industrial entities rich in Japanese-style 
culture. 
  Such economic systems were based on the original "postwar 
system" which existed from the time of World War II defeat in 
1945 to the 1970's. The "postwar system" reflected the 
structural "interruption" taking place from prewar to the 
wartime days and was based on the "postwar democratization" 
policies of the Supreme Command Allied Powers encompassing the 
dismantling of the zaibatsu [conglomerate] and deconcentration 
immediately following the war, adaptation of the Antimonopoly 
Law, agricultural reform, nurturing of labor unions, women's 
suffrage, and human and organizational "continuity" from prewar 
and wartime periods in many areas which were preserved to 
facilitate occupation policies such as the strong economic 
bureaucracy, financial system, and industrial organization. 
Although such "interruption" and "continuity" factors were 
intertwined, the "1938-1941 framework" emanating from the 
national mobilization structure of the Konoe cabinet days was 
the basic structure used to devise a system as a result of an 
adaptation, modification, recasting, discarding, and selection 
process, amidst a drastic reform leading to "postwar 
democratization." 
  The late Mr. Saburo Okita skillfully referred to the special 
nature of the process as an "effective amalgamation of market 
mechanisms and the government's systematic guidance," and 
although the gradual conversion of Japan into market economy and 
policy, which emphasized supply-side economics under a postwar 
system, were, in effect, not very conducive to the thorough 
adaptation of market economy principles, they had the effect of 
providing for considerably lower public economic costs relative 
to reconstruction and growth. Ministries played a central policy 
role were the MOF which controlled capital supply and demand 
from a government finance aspect in coordination with the Bank 
of Japan and MITI which worked on the supply of commodities and 
the building of a foundation for information systems. It is also 
a fact that the key to the policy management of both ministries 
lay in the close relationships reflected in the 
government-industry cooperative systems. 
  Needless to say, these systems were repeatedly revised over 
a 
period of 50 years. Particularly, since the latter half of the 
1970's when the Japanese economy was subject to a quickening 
pace of liberalization and decontrol, there was a gradual 
dismantling or change in the systems and many practices, which 
were considered special characteristics of the "Japan model," 
such as government methods of intervening in the private sector 
or methods concerning interindustry business entity cooperation. 
With the first phase of the 1980's as a turning point, 
industrial policy was especially affected by a major conversion 
from administration of direct regulation and intervention for 
the sake of protecting, nurturing, and strengthening competitive 
capabilities of manufacturing industries to administration based 
on indirect guidance centered on deregulation, consumer 
interests, emphasis of environmental matters, and disclosure of 
information. We need not repeat that such a move created many 
derivative problems. 
  In contrast, we see the inability to unshackle 
administration 
from the inertia of direct regulation and direct intervention 
with a strong protective quality in those areas of the economy, 
which are weak in terms of international competitiveness or 
plagued by low productivity, such as agriculture, distribution, 
and construction. Such areas have been hotbeds for general 
contractor corruption and have caused abnormal political 
imbroglios, such as that pertaining to the partial decontrol of 
rice imports. 
  Further, although it can be said that we finally witnessed 
the full-scale liberalization and decontrol of financial 
institutions in recent years, we have not seen a complete 
removal of the psychological inertia inherent in long years of 
protective administration based on the previously mentioned 
group-escort concept. We can say that this factor is the root 
cause of previously mentioned conditions such as various 
scandals occurring in connection with the bursting of the bubble 
economy including obtuseness of a sense of self-responsibility 
of financial institutions and ineffective government responses 
and the current problems concerning the accumulation of bad 
loans. Further, throughout the economic system, we see numerous 
legal and systemic areas of neglect that represent relics of 
control-type legislation of the wartime and postwar eras, such 
as the Bank of Japan Law, Food Control Law, Agriculture Land 
Law, and Land and Housing Leasing Law. We also see the existence 
of many industry laws which are relics of government 
protectiveness of industry which serve to preserve government 
inertia in terms of the tendency to protect industry and to give 
priority to protection of the manufacturer. 
  In the past, the Hosokawa government vociferously espoused 
"deregulation" and "decentralization of government," whether the 
matter concerned short-term economic measures or medium- and 
long-term structural reform policies. It is probably true that 
the basic goal in such pronouncements emanates from the 
awareness of the need to radically revise the "postwar systems," 
as mentioned previously. However, ranging from emergency 
measures to the final report of the Economic Reform Research 
Committee, many items have been listed on the deregulation 
agenda, the list looks attractive and literature appealing for 
the changes reflect a grand style, but there has been a dearth 
of actual progress in realizing the proposed changes. 
  Presently all policy matters are being held in abeyance 
pending progress on political reform. Thus, one questions the 
degree to which the government will be able to seriously cope 
with deregulation, correction of domestic and international 
price differentials, and government structural reform. This 
writer's estimation is that, even if progress is somehow made on 
political reform and restructuring takes place in sectors of 
industry plagued by recession, the deregulation will make very 
little progress except the areas where there will be limited 
resistance of bureaucrats and industry, and that it will be 
impossible to take any action in the area of bureaucratic 
systems themselves. We may see some progress, but it will be 
within the scope desired or permitted by the mainstream economic 
ministries and agencies such as the MOF and MITI. 
<H5>  Japan's Environment and Status of Bureaucrats </H5>
  The characteristic that bureaucrats provide initiatives and 
the private sectors depend on the bureaucrats will not change 
easily, no matter how long the Hosokawa government lasts and as 
long as we do not see the formation of an extremely powerful 
stable government. Moreover, there is no guarantee that the 
recent election system reform will give birth to such a stable 
government. Then, the question becomes, does that mean we face a 
genuine predicament? I believe such is not necessarily the case. 
  The various economic systems of the past as they applied to 
Japanese culture were such that they functioned to provide 
mutual surveillance and mutual assistance among economic 
entities within the context of government-private sector 
relationships, i.e., functioned as checks and balances. On the 
other hand, they were of a nature that bred so-called collusion 
or a simplistic "sense of mutual interdependence." It was a 
system that made industry very susceptible to widespread 
collusive relationships, but one wonders if it is desirable to 
manage economic affairs so that the competitive principle is 
permeated throughout all aspects or whether the spread of the 
spontaneous form of collusion should be approved as long as it 
does not become too obvious. Setting aside debate from a purely 
economic standpoint, if we premise the question on the 
perceptions or actions and mechanisms of various economic 
entities where collusion is a part of the Japanese culture, 
frankly speaking, it is difficult to explicitly differentiate 
between right and wrong. 
  However, if simplistic "interdependence" should distort the 
efficiency of the economy or the rationality of distribution of 
resources and capital, especially if such practices should cause 
an absence of transparency for outsiders, then, such practices 
should be denounced. Moreover, if collusion between politicians, 
bureaucrats, and businessmen lead to distribution of rights only 
to selected interest groups, cornering of public funds, and 
corruptions, then it is only logical that thorough reform action 
should be taken. 
  However, as suggested by Ronald P. Dore, professor of London 
University, "It is questionable whether the market supremacy 
principle will lead to a recovery in the Japanese economy." Both 
the Japanese government-private sector cooperative system and 
business management and employment systems still contain major 
advantages relative to efficient management of the economy as a 
whole and in terms of eliminating inequality. As long as 
efforts--to eliminate abuses of the previously mentioned nature 
such as "collusion among special interest groups" and "priority 
for insiders"--are not neglected through administrative 
litigation system reform and revision of commercial law, the 
maintenance of practices of the foregoing nature can be 
adequately espoused before the world. 
  Conversion to a political initiative system as espoused by 
Mr. Ichiro Ozawa in his book titled, Blueprint for Buildig 
a New Japan would be meaningless and, in fact, would even 
cause many problems, unless we can realize conditions such as an 
improvement in the quality of politicians, establishment of 
adequate staffing to support the politicians, and organization 
of private sector think tanks to counter the bureaucratic 
system. Such conditions do not exist in Japan at this time. One 
possible approach would be to execute direct government reform 
in the format of personnel reductions as contained in the 
Clinton-Gore concept embodied in the U.S. "Plan to Eliminate 
250,000 Federal Jobs," transfer a large number of highly 
qualified bureaucrats to serve as assistants to politicians and 
political parties, and as employees of think tanks, to guarantee 
them social status above those of bureaucrats as well as 
generous pay. However, it is doubtful that reform of this nature 
can be realized in Japan in the near future. 
  We must consider such problems as the widespread loss of 
efficiency associated with the U.S. Government turnover of 
political appointees relative to a change in administration and 
methods associated with adherence to neutrality by bureaucrats 
under the European parliamentary system, and position 
bureaucrats with a status which is appropriate for the Japanese 
environment. The act of engaging in ill-advised simplistic 
espousal of "respect for politicians and disrespect for 
bureaucrats" as seen with some commentators and politicians 
reeks of ignorance and meaningless ideology. 
  [Boxed item: Sachio Suzuki. Economic commentator. 
Professor of economic policy, International Economic Faculty, 
Reitaku University. Born 1927 in Aichi prefecture. Graduate of 
Political-Economics Faculty of Waseda University. Employed by 
NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN in 1951, serving as member of editorial 
committee and deputy chief editor with board of director 
membership status. In 1982, served as chairman, editorial 
committee, and managing director of Tokyo Television. In 1989, 
served as professor of International Economics Law Research 
Department, graduate school of Yokohama National University. In 
1992, retired and assumed current position. Writings include 
books and papers such as "Hybrid Economy" and "Economic 
Bureaucrats." Serves as Japan IBM consultant. Serves as member 
of such bodies as the Industrial Structure Council and 
International Finance Basic Issues Research Commission. 


