BFN 

  [Text] The naming meeting for the Fourth Company of a unit 
under the command of the provincial military district on which 
the Nanjing Military Region conferred the title of honor of 
Coastal Defense Model Company was solemnly held in Jingjiang 
City yesterday. 
  Leaders of the Nanjing Military Region, the provincial party 
committee, the provincial military district including [Nanjing 
Military Region Political Commissar] Fang Zuqi, [Provincial 
Party Secretary] Jia Qinglin, [Provincial Military District 
Commander] Ren Yonggui, and [Provincial Military District 
Political Commissar] Sui Shengwu attended the meeting. 
  The Coastal Defense Company is a heroic company with a 
glorious tradition. During the war years, it won the title of 
honor of the Libao Battle Heroic Company. During the period of 
socialist construction, they were always advanced in the 
construction of all fields of endeavor. Particularly in recent 
years, always bearing our army's fundamental function in mind, 
they have conscientiously performed their duties, paid keen 
attention to the implementation of the strategic system, and 
made outstanding contributions in defending the motherland's 
coastal security and economic construction. Their advanced 
deeds are an embodiment of our party and Army's fine traditions 
and a revelation of the completely new style and features of the 
soldiers of a new generation. 
  On behalf of the Nanjing Military Region, Fang Zuqi warmly 
congratulated the Coastal Defense Model Company and hoped its 
officers and men would keep a cool head in the face of honors, 
persist in setting high and strict demands on themselves, strive 
to be really up to the mark in all fields, and set a good 
example for all the troops of the region. He also urged all the 
troops in the region to keep their heavy responsibilities firmly 
in mind; conduct, in an extensive and down-to-earth manner, the 
activities of striving to be an advanced company and outstanding 
soldiers; train more advanced units like the Gulangyu Good 
Eighth Company and the Coastal Defense Model Company; and strive 
comprehensively to uplift army building to a new level. 
  On behalf of the provincial party committee, government, and 
people across the province, provincial CPC Secretary Jia Qinglin 
attended and congratulated the company. He called on the cadres 
and people of the province to conduct extensive activities to 
learn from the Coastal Defense Model Company and to learn from 
their efforts to foster a correct world outlook and values, 
enhance dedication to the revolutionary cause and the sense of 
responsibility toward work, set high and strict demands, carry 
out work in a down-to-earth manner, and strive for first-rate 
achievements; learn also from their fine quality of strictly 
discharging their duties and building an enterprise through 
arduous efforts; and learn from their experience in 
strengthening ideological and political work in the new 
situation with a new mental outlook and new forms of activity. 
He urged that we should guide, protect, and give play to the 
enthusiasm of the broad masses of cadres and people and strive 
in our struggle for the development and rejuvenation of Fujian 
and the realization of our province's "three-step" strategic 
goal. 

