Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's article: "Let the Lei Feng Spirit Shine at </F>
Every Post"] 
  [Text] The third national seminar on the "drive for people 
in all walks of life to perform their duties in Lei Feng's way 
to develop new practices" opened yesterday. The deeds achieved 
in the drive to learn from Lei Feng by representatives of 
advanced units and individuals of 14 "window industries 
[representative and key industries]" across the land, which are 
vivid and touching, have reproduced and raised to a higher level 
the Lei Feng spirit, thus making positive contributions to 
advancing socialist culture and ideology. 
  As we face arduous tasks to accomplish the promotion of 
reform and economic construction, there is all the more need to 
use the Lei Feng spirit to unite and encourage the broad masses 
to work hard to make greater achievements and, on the other 
hand, to educate and stimulate the people to advance the pure 
and get rid of the evil, encourage healthy trends, and strive 
for social progress. 
  The "drive for people in all walks of life to perform their 
duties in Lei Feng's way to develop new practices," which was 
created by the people in the campaign to learn from Lei Feng, is 
very popular. Facts show that injecting the Lei Feng spirit 
into every ordinary work post to achieve socialist modernization 
and into every step the people take to attain their ideals, is a 
good and effective way of deepening the campaign to learn from 
Lei Feng in the new period and should be continued for a long 
time. 
  What is important in emulating Lei Feng is perseverance and 
practical results. To achieve this, we must have our feet 
planted firmly in our own work posts and give expression to the 
ideological principle of serving the people heart and soul in 
our work. The common characteristics of many people who have 
distinguished themselves in learning from Lei Feng are that they 
dedicate themselves wholly to their work, willingly do and dig 
into any job they are assigned, study hard, honestly perform 
their duties, work in a down to earth manner, and engage 
themselves in unostentatious hard work so that they can put on a 
first-rate work performance. We must advocate this spirit. It 
is of great practical importance to improve the work style of 
all trades through the campaign to emulate Lei Feng. Certain 
unhealthy trends usually find expression in professional 
characteristics. We must find out where the shoe pinches and 
conduct education on professional ethics in line with actual 
conditions so that we can encourage standing up for what is 
right and resisting what is wrong and inject the Lei Feng spirit 
into the work style of all walks of life and achieve substantial 
results. 
  It is necessary to integrate the drive with our efforts to 
comprehensively raise the general public's moral, cultural, and 
ideological levels to nurture a new generation. The fact that 
people cherish the memory of Lei Feng and wish that he would 
come alive again under the new situation reveals their hopes for 
fostering high social standards. The Chinese youth volunteers 
activities [zhong guo qing nian zhi yuan zhe huo dong 0022 0948 
7230 1628 1807 1959 5074 3172 0520], which have recently been 
organized in more and more urban and rural areas across the 
land, are welcomed by the masses. The masses are glad to see 
more and more people helping those in difficulty, taking 
pleasure in helping others, or enthusiastically promoting public 
welfare, which has resulted in the gradual formation of a 
mightily healthy trend. We should carry on such activities 
intensively, perseveringly, and in a down-to-earth manner and 
work unremittingly for the elimination of extreme individualism, 
mammonism, hedonism, and all sorts of objectionable phenomena. 
  The deeds of Comrade Xu Honggang, who rose gallantly for a 
just cause and risked his life for another, have aroused a 
strong echo in all walks of life. This reflects the love the 
masses cherish for heroes and the value they attach to a good 
social atmosphere. Every trade, area, and department should set 
a number of people up as advanced models who give expression to 
the Lei Feng spirit, to encourage other people to make progress 
in expanding the contingent of advanced elements. Propaganda 
departments must vigorously disseminate the deeds of advanced 
models and spread the use of advanced experience to cultivate a 
social climate of emulating and trying to catch up with advanced 
elements and to carry on the campaign to learn from Lei Feng 
intensively and perseveringly. 
  Party committees at all levels must sum up the experience 
created in the drive and strengthen their leadership of the 
drive. Leading cadres at all levels in particular, should set 
an example and take the lead in learning from Lei Feng. We are 
convinced that through the efforts of every member in society, 
the Lei Feng spirit will bear richer fruits in the new 
historical period and shine more brilliantly in the various work 
posts. 

