BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Croatian President Franjo Tudjman by "the </F>
editors in chief of the Croatian press and HINA" at the 
Presidential Palace in Zagreb on 26 May, 1994: "`The World Also 
Needs a Stable Croatia'"] 
  [Text] On Thursday, the president of the Republic of 
Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, received the editors in chief of the 
Croatian press and HINA [Croatian News Agency] at the 
Presidential Palace. 
  On the occasion of Statehood Day, in a meeting which lasted 
for two hours, the president answered questions about most 
topical events regarding domestic and foreign politics of 
Croatia. 
  This (Unauthorized) interview with the president of the 
Republic of Croatia is published by VJESNIK in its entirety. 
  [Vladimir Vazdar, GLAS SLAVONIJE] Allow me to ask you the 
first question on behalf of my colleagues with regard to the 
upcoming holiday, Statehood Day. 
  Which events of the past four years would you say were 
crucial and confirmed the independence of Croatia, and which 
situation or event has threatened it most? 
  [Tudjman] In my opinion -- and I probably do have something 
to do with what you ask me -- the First Assembly of the HDZ 
[Croatian Democratic Community] was one of the most critical 
moments. 
  Why? Because at that point, I began implementing the program 
of fighting for the establishment of an independent, sovereign, 
and democratic Croatia at the time when not only the ruling 
party, the League of Communists, but also all other opposition 
parties -- as you well know -- considered the program dangerous, 
and when there was the danger that all those gathered around it 
would be arrested, not only myself, but all those around me. I 
think this was one of the most crucial moments. I thought we 
would not be arrested due to the situation in Croatia and abroad 
at the time and that it would be a decisive step in awakening 
the Croatian public to the program of gaining independence for 
Croatia. 
  Therefore, this was one of the most crucial dates in 
fighting 
for an independent, democratic Croatia. Of course, later on, we 
had to defend, preserve the established, declared independence 
of Croatia from the aggression of the Yugo-Communist army, 
Serbia, and Montenegro. May I remind you, ladies and gentlemen, 
that in 1991, both the domestic and international situations 
were adverse to an independent and sovereign Croatia. 
<H5>  25 September, 1991 </H5>
  Let me just remind you about two facts: On 25 September, 
1991, at the height of the rebellion of the Serbs in Croatia 
organized by the Yugo-Communist army and at the time when the 
Yugo-Communist army was on the offensive to overthrow Croatian 
authorities, not only to conquer Croatian territory in its 
entirety or achieve the minimalist program of 
Virovitica-Karlovac-Karlobag, but also to overthrow the Croatian 
authorities -- on 25 September, 1991, the UN Security Council 
adopted the resolution and imposed an arms embargo on Croatia, 
which was defending itself. 
  Naturally, the international factors that initiated the 
resolution knew Croatia was unarmed, and that the Yugo-Communist 
army, Serbia, and Montenegro had enough weapons for years of 
warfare. This resolution was imposed regardless of that, on 25 
September, and on 7 October the long-planned shelling of the 
Parliament Building, Presidential Palace took place, with the 
aim of making Croatia leaderless. 
  Therefore, those were critical days in fighting for the 
establishment of the sovereign and democratic Croatia. After we 
survived -- and may I remind you that some consuls general left 
Zagreb the day the parliament building was bombed, therefore 
they knew what would happen. [sentence as published] You have 
probably seen the fragments of shells and missiles, where they 
were made, which symbolizes the circumstances and conditions in 
which Croatia was being created. 
  After that -- to the surprise of many in the world and 
causing the astonishment of many at the fact that we survived -- 
the process of recognition began, and the real and formal 
recognition happened, as you know, at the beginning of 1992, and 
final recognition, in the real sense of the word, was achieved 
through the Washington agreement. 
  [Hloverka Novak-Srzic] Some, for example, say that the 
Croatian state has not yet been fully formed, for there are 
still international forces that harbor thoughts of various new 
unions. What do you think about that? 
  [Tudjman] I think this is a good question, based on facts. 
Some forces could not reconcile themselves to the fact that 
there was no more Yugoslavia, especially not to the creation of 
independent Croatia. 
  However, those forces are now marginal. Today, Croatia is 
recognized not only internationally and formally, its 
recognition is genuine, and today Croatia has friends and 
allies, from the United States, as the main superpower, which 
talks only about partnership with Croatia in all fields, to the 
most-populated superpower on the other end of the world, China; 
it has very good relations with most countries of the European 
Union; it has established good relations with Islamic countries 
as well, therefore, such intentions have no prospects at 
present, they have no realistic foundation for the realization 
of their plans, but they do exist. 
<H5>  Intricate Circumstances </H5>
  We must remember, however, that this world, Europe in the 
European Union, the main countries of the European Union, are 
not consistent with regard to the problem of former Yugoslavia 
in general, and therefore also with regard to Croatia, and then 
there are, of course, differences between European countries and 
the United States and Russia. Consequently, those circumstances 
are very intricate, but Croatia is, for the first time in its 
history, in a much better international position. 
  [Josip Jovic] The reputation of Croatia is improving, it is 
even gaining a certain economic stability; at the same time, we 
can even afford a political luxury: We are causing problems for 
ourselves, there are political conflicts, a parliamentary 
crisis, the disbanding of parliament is imminent, some say it 
will definitely happen. People wonder who [Stipe] Mesic and 
[Josip] Manolic [deputies who recently split from the HDZ] 
really are, and what they want. People do not understand that. 
  [Tudjman] Your question contains part of the answer: In 
these circumstances, we could really do without internal 
problems, the parliamentary and constitutional crisis; quite the 
contrary, we must remember that we need a stable Croatia. We 
needed, Croatia needed allies, it got them because of its 
democratic system, but international factors and our friends and 
allies also need a stable Croatia. 
  Therefore, the question of what Mesic and Manolic want and 
why is understandable. This is a problem that one could 
speculate about -- who needs to destabilize Croatia considering 
those circumstances -- and with regard to domestic politics, it 
is certain that Manolic and Mesic belonged to the so called 
left-wing of the HDZ. However, as we could see from many 
statements, particularly from those of Mr. Manolic, he never 
approached the central position of the HDZ from his communist 
positions, even positions of the service in which he spent most 
of his active political life. Differences exist in every party, 
and especially in the HDZ, which wanted to reconcile the divided 
Croats, and the sons of the Domobrani [Croatian wartime militia] 
and, globally speaking, the Ustashas extended their hands to 
Communists and partisans. Mr. Manolic has obviously not 
accepted that hand, but has even made statements, together with 
Boljkovac in particular, that those people who were born out of 
national ideas were pro-fascists, pro-Ustashas. 
  Manolic himself said -- I think he even connected it to the 
Washington agreement -- that this presents the final defeat of 
forces in the Croatian nation that were defeated already in 
1945. Consequently, this statement epitomizes the essence of a 
lack of understanding of the position of the Croatian nation and 
of the fact that we managed to establish Croatia because we 
formed such a movement that united the divided Croatianness, and 
that the Ustasha forces that headed the NDH [Independent State 
of Croatia] were defeated in 1945 for they tied their destiny to 
the fascist Italy and Nazi Germany and had pro-fascist politics 
that must be condemned. But we must never forget that hundreds 
of thousands of Croats were at Bleiburg, that those were not 
Ustashas, i.e. that there were least Ustashas among them, but 
that those were people from all parts of Croatia whose families 
were connected with the NDH as a Croatian state and not fascism, 
Nazism, and so forth. 

<H5>    Manolic Could Not Understand </H5>
  This is what he could not understand and he did not realize 
that most Croats wanted their own country at that time as well, 
nor the fact that the anti-fascist movement was stronger in 
Croatia than in other, not only former-Yugoslav country, but, 
ladies and gentlemen, we could even say that it was relatively 
the strongest in Europe, that this, again, stemmed from their 
yearning -- not from the communist orientation of the Croats for 
the idea of communism as such, but because the Communist Party 
fronted by Tito also had a program for Croatia as a federal 
state. 
  Therefore, this is a problem I talked much about and found 
proof of in historical facts, coming into conflict with 
greater-Serbian views long ago, not only with regard to 
Jasenovac and other cases. Furthermore, the program of creating 
a party-democratic program in Croatia, in developing Croatia, 
that I presented to the people they accepted in its entirety, 
which means Manolic and Mesic, as well as some of their 
followers, have not got used to that idea and that is why they 
dropped out. But, their dropping-out did not come as a 
surprise, especially considering the circumstances at the time 
when we were creating the HDZ and Croatia. 
  I think I have already mentioned this; nothing is new in 
history, and out of 12 apostles of Christ, one was a traitor, 
another failed him, and others, all but one, did not follow him 
on the Way of the Cross. All parties in the world, since their 
establishment, even in Croatia, were divided, and in the last 
century, Starcevic's Party of Rights was divided into pure 
right-wingers and Starcevic's right-wingers; the National Party 
was also divided, from an independent party to that of Radic and 
turncoats, and so forth. So turncoats -- Mesic, Manolic -- are 
no surprise in this group; they are a normal phenomenon in the 
transformation of the HDZ as a party that got the majority vote 
-- which in the beginning, was characterized as an all-national, 
democratic movement -- into a party, as we said at the Second 
Assembly, an all-Croatian, national party, not a narrow 
Christian-Democratic party, but a national party that bases its 
program activities on principles of Christian civilization, as 
we wrote and as I said at the Assembly. And that term is broad 
enough. 
  Generally speaking, people have realized that, and I can 
tell 
you -- among hundreds of letters of support I received from 
people, not only HDZ members, but also from ordinary citizens, 
ordinary citizens of all professions and all ages, from young 
people to college professors -- only one was negative. And I 
must admit it was a politically constructive letter. He told me 
he agreed with Manolic's decision to leave the HDZ. Why? 
Because the letter said he could not accept the program, 
decisions, and the HDZ leadership from the Second HDZ Assembly, 
because he could not accept the kuna as the Croatian currency, 
and because he could not accept a ditty like "God Save Croatia" 
as the hymn of the HDZ! 
  Therefore, this is the essence of Manolic's ideas and his 
followers. 
<H5>  Dragging Away Renegades </H5>
  I said less than 1 percent of party members would follow 
them 
as far as the party is concerned, and they have obviously failed 
to cause a rift in the parliament; rather by dragging away 
renegades, 10 deputies, the HDZ maintained its majority in both 
chambers. 
  And, ladies and gentlemen, let me tell you something -- 
stratification is good for every party, such stratification and 
turmoil are present everywhere and sometimes even amount to 
rifts. In the HDZ, therefore, there was no rift. It is good 
that parties are given shape, become stabilized, in this or that 
manner. However, it is good for Croatia to have a majority party 
in the parliament. 
  I claim the following: It would be easier for me, as the 
president of the country, not to be linked to any party. If I 
wanted to run for president at the next elections as well, my 
reputation is probably so good that my party affiliation would 
play no role in that. But the party I founded, to which I 
contributed its program and together with which I contributed to 
creating an independent and democratic Croatia, needs my party 
affiliation. As a historian, not only as the state leader of 
Croatia, I can say that if it had not been for such a majority 
party, we would not have had an independent Croatia; nor would 
we manage to establish it and defend it; nor would I be able to 
make decisions as we did in the times about which you partly 
spoke in your questions and in which we are still struggling. 
  Take other countries, from the Baltic countries to Poland, 
Slovenia, and Bulgaria, and you will see that the Communists 
have either regained power, or there are problematic coalitions 
that cannot make good political or economic decisions. Even the 
most serious economic experts from abroad, neutral to us, have 
said -- you have managed what you did in the field of domestic 
and foreign politics and economy because you had leadership, 
because you knew what you wanted, because the government could 
also rely on the majority. 
  Consequently, it is good that the parliamentary crisis 
caused 
by Manolic's and Mesic's defection preserved the situation in 
the Croatian Parliament, that the majority party is the party 
that won an overwhelming majority at the latest elections, that 
it is still in the majority, for Croatia's sake. 
  [Nenad Miculinic] Mr. President, as we speak, the 
parliamentary crisis is being aggravated. Last week, in 
Makarska, you said you were prepared, if there is no agreement 
between the HDZ and the opposition, to disband the parliament 
and address the Croatian nation. 
  Are you still prepared to do that, if no agreement is 
reached? Will you, then, disband the parliament and schedule 
early elections? Or, do you think it is possible to overcome the 
parliamentary crisis on the model that has lately been presented 
by the HDZ, so that the party that got the majority in the 
parliament, but that got about one-third of votes at the last 
elections, rules and does not even want to hear those 
representing other opinions, of parties that got the trust of 
the greater part of that same electoral body? 
  [Tudjman] First of all, there are a few things that are not 
true in your question. It is not true that the parliamentary 
crisis is getting worse. We have already overcome the 
parliamentary crisis. For, Manolic and Mesic, even those from 
the opposition who wanted to provoke parliamentary and 
constitutional crisis, have not managed to do that, but, as I 
said, the majority party has preserved the position that allows 
it to make decisions and secure the stability of both the 
parliamentary and executive authorities. And the second part of 
your question reflects, my dear sir, either your ignorance about 
the essence of parliamentary democracy or insufficient political 
education, or good intentions. What does it mean that the HDZ 
got one-third of the electoral body? How many people go to 
elections in the United States? About 50 percent or less, and 
the president is elected with 50 percent of those 50 percent of 
people who voted.... Do any Americans raise the question of the 
president being elected by only 25 percent of the electoral 
body? Only ignorant people and petty politicians raise that 
question in Croatia, those who have not yet accepted the 
reality; that Croatia became an independent, democratic, 
sovereign country and that the HDZ achieved that, together with 
people, and won the majority vote of the electorate that went to 
the polls, and the majority of the HDZ cannot be linked to those 
who voted both for the red and for the black [sentence as 
published]. That is not unity, the majority are those who 
voted, who gave their votes to one party. 
  Therefore, as I said, your question either reflects one of 
the above -- ignorance about the essence of parliamentary 
democracy, poor political culture, or a lack of good intentions 
-- or all of the above. 
  [Nenad Miculinic] No, it does not reflect any of that. The 
fact is, when we look at the results of the elections, the HDZ 
is.... 
  [Tudjman] You got the answer to your question. Let us 
proceed. 
  [Vladimir Vazdar] Allow me to ask you, can you comment on 
the contribution of Slavonia and the Slavonians in gaining 
independence and creating the democratic system of Croatia? 
  [Tudjman] Slavonia, particularly eastern Slavonia, is the 
one that suffered the first blow and that the Yugo-Communist 
army, i.e. Serbia too, wanted not only to conquer, but also to 
rob at all costs, and it was exposed to total ethnic cleansing. 
Slavonia gave an extraordinary contribution -- which is 
difficult to estimate at present -- to the preservation of the 
entire Croatia, to the fact that they did not succeed, in spite 
of the fact that they concentrated all their tank forces there, 
that they did not manage to conquer Vinkovci and Osijek; that 
speaks about the contribution of Slavonia, about the spirit of 
the Croatian nation in Slavonia, about our defensive war. 
  And, of course, the conclusion of that patriotic war, 
fighting for the liberation of eastern Slavonia will probably be 
the most difficult one, but there is no doubt in my mind that 
the Croats in Slavonia will then display both their maturity and 
readiness to do everything to integrate those parts, if possible 
without more casualties, with the help of the international 
community, but as I said, if necessary, also by using all 
available means. 
  [Vladimir Vazdar] With regard to that, let me mention 
hundreds of thousands of refugees and the fact that the key task 
of UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces] in temporarily occupied areas 
has not been fulfilled. And this is still the reality 
preventing Croatia from assuming authority over its entire 
territory. 
  You have recently announced that the UNPROFOR mandate will 
not be extended. Do you hope the problem will be solved during 
the present mandate, or do you see another solution? 
  [Tudjman] You see, those Croatian areas under UN protection, 
which are actually occupied by the Serbs, also enable us to 
monitor the position of Croatia and international relations. 
  We should not turn a blind eye to the fact that the 
international community not only tolerated the aggression of the 
Yugo-Communist army and Serbia on Croatia, but that is was also, 
as I said, indifferent as to what would happen -- they simply 
thought Croatia was the main culprit for the collapse of 
Yugoslavia. Although, as far as the HDZ and myself are 
concerned, I have never said what Mesic wrote in his political 
wisdom "How I Was Breaking Yugoslavia." I knew that former 
Yugoslavia was a reality in the international system and that 
the international community was not inclined to doing away with 
that system, knowing what might result if it did. 
<H5>  If We Could Have Had Confederation... </H5>
  Therefore, my politics at that time proposed to solve the 
Yugoslav crisis by transforming federal Yugoslavia into a 
confederation. Consequently, my confederation proposal stemmed 
from my respect for international circumstances but, ladies and 
gentlemen, also from my desire for a sovereign Croatia, without 
losing lives. 
  For, if we could have formed a confederation, realize full 
sovereignty within a conferral union, without losing lives, then 
it would also accomplish the realization of Croatian, national, 
and democratic goals, for we could have made decisions about the 
future from the viewpoint of a confederation. 
  Consequently, when speaking about the problem of UNPA [UN 
Protected Area] zones, we must remember all those historic 
events from the disintegration of Yugoslavia, even remember that 
many international factors were and still are not completely 
inclined toward us. 
  But we have succeeded, we got the support of international 
factors; we have allies and the support of the main super power. 
We managed to get UN Security Council resolutions that 
guarantee our territorial integrity. And with regard to 
everything Serbia went through with sanctions, the hopelessness 
of its imperialistic politics to create a greater Serbia at the 
expense of Croatian territory, there is, I think, a 50:50 chance 
of beginning the process of normalization on the basis of the 
signed agreement on normalization. Again, we signed the 
agreement also because we were obliged to do so, from the Vance 
plan and the European Community, etc., because it was 
recommended to us by the latest Juppe-Kinkel proposal on a modus 
vivendi, for the proposal actually reverses my peace proposal; 
it obliges us to accept a political solution. 
  Therefore, we shall try to realize that normalization to 
which the representatives of Yugoslav and Serbian government and 
Milosevic have agreed personally by signing the agreement at the 
negotiating table in Geneva, not only in bilateral talks, but 
also at the negotiating table. They agreed to that, to have 
full normalization. Furthermore, we witnessed Belgrade arranging 
the elections in Krajina, around Hadzic, Martic, etc., and they 
even announced that Martic was elected to head the process of 
normalization, and now we witness Martic and Mikelic continuing 
to exacerbate the situation. 
<H5>  Simply Tactical Exacerbation? </H5>
  It remains to be seen whether that exacerbation will last or 
whether it is just tactical, connected with the situation in 
Bosnia. During talks on extending the current UNPROFOR mandate, 
we demanded the implementation of Resolution No. 769 on 
controlling borders between Croatia and Serbia, and Croatia and 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the part of Bosnia-Herzegovina controlled by 
the Serbs. We were then told by our friends that the UN did not 
have enough forces to secure the borders at that time, but that 
they understood our proposals, that our demands were justified, 
and that they would be considered. 
  We will, therefore, do our best to see whether or not they 
want normalization. If they do not want it, we will take our 
demand to the United Nations and take other steps; the mandate 
will no longer be extended. You know that Foreign Minister 
Simic came to Zagreb and that our foreign minister was also 
supposed to visit Belgrade, but we said that would only happen 
after the road toward Belgrade is opened, i.e. the highway via 
Okucani, and when telephone communications are restored. They 
did not satisfy our demands and as long as they do not do that, 
until they really start the process of normalization, we will 
have to maintain an unbending attitude, because today we have 
250,000 refugees and we can no longer postpone solving their 
problem -- and we understand their personal and family problems, 
but there is also the problem of Croatian integrity, 
infrastructure, economic integrity, as well as integrity in 
terms of politics and security. 
  Anyhow, the world does not accept that the Serbs in Croatia 
have the right to self-determination, regardless of the fact 
that this demand of theirs is reiterated by not only their 
politicians, but also prominent intellectuals. The Serbs are a 
minority in Croatia, they are guaranteed all the rights of an 
ethnic community and we are prepared to give them territorial 
self-government in districts -- two districts where they had a 
majority before the war -- cultural autonomy throughout Croatia, 
we are prepared to make many concessions also partly as a result 
of their spreading rumors about the continuation of the NDH, 
etc. We are also willing to implement our Constitutional Law, 
the civic and ethnic rights of the Serbs, and have the 
implementation supervised by interested international factors, 
but with regard to that, let me tell you, as you are public 
persons who mold public opinion, in discussing the position of 
the Serbs in Croatia, people still mention the NDH in connection 
with those horrible figures that say at least 600,000 or 700,000 
Serbs were killed in Jasenovac. And the number of all 
casualties of all nationalities during World War II is less than 
that.... 
  Already in the 1950's, i.e. while I was in Belgrade, I 
objected to those lies and deceptions. Make an effort, take it 
to the press, to all the media, that there were not so many 
people killed in World War II in all of Yugoslavia; all 
partisans, Chetniks, Ustashas, Domobrans, in Jasenovac, in 
Bleiburg, and so forth, included. 
<H5>  Deceit as "Argument" </H5>
  Demographic loss is a different matter, I am talking about 
people killed during the war, and there were 597,000 of them, 
but I did not have that information while I was writing 
The Vastness of Historical Reality. Tell the public, 
publish that data in all your newspapers, dispel that myth and 
deception. For the Serbs base their allegedly justified Serb 
demands, fears, deceit, and so forth, on that. 
  [Josip Jovic] They will not negotiate, except outside 
Croatia. 
  [Tudjman] Knin will not see negotiations outside Croatia.... 
  [Josip Jovic] Those are their maneuvers.... 
  [Tudjman] Maneuvers... Lately, as opposed to the stalling 
of Martic and Mikelic and their unreasonable behavior, Milosevic 
has stated for Athens KATIMERINI that the solution is to solve 
the problem of the Serbs in Croatia like the problem of the 
Albanians in Kosovo. That is, so far, the most positive 
statement. Of course, we would immediately agree to giving the 
Serbs in Croatia rights equal to those of the Albanians in 
Kosovo. 
  [Branko Tudjen] To what extent is this vital and most 
painful problem of the UNPA [UN Protected Areas] zones related 
to the development and outcome of the situation in Bosnia? 
  [Tudjman] It is extremely closely related, to the extent 
that our friends advise us to be patient and wait until it is 
solved. 
  The situation in Bosnia is bound up with the situation in 
the 
UNPA zones and many expect that the relations with the Serbs 
will change once the Bosnian question is solved within a 
framework of those draft proposals that are now being discussed, 
and that this will clear the way for making them give up their 
pretensions about annexing krajina to greater Serbia. 
  [Branko Tudjen] Do you think that Serbian imperialistic 
politics has now reduced its ambitions to what is being offered 
through Bosnia? 
  [Tudjman] I think -- and we were told that at the 
negotiating table as well -- that the world has realized there 
are 2 million Serbs on the other side of the Drina River and 
that the solution to the Bosnian problem would change the angle 
with regard to the problem in Croatia. I think they will accept 
the fact that the Serbs in Bosnia are one of three constituent 
nations. Consequently, they will also accept that the Serbs 
have a right to demand self-determination, but that they must, 
in turn, agree to solving the problem of the Serbs in Croatia on 
the basis of general principles of the international community, 
that national minorities and ethnic communities do not have the 
right to self-determination, but to civic and ethnic rights in 
accordance with international conventions. 
  [Mirko Bolfek] Mr. President, while we are on the subject 
of Bosnia, would you comment on current relations between the 
Muslims, i.e. the Bosniaks, and the Croats, and the fact that 
some say the Washington agreement is not entirely beneficial for 
all Bosnia-Herzegovina Croats, i.e., on the fact that some say 
the agreement does not provide what it is supposed to provide 
for the Croats? 
  [Tudjman] First of all, regarding the Washington agreement, 
I must again point out that the signing of the agreement does 
not present a turning point in Croatian politics and my politics 
toward Bosnia-Herzegovina, but that it was exactly those 
politics that lead to the agreement and won over those allies 
that were not quite familiar with the situation. 
  I not only helped, but received several hundred 
representatives from all parts of Bosnia-Herzegovina in this 
very building, and I told them to go to the referendum for the 
sake of Croatianness and Croatia. 
  Moreover, I not only accepted, but also initiated 
Cutilhiero's plan about cantonal solution. I initiated and 
contributed to the draft solution for provinces. You will 
remember that I dedicated days to some people who came to see me. 
<H5>  We Helped the Establishment of the Croatian Republic of </H5>
Herceg-Bosna 
  Of course they are against the secession of the republic of 
Srpska and oppose the view of a part of the Muslim leadership 
that if a unitarian Bosnia as a whole is not possible, they 
establish a separate Muslim state, that we helped the creation 
of the Croatian republic of Herceg-Bosna, and that it defended 
not only western Herzegovina and central Bosnia, but also other 
parts of Bosnia from the Serb aggression, and that Croat areas 
in central Bosnia be defended from the Muslim offensive, at the 
time when the Muslims were determined to create a Muslim state. 
[sentence as published] 
  Proof: After I signed both public and secret agreement on 
federation and confederation with Izetbegovic, he later on 
signed an agreement with the Serbs in which he said that if 
Bosnia-Herzegovina was to disintegrate, that real membership in 
the United Nations be transferred to the Muslim republic. 
  Furthermore -- I might have mentioned this already; I know I 
did, but I do not know whether it was published anywhere -- at 
one point Izetbegovic told me: "You can annex western 
Herzegovina to Croatia." I refused, for we wanted to defend the 
Croats in central Bosnia. 
  Consequently, the present agreement is beneficial for the 
survival of Croatianness in Bosnia. On the whole, it is more 
beneficial for the strategic interests of Croatia than if it 
simply joined western Herzegovina, but it is also causing 
problems due to the resistance and lack of trust on both the 
Muslim and the Croat sides, although generally speaking, we must 
admit that the agreement on the cessation of hostilities and on 
the implementation of the Washington agreement, regardless of 
the resistance on both sides, was, on the whole, accepted much 
better than we had anticipated considering our strained 
relations. 
  We can expect to encounter many problems, it will take good 
will on both sides to smooth over misunderstandings and regain 
trust. 
  I think most part of the Croatian nation and most 
responsible 
persons who lead that defensive war of Croatia in Bosnia will 
follow these politics and that the Muslims will also try to 
implement the agreement, simply because they realized that the 
world, both Western countries and the United States, were not 
well-disposed toward them. Not only that, they also rejected the 
idea about a unitarian Bosnia, for it is as impossible as 
creating a separate Muslim mini-state. They were advised -- to 
put it mildly, since I do not know what some of you will write 
-- to join the Croats, to connect with the Western civilization 
together with the Croats, that this was the only chance for 
their survival in these parts, and that this is in the interest 
of most Islamic countries as well. For most of them, as you 
know, have pro-Western governments -- actually 47 out of 51 
Islamic countries -- and it is in their interests not to have 
some extremist fundamentalist factions prevail in Bosnia, 
although there are, of course, such extremes in all Islamic 
countries, but, on the whole, they support the Croat-Muslim 
alliance in Bosnia and the confederation. 

<H5>    Overcoming the Historical Burden </H5>
  Between us, the Croats therefore have to overcome this 
historical burden of having been in a subordinate position or 
under hegemony in Bosnia all the time; both in the Muslim, 
Turkish, times and the Yugoslav times -- first under the Serb 
hegemony, and later under the Muslim. They have to learn to 
understand the reality that the U.S. professor, Dr. Boyd, 
presented -- he is said to be one of the top experts on 
international law, and he is paid by the Islamic countries and 
Islamic circles to be an advisor to Izetbegovic, that is, the 
Muslim leadership. After the Washington agreements he put 
together an analysis for Izetbegovic and the Muslim leadership, 
and called it The Memorandum. 
  There are 26 pages of text in this memorandum; it has 121 
items, and each sentence, item, or page, whatever you like, 
states that, with the Washington agreement, the new state 
formation, the federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, has been put 
under the protectorate of Croatia by agreement, by the decision 
of the United States, Europe, and Russia. These are the words 
of this professor in this memorandum. Naturally, from these 
positions and certain Islamic points of view, he does not advise 
the Muslims to accept that. 
  The Croats must overcome that negative 
historical-psychological-political heritage; they must realize 
that, with this federation, they are really becoming equal, and 
they must learn to manage this federation on an equal basis, and 
learn that through the confederation, that is, the confederate 
relations with Croatia, they have full guarantees that they will 
not be tricked. 
  This is favorable for Croatianness in Bosnia as a whole, as 
over 90 percent of the Croats in Bosnia are in the federation, 
and, connected to Croatia, this is, from the geopolitical 
strategic point of view, in the interests of both Croatianness 
in Bosnia and the Croatian state, in the economic and every 
other aspect. We coordinated the interests of the Croat people 
with the interests of international forces on this issue, with 
regard to the eternal divisions of interest spheres in these 
areas. 
  As you know, Croatianness was suppressed in Bosnia in the 
demographic aspect too, and, faced with the population expansion 
of the Muslim population, this placed great demands on the Croat 
politics: the demand to know this strategic position, to know 
how to make us of it without letting the negative aspects 
prevail. 
  [Josip Jovic] The cantonal demarcation has stirred up 
discontent. Was it possible to gain more in these negotiations? 
  [Tudjman] For heaven's sake, we did gain.... The issue 
there was central Bosnia; we could have gotten the separate 
canton of Novi Travnik, Vitez, Busovaca, Kiseljak, Kresevo, but 
it would not have been connected with the other parts. This way 
we got both Jajce and Travnik into a mixed canton -- and 
everything we have listed -- and this way this canton borders 
with a purely Croat canton and a mixed canton. 
  The greatest noise was raised about the mixed canton of 
Mostar, the Mostar-Neretva canton, concerning Medjugorje. I 
said that it was precisely the fact that Medjugorje was going to 
be there that was proof to the Croats there, to us, and to the 
foreigners who are going to come there that it is not only a 
Muslim, but also a Croat canton -- more Croat, if you like -- 
and Mostar must have the main Croat institutions and the Croat 
university, the Croat theater, the Croat soccer club, and the 
institutions of the Croat republic of Herceg-Bosna until the 
federation comes into effect, and later of the canton, and the 
great county [velezupa]. The problem is us; we must know how to 
make use of it. This European Union management, headed by 
Koschnik and his team, will surely not oppose, it will not be 
against the Croat interests. 
  From the strategic point of view, this demarcation is 
therefore favorable for Croatia, but the Croats must accept 
their position; they are no longer subordinated, but they will 
be the ones who will participate in the management. 
  [Kresimir Fijacko] All this presupposes political stability 
in Zagreb. How do you see the way out of what has been 
happening with the parliament, which is surely not contributing 
to the stability? As president of the state, what can you do, 
what do you intend to do, and what do you think should be done? 
  [Tudjman] First of all, I said that this parliamentary 
crisis has in fact been overcome. At this table I said to all 
the party leaders, not only of the majority party, but also of 
the opposition, that Croatia has achieved a favorable 
international position in the present-day world with the 
stability, the democratic system, but also that the world needs 
a stable Croatia, and that everyone had their own share of 
responsibility in that respect. 
<H5>  Italian Imperialism </H5>
  The problem of the stability of Croatia is at present posed 
from a special point of view; that regarding the results of the 
elections in Italy, where the representatives of the parties 
that are at present in power made open statements about 
tutorship, about Istria, Rijeka, and Dalmacija having been 
historically and culturally Italian, which means that they have 
a right to them.... Therefore, it is particularly the gentlemen 
in the Rijeka NOVI LIST who should bear in mind that we are 
faced with the constant presence of Italian imperialism and 
irredentism, which are connected to the Serbian aspirations, 
with the visits to Knin, Baranja, and so on. 
  However, let us go back -- it is necessary to do everything 
for Croatia to remain a stable country with regard to its 
democratic system. The international community has not paid 
much attention to Manolic and Mesic's being renegades, because 
in fact they considered Manolic a proof that we have not done 
enough about decommunizing both the majority party and Croatia. 
  I believe that the crisis they wanted to provoke has in 
fact been overcome, that the majority party is prepared to abide 
by the agreement, which states that the majority party has the 
right to have its members as chamber presidents; they have been 
elected -- that is a fact -- and the majority party is prepared 
to have deputy presidents from the opposition, as has been 
stated. However, this agreement does not mean that nine party 
leaders can determine that -- it is unconstitutional, and does 
not comply with democratic parliamentary practice. 
  Let the majority party and the opposition parties nominate 
the candidates that the parliament as such will accept, and the 
majority party will not make proposals for these positions; it 
could impose its solutions, but it will not -- let the gentlemen 
nominate candidates that will win the majority of the HDZ 
representatives too, and vote according to their conscience and 
the responsibility to their voters. It seems to me that 
prudence will prevail and that the opposition parties will 
acknowledge the election of the chamber presidents that has been 
carried out, and that the parliamentary activities regarding the 
election of the chamber deputy presidents and the drawing up of 
the new rules of procedure on the parity basis, in the spirit of 
the democratic principles in the European and other countries, 
which will then be submitted to the parliament, will continue. 
An agreement on the new number and members of parliament 
committees, which we had agreed upon, was reached, and I think 
that sense will prevail among the opposition too -- though you 
know that they were not united either in their positions or in 
electing Manolic -- and that the parliamentary activities will 
continue under normal conditions. 
  At any rate, I can tell you this: There were even 
representatives from the opposition parties who said that they 
did not consider that important, that each parliament in the 
world is managed in a democratic way, on the majority basis. 
<H5>  The Majority Party and the Majority </H5>
  One of the opposition representatives said that if the 
majority party does not know how to make use of its majority, 
then it proves that it is not capable of ruling. We have 
received some similar statements from foreign observers too. 
  But I will tell you something, ladies and gentlemen. The way 
you have interpreted this parliamentary crisis in your media.... 
Croatia needs a stable democratic system to resolve its 
important problems, to liberate the occupied territories, and to 
be able to participate efficiently in the talks regarding the 
crisis and all the international positions; it does not need 
destabilization. 
  Instead of saying "parliament without opposition," you could 
have nicely said that a new parliamentary chairman has been 
elected, because he has indeed been legally elected. You are 
also responsible for creating public opinion in the sense that 
our people are able to understand what it means to have a state 
of one's own. 
  We can have internal differences, but we can not create the 
term "unstable Croatia." Who needs an unstable Croatia? 
Remember, gentlemen, this West, this democratic West has given 
billions of dollars to Yeltsin to establish the democratic 
system -- you know how, you witnessed the tanks aimed against 
the parliament and so on. Therefore, there are realities in 
international life, there are problems that the international 
community needs to solve to prevent a world conflict, or 
regional conflicts, and so on. 
  I repeat, it was because Croatia knew what it wanted, 
because 
it had a more stable system than any other former socialist 
country -- in which the Communists have been coming back, or the 
coalitions are inefficient -- that it has gained trust, but also 
because it was stable, because the world also needs a stable 
Croatia. 
  Therefore, I am asking you, not for the sake of the 
interests 
of the party, but for the sake of the interests of the Croat 
people. [sentence as published] For the consciousness of what 
it means to build a state and what needs to be invested in it, 
to prevail over the negative, centuries-old heritage in which 
even intellectual minds were forced to serve foreign masters -- 
from Venice to Vienna, Budapest, and Belgrade -- therefore, to 
build a democratic Croatia and this responsibility, that is 
truly not an easy job. 
  [Hloverka Novak-Srzic] In the context of the attempt at 
destabilizing Croatia that you spoke about, what is your comment 
on the fact that some of the critics of the Croatian state do 
not criticize the real problems -- the improvement of democracy 
and economy, or Croatia entering Europe -- as much as you 
personally? I am talking about the letter of the six, [former 
president of the Croatian Rights Party] Paraga's letter to the 
U.S. Congress, and the two letters that we have heard that 
Manolic and Mesic wrote. What is your comment on that; why is it 
so? 
  [Tudjman] If there were no Tudjman, there would be no HDZ, 
there would be no Croatia. Therefore, if the attempt on the 
Presidential Palace had succeeded, which it did not thanks only 
to circumstances, it is clear what would have happened. 
  [Miroslav Ivic] President Tudjman, war profiteering and now 
the irregularities in the transformation process have been 
irritating the public and stirring up disunion, which is 
contrary to what is necessary. Do you think that enough has 
been done to prevent this from spreading, and what is your 
assessment of the activities of the bodies in charge of that? 
  [Tudjman] You know that, during several government sessions 
that I chaired, I dedicated some special time to the problem of 
fighting all criminal activities, of eliminating the old 
bureaucratic remnants at all levels, but especially the criminal 
activities. Naturally, there are problems, and not enough has 
been done. 
<H5>  Inevitable Criminal Activities </H5>
  However, gentlemen, such things are inevitable even in 
countries that have never had any other systems but the free 
market system -- or capitalist countries, if you like -- and 
that had state management for centuries. 
  Let us be aware of the fact that it is precisely on the 
free market where the ruthless relations are in force, and that 
in legal conditions you also have people who can cope and those 
who cannot cope, and that there is underground mafia in any 
situation, even in the most normal countries, so to speak -- not 
only in Italy, but also Germany, the United States, Japan -- 
countries that have not undergone such turmoil as Croatia has. 
  Therefore, with the breakup of the former Yugoslav community 
a number of Yugo-unitarians, Yugo-integrationists were affected, 
and they remained in Croatia. The same goes for the breakup of 
socialism. A very large level of people was connected to the 
socialist structures, and they remained here, partly 
dissatisfied with the new situation. Even when they became 
involved in the structures of the democratic authorities, they 
were subversive and tried to use their positions for their 
purposes, for turning the wheel of history in the opposite 
direction again. 
  And then there was the transformation of the socialist, 
nobody's property -- state property -- into private property. 
This is a problem that humanity had never faced before, and it 
has not been completely resolved anywhere yet. As the free 
market was being formed, so was this capitalist society the 
wild-west way, the mafia, and so on. Were the Fords and all the 
other international magnates established by being clerks, 
sitting at their desks, like the others, the majority of the 
citizens? We must understand that; a much more stratified, more 
political, and more scientific approach to this problem should 
be taken. 
  On the one hand there is the fighting against criminal 
activities, and on the other we should see that in this 
transformation, the transition from the socialist system to the 
free market system, some people will inevitably become rich, and 
some will not. We must also understand that while we have to 
fight all the criminal activities, there will be no rich Croatia 
without rich Croats. We must understand that. 
  There is this very interesting phenomenon of the real 
mistakes being used for petty political pusposes, instead of 
seeing to the transformation being carried out as soon as 
possible, and achieving stability in that respect, both for the 
sake of internal development and external relations. 
  These old structures are a special problem, as are the old 
views, and the Yugo- and socialist resistance to the return of 
the Croat emigrants. We still do not have any information as to 
whether, at present, there are as many Croats abroad as there 
are in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, or at least two thirds of 
that number. 
  However, it was clear to me from the very beginning that a 
great part of the Croat people have been abroad from the last 
century, and that if we do not bring them back, the Croat people 
and Croatia will not be able to survive. If we let these people 
stay abroad, they will continue to pull away the others -- there 
is no house, no home, that does not have a relative abroad. If 
we do not create the conditions for these people to come back, 
they will continue to leave, and Croatia is depopulated as it 
is. Father Bakovic may get on some people's nerves, but there 
are more coffins than cradles in most of Croatia, if you please. 
  Therefore, the return of the emigrants should be facilitated 
through transformation. 
<H5>  Resistance to Emigrant Investment </H5>
  I must admit that I have not received much support in this. 
There has been some in the HDZ, but not in the structures that 
are in the opposition parties. There is so much resistance to 
the investments of our emigrants that they did not accept 
Luksic, the richest man in South America -- not only Chile, but 
South America -- and one of the 100 richest people in the world. 
After I had received him, after he had even sent his sons who 
are there, and after he had expressed his readiness to invest, 
they would still not take him. They resisted it so much that 
they almost threw him out. 
  And now this Geofizika [Croatian company]. There are three 
Croats from California who are willing to buy it for more money 
than Ina [Croatian oil company], which initially stated it was 
not interested, and now these structures in Ina -- which have 
been there since the Communist regime, you know -- are saying it 
is treason, and so on. Because there are three Croats who, 
between us, are doing similar things for us in the United 
States, they can not do it. So then it is said to be a crime of 
the party in power, and so on. 
  I received a letter from a man in Germany, who said he had 
three children, and that he had offered 1.75 million German 
marks [DM] for a company.... If we do not achieve that, Croatia 
will not exist in the future, for the reasons I have stated. As 
soon as this practise is abandoned, there are immediately 
announcements that this is underhand dealing or whatever. 
  This is a problem in which on the one hand we must fight 
absolutely for the rule of law, and against any crime, but on 
the other hand we must be aware of the fact that if this 
Zvonimir Boban [Croatian soccer player for AC Milan in Italy] 
has sold his legs for DM16 million or dollars -- German marks, 
and if he wants to invest that money in Croatia, it should be 
made possible. They have preventing him from doing so for a 
year, and labeled him a Herzegovinian, or whatever. 
  Therefore, this is an issue of a conflict between those who 
came from the former management that is holding the structures 
in certain companies, and even in the state management. We were 
at war, and if we had made changes in these structures, the 
Croat people would have become disunited, a civil war would have 
occurred, and so on. Therefore, we carried out the correct 
policy of non-revanchism, of unity, but even with these great 
difficulties we must overcome the resistance both to private 
enterprise and to emigrant investment, which to me primarily 
means the return of our people. We should bring them back, and 
not have them leave. 
  However, I think that this is a process that cannot be 
stopped. I personally know about 100 young people who were born 
abroad. Eventually, we managed to appoint Mr. Blazevic, who was 
born in Argentina, to be assistant to Penic, to put an end to 
this resistance. There have been some positive trends, but 
there have also been some negative ones. Some people who were 
in the state management, in some ministries, went back to 
Australia, so I brought them back, and there were some who were 
disappointed with the relations in the transformation process, 
so I had to make personal interventions over and over again, 
and, as you see, it is a difficult process. It also includes 
the denationalization problem. Other countries have not yet 
managed to resolve that either, but from the very beginning my 
position toward the denationalization problem -- which is the 
only correct one -- has been that we should return what we can 
immediately, but not do more injustice than has already been 
done. So, in the cases in which we cannot return the property 
we should offer adequate compensation, proportional to the 
possibilities. 
<H5>  We Are a Little Impatient </H5>
  This was clear to me in 1990, but, as you can see, it is 
difficult. We have in fact not yet made any significant 
progress in the issue of the new role of the Chamber of 
Commerce, which should be the moving force in all these issues. 
However, you all know that you and I are paying 0.8 percent to 
the Chamber of Commerce -- I do not know whether it is from 
gross or net income. I found it clear as early as in 1990 that 
this is not necessary, but none of the heads of the Chamber of 
Commerce have implemented this so far. The Chamber of Commerce 
must either be a chamber of tradesmen or industrialists, and 
they should make voluntary contributions, instead of us paying 
for this to continue.... This is an example of both 
authoritarian power and of a difficult problem to solve. You 
know, we are a little impatient, though. It all takes time, it 
takes a good law -- it cannot simply be copied. 
  [Josip Jovic] There are certain individuals, let us put it 
that way, who are very highly placed in the political sense, and 
are involved in various suspicious activities, and I do not see 
any reason why this is tolerated. I think they are also 
misusing your moral credibility. 
  [Tudjman] I had two ministers removed from office when I 
learned they were involved in such things. I am in favor of 
finding out about this, of throwing them out, and not only 
shaming them, but also taking them to court. But here things 
are politicized in such a way as to ask for [Defense] Minister 
Susak's resignation with no justification -- if the situation 
were normal, then he would have been replaced after the 
explosion at Duboki Jarak [near Zagreb; a military warehouse], 
not because he would be directly responsible, but for political 
responsibility. However, I know that there are about 10 other 
people there who are directly responsible for what happened, and 
I know that the demand for his resignation was not caused by 
this, but because I could carry out Croatian state policies in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina through him, which included organizing the 
resistance to both aggressions in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the 
removal of the people who had become obstacles to these policies 
-- and you know who they are. 
  You see, things are politicized, and given other meanings, 
or 
they are simply misused for petty political purposes. As far as 
Mrs. Girardi [minister of culture and education] is concerned, 
the organization of the teachers' strikes was connected to this 
entire destabilization action, to the provoking of the 
parliamentary and constitutional crisis, to what they intended 
to do later. So Minister Girardi was then held responsible for 
the whole affair. Anyone else could be better at any position, 
if only they could find such people. 
  The problem of liberating the occupied territories is not 
simple. You probably remember that I said that I did not receive 
support even from those people from Croatia and abroad who 
favored me. They threatened that the sanctions would be 
extended to Croatia if I started liberating Maslenica. I did so 
anyway, again on the basis of the judgment that they would not 
do it because they need us, and that we should prove that we can 
carry out independent policies. 
  We must solve the internal problems in as painless a way as 
possible; I have been saying that the instances of particularly 
heavy crime should be found out about and dealt with, but in as 
painless and efficient a way as possible, which is not easy. 
And then you have these reproaches to the authorities.... I 
said that the documentation on what the members of the majority 
party have gotten in the transformation and on what the others 
have gotten should be prepared, and it will be prepared, and all 
the information should be presented. 
<H5>  Consistent Observation of the Law </H5>
  Only when we have resolved the problem of the occupied 
territories, and when the war in Bosnia ends will we be able to 
start resolving the problems of consistent and absolute 
observance of the regularities and democracy, with all our 
forces and all our energy. 
  The courts made decisions on releasing Arkan and Hadzic, and 
I did not know about it, so those who now provoked the crisis 
must have known about it. On 17 August 1990, when I was 
returning from the track-and-field championship in Split, I 
heard that Martic [president of the republic of Serb Krajina] 
was there, so I ordered that a commando unit be sent to Knin to 
break up the meeting, and if they had done that, things would 
have been different -- I am not saying that they would be much 
different, but there would have been some difference. Those who 
wanted to provoke a crisis now are the ones who did that. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, managing the Croatian state in these 
circumstances is a very demanding job. However, I am not at all 
pesimistic. 
  [Branko Tudjen] Perhaps something else about the stability 
of the government: Will there be any changes? 
  [Tudjman] These are only petty political insinuations, 
they are an attempt to provoke, just like what the papers were 
saying at the time -- that Domljan, Greguric, and Valentic would 
join Manolic.... As you can see, the government is stable, 
prime minister Valentic is completely following my state 
politics, and there is no instability. There are no problems 
about whether there will be any changes, individual ones, 
because of some needs.... 
  [Nenad Miculinic] President Tudjman, since the issue of the 
Day of Statehood has been raised, and since the opening of the 
monument to Croatian freedom has been planned at Medvedgrad, I 
would like to ask you for a comment on the announcement of the 
church authorities, which says that the representatives of the 
church will not participate, and that no church ceremony has 
been planned for the occasion of opening the facility you have 
called "the altar of the homeland." The Catholic Information 
Agency issued the announcement last week. 
  [Tudjman] You do issue various sorts of information in your 
announcements.... To my knowledge, Cardinal Kuharic, as 
president of the Bishops' Conference, will be present on the 
occasion, and these are therefore only speculations about a 
conflict between the church and the state. I think that a 
misunderstanding has occurred, that some of the church people 
perhaps thought that this monument should not be called `the 
altar of the Croatian homeland,' because altars belong in the 
church.... 
  However, that is not true -- we primarily wanted a place at 
which honor would be paid to all those who lived and died for 
Croatia, and this is not an altar in the classical sense. You 
let all sorts of things be published, it is shameful. We have 
not only saved Medvedgrad in the most authentic sense, which is 
already known, but we also assigned a purpose to it, and created 
a place where, on the elements of the Croatian coat of arms 
[reference to the sculpture at Medvedgrad], the Croatian 
homeland would be honored by all the foreign statesmen and 
foreign delegations.... We thought that the most suitable name 
was precisely "the altar of the Croatian homeland." We also 
considered "the altar of Croatian freedom," but we finally 
decided, in a wider circle, during an intellectual, political 
consideration of the issue, that it should be "the altar of the 
Croatian homeland." Some may have thought that it was just an 
altar, but it is not. You have an altar in Rome and somewhere 
else too, I do not know the Italian word for altar, and there 
have been similar terms -- pro patria, for instance. 
<H5>  There Are No Residences </H5>
  We will have a special agreement on whether consecration is 
necessary, but it is not an issue, as the cardinal is going to 
be present. You will see that it will be a unique monument. We 
will revive this Medvedgrad, the appearance of which between the 
13th and 15th century nothing is known about. As far as the 
concrete support that they have been writing about is concerned, 
whenever you restore something, you put the concrete and the 
frame inside that could endure an earthquake, and on the outside 
the facing is done according to the authentic design. This is 
the case everywhere in the world. This will be a monument with 
a nice view of the capital, it will be a successful solution, as 
it will have been put to a purpose with much less money than is 
being talked about, and there are no residences there.... 
  We may differ in everything, but we must realize that we did 
not get a state in an easy way, nor will it be preserved if we 
do not know how to preserve it. States are like homes, 
families: They disintegrate and disappear, and we must realize 
that. From the point of view of our geopolitical position, we 
are where we are. Let me mention one more thing: The recent 
ideas presented by certain political circles -- not only the IDS 
[Istrian Democratic Congress], but also some others, regarding 
regionalism, the federal state of Croatia... for the first time 
in history we have achieved unity, and should we now, with the 
Italian irredentism for Istria, Hungarian for Medjimurje, 
proclaim regions of, say, Dalmatia, Slavonia, and give rise to 
speculation? 
  Somebody told me that we have been reproached for not having 
put Gaj [leader of the Illyrian Movement] or Strossmayer 
[bishop, promoter of Pan-Slavism] on the new notes. So, in 
relation to what has not been overcome, which I discussed 
earlier, now we should continue to spread the Illyrian Movement 
and Yugoslavianism! 
  Therefore, we have not made any strategic mistakes in that 
respect. 
  There have also been statements that the kuna will not be 
accepted. Who will not accept the kuna? Why were the names of 
the mark, lira, franc, and other currencies not changed then -- 
they were also used under occupation. The kuna was the means of 
payment in the Croatian lands from Slavonia to the island of 
Cres. Moreover, we have it [kuna -- marten] on the Croatian coat 
of arms of Slavonia, and Slavonia was at a time the state term 
for the whole of Croatia. 
  And now I am expected to give in on this.... 
  [Branko Tudjen] It is better to have a marten than a 
badger [in Croatian, badger is jazavac; the name of a satirical 
theater in Zagreb]. 
  [Tudjman] Have they changed the name of Jazavac? In Jazavac 
they prepared a blue night: return the holy name of Dinamo 
[reference to a play; Dinamo -- the former name of a soccer club 
at present called Croatia]. This is also part of the action 
aimed at destabilizing Croatia. 
  I told them in 1990 to change the name. My idea was to have 
it done right away. Then last year they said they would change 
it back. I said no. It will not be called Dinamo. In Dinamo 
lies the symbol of what Croatianness has gone through from World 
War II, from Bleiburg, when 100,000 Croat people were forced 
into death marches, to Jugoton, Jugoriba, Jugokeramika, 
Jugoexport, Jugovinil, Jugoplastika, Jugodugme [factories and 
industries]... in Croatia. 
  On the other hand, Dinamo was in all the socialist countries 
and in the West a synonym of the pro-regime, pro-KGB, pro-secret 
service clubs. There is still a Dinamo in Tirana and one in 
Pancevo. And we are supposed to change it back?! Try to 
explain what it means to these young men who do not know 
anything. As long as this Croatia exists, there will be no 
going back to Dinamo. 
  [Hloverka Novak-Srzic] The name was changed two weeks ago. 
  [Tudjman] Was it in Jazavac or in Kerempuh [a theater in 
Zagreb, originally a character of a Croatian poem]? 
  [Unidentified] In Kerempuh. 
  [Tudjman] The first performance of the play in which there 
appears the demand that the name be changed back to Dinamo was 
in Kerempuh. There -- you see, this is the state of affairs 
here. 

