BFN 

  [Text] Brother Lieutenant General 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, 
chairman of the Presidential Council and supreme commander of 
the Armed Forces, today chaired a meeting of the Defense 
Ministry Command and the General Staff Command, in the presence 
of brother Yahya al-Mutawakkil, the minister of interior, and 
Staff Brigadier General 'Abd-Rabbuh Mansur, the minister of 
defense. 
  At the outset, the brother supreme commander of the Armed 
Forces congratulated brother struggler Brig. Gen. 'Abd-Rabbuh 
Mansur on his appointment as defense minister of the Republic of 
Yemen. He stressed his confidence in the competence and 
capability of the brother, struggler, hero defense minister, in 
commanding the Armed Forces of the Republic of Yemen and 
consolidating its heroic role in defending the unity of the 
Yemeni homeland and crushing the remnants of apostasy and 
secession -- those who have sold their conscience, lost the 
honor of belonging to their homeland, and been carried away 
behind their evil whims and ambitions, not caring about the 
consequences of their acts, namely, sabotaging the homeland, 
depleting its forces, and destroying its resources, which were 
built by the sweat of the masses. 
  The brother chairman urged the commanders of military units 
and the personnel of the Defense Ministry Command and the 
General Staff Command to cooperate with the Defense Ministry and 
implement its orders, which aim at enhancing the heroic 
abilities of our Armed Forces -- the forces of unity and 
constitutional legitimacy -- which are continuing to achieve 
successive victories, repulsing heroically and crushingly the 
remnants of apostasy, secession, and rebellion against 
legitimacy. 
  The brother chairman and supreme commander of the Armed 
Forces paid tribute to the efficiency and heroic, splendid 
performance of the noncommissioned officers, officers, and 
troops of our Armed Forces on all axes of fighting and national 
struggle in defense of the unity of the homeland and its pure 
soil. 
  The brother chairman and supreme commander of the Armed 
Forces pointed out the importance of coordinating efforts in an 
integral way with the agencies of the Interior Ministry. This 
is meant to enable these agencies to carry out their effective 
national role in maintaining the security and safety of the 
citizens, safeguarding public funds and property, and 
confronting any phenomena that seek to infringe on the citizen's 
safety and funds and any attempt to create disorder. He also 
urged these agencies to strike with an iron fist at any party 
that tries to tamper with the security of the homeland and to 
maintain the community's safety. 
  The brother struggler, Brig. Gen. 'Abd-Rabbuh Mansur, the 
defense minister, thanked and appreciated the precious 
confidence of brother Lt. Gen. 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, chairman of 
the Presidential Council and supreme commander of the Armed 
Forces, asserting his faith in God and in the ability of the 
heroes of our Armed Forces to achieve the hopes pinned on them 
by their people in defending the unity of the homeland and 
defeating all the attempts of the gang of apostasy and secession 
and its schemes that aim at fragmenting and destroying the 
homeland. He stressed that our valiant Armed Forces will always 
remain the sword in the hand of the people and its 
constitutional institutions in the face of any party that 
tampers with the security and achievements of the homeland, 
primarily, unity and democracy. 

