Language: <F P=105> Slovene </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] We have asked the Slovene Defense Minister [Janez 
Jansa] to give an opinion about the case. From a longer 
interview that we broadcast less than an hour ago, here is an 
excerpt: 
  [Begin Jansa recording] This matter is not as one-sided as 
it appears at first sight. Regarding the opinion of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs, one must wait to hear the other 
side of the story about the work of this ministry. However, 
there are few things that are definitely questionable in this 
process and I could express my regret in advance. 
  Today, yesterday, and indeed ever since the event took 
place, there has been an internal investigation in our ministry; 
that is, a chronological reconstruction of this event. I have 
the initial draft of this reconstruction here and it is 
perfectly clear to me now, minute by minute, how the events 
unfolded. There are some important new facts here. 
  Let me begin with those things that might be questionable. 
The inquiry will definitely have to determine whether the force 
used when the car was broken into and so forth was justified. 
The inquiry will also have to explain about the time that 
elapsed between the arrest of Mr. Smolnikar and when the 
information-communications center of the Ljubljana-City Interior 
Ministry was informed. I must say, however, that the whole 
affair is not as it was presented yesterday: The police were 
informed about the detention of this man, who refused to reveal 
any personal data and, therefore, refused to identify himself, 
having been arrested receiving certain documents from a military 
person, and they were asked to take him to a physician, as he 
had demanded, at 2045. The arrest itself took place at 2020. 
Therefore, only the time when the man was brought to the 
Security Headquarters of the Defense Ministry is controversial 
here. 
  As I have already said, no procedures were initiated against 
this man; that is to say, he was not questioned, as he would not 
even identify himself. He was informed of his rights under 
Article 50-A of the Internal Affairs Law. The man, in 
accordance with these rights, demanded to be examined by a 
physician and requested the presence of a lawyer, which were 
both complied with. During this time, according to the data 
from where this event took place, an approximate identification 
of the man was made; namely, what we knew in advance was 
confirmed, even though he did not reveal any information about 
himself. Immediately afterward we tried to hand him over to the 
civilian police. 
  Although we requested this twice, it did not happen and that 
is the only reason why it was the military police who 
transported him to the physician. [end recording] 
  Minister Jansa in an interview to our reporter Sandi Frelih 
expressed regret over the unfortunate event and gave assurances 
that Mr. Smolnikar was not viciously beaten but merely sustained 
light injuries in the course of resisting arrest. He said that 
the events imply the involvement of other state bodies and have 
a political background. 

