Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 14 Mar (XINHUA) -- Qian Qichen, State 
Council vice premier and foreign minister, held concluding talks 
with U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher for one and a 
half hours at the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse this morning. 
Later, Qian Qichen spoke to foreign and domestic reporters and 
summed up the Sino- American talks and answered reporters' 
questions. 
  Qian Qichen said: China and the United States have held 
talks lasting over 10 hours. The talks were characterized by 
frankness, sincerity, and realistism [kai cheng bu gong tan 
shuai qiu shi 7030 6134 1580 0361 0982 3764 3061 1395]. China 
and the United States unanimously maintained that Sino-American 
relations are not only bilateral relations but should be put in 
the global context, and that the future and the 21st century 
should be kept in mind in handling the relations. The three 
Sino-American joint communiques constitute the foundation stone 
for Sino-American relations. China and the United States are 
two big countries with world influence. They are both permanent 
members of the UN Security Council and share many common 
interests in global affairs and in safeguarding international 
peace and security. In addition, they have much in common in 
their positions on safeguarding regional peace and stability. 
  Qian Qichen stressed: During the talks, China and the United 
States expressed their satisfaction at the speedy progress 
achieved in the economic and trade sphere, and felt that there 
are great potential and bright prospects for economic 
cooperation and trade between the two countries. 
  Qian Qichen pointed out: The issues of human rights and the 
most-favored-nation [MFN] status were the major topics of 
discussion this time. China is opposed to linking the issue of 
human rights to MFN status. The human rights issue involves two 
aspects. On the one hand, China and the United States have 
different concepts on human rights, and this is the reality 
which will exist for a long time to come. On the other hand, 
the two countries adopt different approaches in handling 
differences. We believe that the two sides can conduct dialogue 
on the human rights issue on the basis of equality, mutual 
respect, and noninterference in each other's internal affairs. 
China can only do what the Chinese law permits, and it is 
futile and harmful to apply pressure on China under the pretext 
of human rights. 
  Speaking on the specific outcome of the talks, Qian Qichen 
listed the following five points: 
  1. The two sides have agreed to continue to maintain the 
momentum of high-level exchanges. Chinese State Councillor Song 
Jian and Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade and economic 
cooperation, will go to the United States in April to attend 
meetings of the Joint Commission of Science and Technology and 
the Joint Commission of Commerce and Trade, respectively. 
  2. The U.S. side has reaffirmed its firm support for China's 
resumption of its status as GATT signatory. 
  3. The two sides have agreed to resume and develop exchanges 
between the two militaries, and to set up a joint commission on 
the conversion of defense industries to civilian use. 
  4. Out of friendly sentiments for the American people and 
out of humanitarian considerations, the Chinese side has agreed 
that the United States will soon send a team to China to conduct 
on-the-spot investigations into three cases of missing American 
soldiers during the Vietnam war. 
  5. The Chinese and the U.S. sides have signed a statement on 
cooperation in implementing the memorandum of understanding on 
prison labor products. 
  Qian Qichen said: "Apart from these, the two sides also have 
reached agreements in other areas. We hope the secretary of 
state's current visit will contribute to enhancing mutual 
understanding and to improving and developing relations between 
the two countries." 
  In answering questions on differences between China and the 
United States on the human rights issue, Qian Qichen pointed 
out: "The U.S. secretary of state said that he wanted to 
implement the executive order of the U.S. President and abide by 
U.S. law, thereby linking the human rights issue with the MFN 
status issue. This is understandable. The secretary of state 
is an attorney. I told him that he must know that neither the 
executive order of the U.S. President nor U.S. law can dictate 
[guan bu dao 4619 0008 0451] China. China has no obligation [yi 
wu 5030 0523] to implement them. The differences between China 
and the United States can only be solved through consultations 
and talks on an equal footing." 
  Speaking on the MFN status issue, Qian Qichen said: "The 
opinions within the United States are also divided. The U.S. 
business circles are very supportive of the extension of the MFN 
status to China. There are people with different opinions. It 
is true that China and the United States have many common 
interests as well as differences. China will not become a 
United States. How can China be asked to accept American ways 
of doing things [na yi tao 6719 0001 1152] and change itself to 
resemble the United States for the sake of developing trade? 
What trade is there to speak of in the world? I believe 
Sino-American trade will continue." 
  When a reporter asked a question on the effect of U.S. 
Secretary of State Christopher's current visit on Sino-American 
relations, Qian Qichen said: "The secretary of state's current 
visit is very crucial to Sino-American relations. Judging by 
the trend of the development of Sino-American relations, I feel 
that the two sides still have to implement the memorandum of 
understanding reached between the Chinese and U.S. heads of 
state at the Seattle meeting last November. I believe the 
secretary of state came to China to solve problems. Despite 
difficulties, Sino-American relations will continue to develop." 

