Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jiang Yan (6199 6056): "Taiwan's New Modified </F>
Fighter, the F-5E SX"] 
  [Excerpts] Early in 1993, the Taiwan media reported that 
the military was preparing to modify its antiquated F-5E 
fighters. After modification, 90 of these F-5E SX fighters would 
join the new fighter aircraft line-up made up of F-16s, Mirage 
2000's, and the IDF. Coming as it did in the wake of Taiwan's 
having signed an agreement with the United States and France to 
import fighter aircraft, Taiwan's continued use of these 
fighters, which it had originally planned to replace, cannot 
help but arouse some interest about the newly modified F-5E SXs. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Possible Combat Tactics </H5>
  The F-16s and Mirage 200-5s in Taiwan's new fighter aircraft 
lineup are superior quality aircraft, while the IDF and the F-5E 
SXs are relatively lower quality aircraft. When used to attack 
surface targets (including on water), generally speaking, the 
attacking force capabilities (bomb load and attack accuracy), as 
well as the penetration capabilities of superior quality 
aircraft are somewhat greater than for lower quality aircraft; 
however, if low performance aircraft have accurately guided 
weapons, they also can complete their mission fairly well. When 
they run into the opponent's air defenses, the survivability of 
high-priced, superior quality aircraft is not all that much 
better than for lower quality aircraft. This point was made 
extremely clearl during the Gulf War. However, in aerial 
warfare, the performance of superior quality aircraft is 
markedly higher than that of low performance aircraft. This 
demonstrates that when combat using both superior quality and 
lower quality aircraft is waged, the basic method should be as 
follows: Use of the superior quality aircraft primarily for 
aerial warfare, and the lower performance aircraft mostly for 
ground combat. When needed, the two kinds of aircraft may be 
changed around. This means that as a lower quality aircraft, the 
F-5E SX would be used mostly in attacks on the ground (or 
water), but when a large scale enemy aerial attack is 
encountered, if there are not enough superior quality aircraft 
to put up a fight, the F-5E SX would also join the aerial war. 
  Taiwan is surrounded by the sea. The nearest threat to its 
land area, one might say, comes from the opponent's surface 
vessel units. According to the laws of combat, the objective to 
be attacked first is naturally the one that is nearest and that 
poses the greatest threat. This means that Taiwan will send out 
fighters to assault the opponent's nearest surface vessel 
forces. If the enemy has fighter planes up to protect its vessel 
formations, the two sides will engage in aerial warfare. The 
F-5E SX's could carry out attacks against the opponent's 
vessels, but they could not easily protect themselves. 
  Data show that the F-5E SXs do not carry air-to-ship 
missiles; thus, they do not have a distant warfare capability 
against ships. However, Taiwan does have 60 Mirage 2000-5s that 
carry Exocet air-to-ship missiles. During wartime, the 
air-to-ship missiles could be used first in attacks against the 
opponent's ship formations, followed by the F-5E SXs' dropping 
bombs to exploit the results. In addition, Taiwan has nearly 40 
S-2 anti-submarine patrol aircraft, and it has ordered four E-2 
early warning plans from the United States. When an armed attack 
occurs, it can use the S-2s for continuous patrolling of key 
ocean areas, and during major combat activity, it can use the 
E-2s for command and control, thereby greatly improving combat 
performance. 
  Given the F-5E SXs' performance, the main tactics that might 
be employed in order to evade the opponents' aircraft, missiles, 
and anti-aircraft fire while attacking surface vessels might 
very well be low altitude attacks using small forces in multiple 
sorties from many directions, while frequently changing speed, 
altitude, and direction on the flight path. After coming within 
striking distance of the opponent's ships, the planes could 
deliver a diving attack and then break off rapidly. At night, 
they could switch from a visual attack to a radar-guided attack 
to carry out more horizontal bombing runs. When the aircraft's 
radar is jammed, they could use an "illuminated attack," meaning 
having a single plane fly rapidly over the opponent's vessels 
and drop flares. The other aircraft would then use the light of 
the flares to conduct visually aimed attacks. With the flares at 
an altitude of between 1,000 and 2,000 meters, they could drop 
two to four bombs on each run, and make several runs. 
  Faced with a serious aerial attack threat, when superior 
quality aircraft are insufficient to complete an attack mission, 
the F-5E SXs would be used in aerial combat. Because of the 
fairly small number of them, and their relatively low 
technological level and combat capability, their aerial combat 
role would be to intensify and augment that of the superior 
quality aircraft. In wartime, the F-5E SX's would be under the 
command and control of the E-2 early warning aircraft. They 
would use Sky Sword II air-to-air missiles in combat at long 
range avoiding close-in combat insofar as possible. When 
unavoidable, after firing their Sky Sword II air-to-air 
missiles, they would continue to press the enemy and engage in 
combat at close quarters. To increase their combat 
effectiveness, the F-5E SX's would concentrate their strength to 
attain partial superiority in numbers in the aerial combat zone. 
At the same time, the F-5E SX's could work together with the 
superior quality aircraft in the electronic jamming of the 
opponents aircraft, and send some aircraft in strikes against 
the opponent's important land targets (sea and air bases). 
  One final point worth mentioning is that many countries and 
territories of the world (including many countries of Southeast 
Asia) are still using F-5 fighter planes today, the number of 
planes totaling more than 1,000. If Taiwan is successful in 
modifying the F-5E SX, the countries and regions that have F-5's 
will certainly be very interested. 

