Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Colonel General Georgiy Kondratyev, Russian </F>
deputy defense minister, by Colonel Nikolay Poroskov under the 
"Topical Subject" rubric; date, place not given: "Second Stage 
of Reform: What Lies in Store for the Army. Colonel General 
Georgiy Kondratyev, Russian Deputy Defense Minister, Answers 
KRASNAYA ZVEZDA's Questions"] 
  [Text] The first stage in the reform of the Army and Navy, 
during which the main organizational measures to create the 
Russian Armed Forces proper, ensure the reliable command and 
control of the troops, and shape a normative-legal base for 
their activity were carried out has come to an end. What does 
the future hold for the Armed Forces? Our correspondent's 
conversation with Colonel General Georgiy Kondratyev began with 
this question. 
  [Kondratyev] The second stage (1993-1995) will see the 
continuation of the work to create the main groups of troops 
(forces) and a military infrastructure. This includes provision 
for the creation of mobile forces capable of providing a rapid 
response to threats to Russia's security from wherever they may 
come. This is enshrined in the new military doctrine. The 
provisions of this doctrine will be the basis of the reform 
strategy during the third stage (post-1995), during which the 
Russian Armed Forces will undergo in-depth transformations to 
determine what they will be like in the 21st century. The Armed 
Forces will be a relatively small, but powerful and mobile army, 
materially secure, equipped with the most effective arms and 
military hardware systems, capable of protecting Russia against 
outside encroachments and being a guarantor of peace and 
stability in the country. That is the first point. 
  Second, they will be the army of a democratic state, having 
fundamentally different relations with society and state and 
command respect and prestige among the people. 
  Third, they will be an important tool of national policy, 
preserving all the best traditions of their predecessors, 
everything relating to the performance of exclusively defensive 
tasks. 
  These three positions effectively reflect the main purpose 
of 
the process of reform of the Russian Armed Forces currently 
under way. 
  [Poroskov] As you know, the reforms being implemented are 
checked out during strategic drills and regional command-staff 
exercises of which there were a plethora last year. A series of 
experiments is also being carried out. The trial switch -- 
using the Moscow Military District as a basis -- to the 
territorial principle of rear services support is one of these. 
What is the essence of this experiment? 
  [Kondratyev] We are seeking ways of improving the whole 
system of rear services support, and the effectiveness of the 
work of rear services structures is being practically verified 
amid the transition to market relations. To this end early last 
year rear services support staff centers were set up for the 
troops regardless of the branch of the Armed Forces to which 
they are affiliated. Over the past year they have proved their 
viability and effectiveness. Centers of this kind will probably 
also be set up in the Kaliningrad special area and in the Far 
East Military District. And this year the Moscow Military 
District has decided to fully switch to the territorial system 
of support. 
  [Poroskov] Now a word about another experiment -- the 
Leningrad, North Caucasus, and Transbaykal Military Districts 
are switching to the zonal-territorial principle of organizing 
air defense, assigning responsibility for it to the commanders 
of the military districts' troops. Is that not turning back the 
clock, a return to the so-called "Ogarkov" principle that was 
later rejected? 
  [Kondratyev] Air defense formations were indeed disbanded in 
the period 1977-1980 at the suggestion of N.V. Ogarkov, then 
chief of the General Staff, and their forces and facilities 
transferred to the jurisdiction of military district commanders. 
This organization's main shortcoming was its lack of unified 
responsibility for the air defense of the country and of the 
Armed Forces. Unity both as regards the organization and the 
combat use of air defense forces and facilities was violated. 
And in 1986 we switched to the current system. 
  In the course of military reform it is planned to make air 
defense an integral part of Russia's unified aerospace defense 
system [ADS]. The air defense organization is based on the 
territorial principle -- not cooperation between associations of 
air defense troops and the air defense troops and forces of 
military districts, the Air Force, and Navy as happened before, 
but unified command and control of these forces in air defense 
zones and regions. In accordance with a unified concept and 
plan. The plan is to have a large mobile reserve of air defense 
forces in central regions of the country -- in order to promptly 
step up efforts in crisis situations. Thus, this is not a 
reversion, as you put it, to the "Ogarkov" principle, but the 
creation of an ADS on a new footing. The experiment is being 
conducted to prevent mistakes when this system is set up. 
  [Poroskov] The Russian president's edict on the organization 
of aerospace defense was the basis of the reform and development 
of the Air Defense Forces. What made it necessary to create 
aerospace defense? 
  [Kondratyev] Analysis of the experience of recent wars and 
conflicts, including the Gulf War, shows that wide-ranging 
massive use of offensive aerospace weapons is assigned the main 
role in ensuring the success of a military campaign. Ground 
forces do not embark on active operations unless these weapons 
have engaged the opposing grouping. 
  The emphasis is obviously shifting toward the creation and 
use of unmanned, high-precision, low-signature offensive 
aerospace weapons that can operate from space and the air at the 
same time. The fact that the combat potential of the whole 
arsenal of these weapons is being constantly enhanced is 
convincing evidence that the bulk of the initial phase of an act 
of aggression will be determined by fierce air and space 
warfare. So what is needed is a well-organized unified ADS 
system for the country and the Armed Forces. 
  The General Staff has enlisted the commanders in chief of 
the 
Armed Forces, as well as research organizations under the 
Defense Ministry and other ministries and departments, in 
formulating a concept for the organization of Russia's aerospace 
defense. The latter does not just deter the enemy, which is 
fully in keeping with the essence of our military doctrine. The 
supreme effectiveness of this system provides a material 
foundation for achieving the objectives of strategic troop 
deployment and the Russian Armed Forces' first strategic 
operations. 
  The ADS is in practice based on the existing air defense 
system. That is why the Air Defense Forces are the basis for 
the creation of this system. What is more, the ADS must 
comprise the forces and facilities of other branches of the 
Armed Forces that are capable of combating offensive aerospace 
weapons present and future and be based on the comprehensive use 
of aerospace reconnaissance, missile space and air defense of 
branches of the Armed Forces, and these forces' combat command 
and control systems. 
  [Poroskov] Will questions of a unified information system be 
examined when the ADS is set up regardless of departmental 
jurisdiction? 
  [Kondratyev] The plan is to create an aerospace 
reconnaissance system based on the reconnaissance information 
assets of all branches of the Armed Forces and other Russian 
ministries (in particular the federal reconnaissance and 
aerospace surveillance system) capable of detecting offensive 
aerospace weapons and at the same time forming an integral part 
of the overall early-warning system. Thus, all forces within 
the ADS will receive unified information, and on a real time 
basis, moreover. 
  We are also planning to pursue a unified technical policy 
and unify the arsenal based on one customer for aerospace 
defense arms and hardware and one designer for the command and 
control system. 
  [Poroskov] You have extensive plans and the military are to 
implement them. But, Georgiy Grigoryevich, we know that there 
is a degree of strain in the mental condition of the personnel 
and in their morale: The military legislation package is not 
fully operational, payment of wages is held up, and the housing 
question is an acute one.... The state owes the Moscow Air 
Defense District for instance over 15 billion rubles. What is 
being done to solve these problems? 
  [Kondratyev] The Defense Ministry is working with the 
government to resolve the Army's and Navy's urgent problems. 
The government recently examined the main problems of social 
policy in the sphere of defense organizational development for 
1994. I think that the aim of this policy is to formulate a 
reliable mechanism for the implementation of the decisions that 
have already been adopted. Today we do not lack programs and 
plans for the social protection of servicemen and members of 
their family. But we must carry out our previous plans. And 
for that we need the appropriate structures at federal and 
regional levels as well as financial and material resources. 
  [Poroskov] There are signs of a positive trend in the 
Defense Ministry's actions -- "moving" garrisons from 
"godforsaken holes" closer to cultural centers. "But won't this 
weaken, figuratively speaking, the defense chain on the 
country's borders? 
  [Kondratyev] The minister and the Defense Ministry Collegium 
have decided, where possible and mindful of operational 
assignments, to station units and formations near cities and 
urban-type settlements. This should not be understood literally 
as massing troops in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and other oblast 
centers or Russian republic capitals. The defense minister has 
set the task of creating normal living conditions for 
servicemen's families, ensuring that children can go to school 
and kindergarten and do not have to travel 15-30 km as often 
happens. Servicemen will be able to go to cultural centers and 
the stores, live in apartments with all modern conveniences, 
etc. After all, officers, warrant officers, and contract 
personnel are the same as our citizens and should be provided 
with everything they need for a normal life. Naturally, then 
they will give back more during their service. 
  I have already pointed out that formations and units will be 
sited with consideration for their operational mission because 
defense of the borders will not be weakened. What is more, we 
have set about creating mobile forces which are capable of 
massing rapidly in areas where a threat to Russia's security 
arises. 
  Things are tricker with the Air Defense Forces: They are on 
constant readiness, they perform alert duty to guard Russia's 
air borders. That is why we will not be able to redeploy many 
units and subunits -- particularly in the radiotechnical forces 
-- that are stationed on islands in the Arctic Circle, etc. in 
major population centers because that would indeed weaken 
defense. But there is also a solution to this -- camps can be 
set up near population centers and alert duty carried out by the 
so-called "tour of duty method." Duty crews will be taken by 
helicopter or surface transport to their post for 10-15 days and 
their families will live in normal conditions. 
  [Poroskov] Contract personnel could probably particularly 
prove their worth here. But they by no means arrive as 
ready-made specialists. Are there plans to set up training 
subunits for them or will training take different forms? 
  [Kondratyev] Virtually all volunteers undergo special 
training programs lasting 2-5 months at training units, centers, 
schools, and crews, or directly in their subunits. Contract 
servicemen receive a qualification on the job and perfect their 
military proficiency during military training sessions held in 
formations and units and training courses at central and 
district level. 
  In the future given the increase in the number of servicemen 
admitted for contract service and in order to provide training 
in the most complex military specialisms there may be a move to 
create regional training centers that offer up to 10 months' 
training in multiple specialisms. 
  [Poroskov] One last question: Georgiy Grigoryevich, you 
have left your Turkestan District comrades in arms outside 
Russia and you yourself admit that your heart bleeds for them. 
Most officers who have ended up in national armies by the will 
of fate want to return to the Russian Army and spend their leave 
trying to find themselves a job, but they are by no means always 
successful. So how can a Russian officer return to his own army? 
  [Kondratyev] This is a very sensitive problem. Barring 
Ukraine and Belorussia [Belarus], the newly-formed national 
armies in nearby foreign countries have virtually no officers. 
The leadership of these states is trying to keep Russian 
officers, sometimes by not very civilized means. Regrettably, 
even in those states with which Russia has agreements on these 
matters and which have signed the Collective Security Treaty, 
officers feel uncomfortable, to put it mildly. When they leave 
they are prohibited from privatizing and selling their 
apartments, taking their cars and personal possessions with 
them, and they pay heavy duties. You know about the death of 
our officers in Georgia and Ukraine. It is very hard to hear 
and talk about this. Regrettably, our Foreign Ministry is not 
providing any clear-cut detail on this issue. I am not the only 
one whose heart bleeds for them -- there is also the defense 
minister as well as all commanders and commanders in chief. But 
we will try to help them and we are helping them. Those who 
have firmly decided to serve in the Russian Army are gradually 
taking up posts there. But let those who have sworn an oath to 
another state serve the people whose oath they have sworn. We 
have no room for them. 
  In order to return home an officer must put in a formal 
request which will be sent to the Russian Armed Forces Main 
Cadres Directorate. The officer will be sent to his post once 
his assignment has been agreed and decided. 
  We expect the Russian Armed Forces to fully accord with the 
new tasks as laid down by the basic provisions of our military 
doctrine when carrying out our ideas. 

