BFN 

    [Editorial Report] PRC media monitored by Okinawa Bureau 
carried the following reports on PRC Central leadership 
activities from 5 to 19 May 1994. The source is noted in 
parentheses after each report. 
  Jiang Zemin, Chen Yun, Bo Yibo, Wan Li Make Donations to 
Campaign -- A campaign launched to show care for people in old 
revolutionary bases has received an enthusiastic response from 
leaders at all levels of organs under the party Central 
Committee and vast numbers of cadres, workers, and staff 
members. "Leading comrades Jiang Z emin, Qiao Shi, Li 
Ruihuan, Hu Jintao, Ding Guangen, Wei Jianxing, Wen Jiabao, Chen 
Muhua, and Wang Zhaoguo; senior comrades Chen Yun, Wan Li, Bo 
Yibo, and Peng Chong; and many other responsible comrades of 
central departments, commissions, and committees donated cash 
and books to support the campaign." (Beijing XINHUA Domestic 
Service in Chinese 0930 GMT 5 May 94) 
  Jiang Zemin, Li Peng, Qiao Shi, Li Ruihuan, Qian Qichen 
Write 
Inscriptions for Friendship Association -- Jiang Zemin, Li Peng, 
Qiao Shi, Li Ruihuan, and Qian Qichen wrote inscriptions for the 
Chinese People's Association for Friendship With Foreign 
Countries on the latter's 40th founding anniversary. Their 
inscriptions read, in order: "Make as many friends as possible, 
enhance understanding, and increase cooperation"; "Expand 
friendship between people in various countries and promote world 
peace and prosperity"; "The golden bridge of friendship leads to 
the four corners of the earth and the ideal of peace shines 
through the ages"; "Expand people-to-people exchanges to serve 
the great cause of the four modernizations"; and "Friendship 
between people bears rich fruit as government officials and 
people jointly write a new chapter of friendship." (Beijing 
XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1306 GMT 5 May 94) 
  Chen Junsheng Addresses Water Conservancy Conference in 
Hubei 
-- A national work conference on water conservancy concluded in 
Danjiangkou City, Hubei Province on 12 May. "In his message of 
congratulations, State Councillor Chen Junsheng said: Water 
conservancy is one of the country's basic industries which will 
be strengthened on a priority basis. During the State Council's 
current institutional reform, water conservancy departments will 
be strengthened. With the advent of the flood season, 
governments at all levels should improve leadership over all 
areas of work related to water conservancy, and should support 
water conservancy departments in carrying out structural 
reform." (Beijing Central People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
1030 GMT 14 May 94) 
  Jiang Zemin, Liu Huaqing, Zhang Zhen, Chi Haotian, Zhang 
Wannian Donate Cash for Project Hope -- The General Logistics, 
Political, and Staff Departments under the People's Liberation 
Army (PLA), and the General Office and other organs of the 
Central Military Commission (CMC), on 14 May waged a cash 
donation drive to support Project Hope, which was launched in 
1989 on the initiative of Deng Xiaoping to help school dropouts 
return to school. "Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the CPC 
Central Committee and chairman of the CMC, donated money to 
Project Hope at the CPC Central Committee's Work Committee for 
Party Organs. CMC Vice Chairmen Liu Huaqing and Zhang Zhen, and 
CMC members Chi Haotian, Zhang Wannian, Yu Yongbo, and Fu 
Quanyou, separately donated cash at the CMC General Office and 
at organs under the three PLA General Departments." (Beijing 
XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1228 GMT 14 May 94) 
  Wu Bangguo, Culture Minister At Shanghai Art Festival 
Opening -- The 1994 Shanghai Art Festival opened in Shanghai on 
14 May. Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC Central Committee 
Political Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai Municipal party 
committee; Shanghai Mayor Huang Ju; and Liu Zhongde, deputy 
director of the CPC Central Committee Propaganda Department and 
minister of culture, (Shanghai People's Radio Network in 
Mandarin 2300 GMT 14 May 94) 
  Wu Xueqian Addresses CPPCC Study Class -- The 1994 study 
class on political consultative work opened at the Cadre 
Training Center of the National Committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) on 16 May. 
National CPPCC Vice Chairman Wu Xueqian addressed the opening 
ceremonies. "On how to further improve cadre training within 
the CPPCC establishment, Wu Xueqian expressed a three-point 
opinion: We should give priority to studying Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, carry out CPPCC-related work more 
conscientiously and creatively according to the principle of 
linking theory with practice, and make concerted efforts to 
improve cadre training and earnestly strengthen CPPCC organs." 
(Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0728 GMT 16 May 94) 
  Wu Bangguo Attends Shanghai Neighborhood Service Meeting -- 
The Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee and the Shanghai Municipal 
People's Government on 16 May held the 1994 Shanghai municipal 
meeting on neighborhood service. Wu Bangguo, member of the CPC 
Central Committee Political Bureau and secretary of the Shanghai 
Municipal CPC Committee, and Mayor Huang Ju attended and spoke 
at the meeting. (Shanghai People's Radio Network in Mandarin 
2300 GMT 16 May 94) 
  Li Peng, Liu Huaqing, Xie Fei Greet Painter -- A seminar and 
retrospective on the works of famed contemporary calligrapher 
and painter Lai Shaoqi was held in Guangzhou, Guangdong 
Province, on the 60th anniversary of Lai's art career. "Li 
Peng, premier of the State Council, sent a congratulatory 
message saying: `Art caters to people.'" Liu Huaqing and Xie 
Fei also sent congratulatory messages. (Beijing XINHUA Domestic 
Service in Chinese 0431 GMT 17 May 94) 
  Song Renqiong Writes Inscription for Youth Federation -- A 
youth federation comprising young people from organs directly 
under the CPC Central Committee was founded in Beijing on 17 
May. The purpose of establishing the federation is to encourage 
young people of all nationalities from organs directly under the 
CPC Central Committee to assist in the "great" cause of carrying 
out reform, opening up, and building a socialist market economy 
by rendering "outstanding" services on the job. Comrade Song 
Renqiong wrote an inscription for the occasion. (Beijing XINHUA 
Domestic Service in Chinese 1416 GMT 17 May 94) 
  Wan Li Prefaces Book on Project Hope -- "A Trans-Century 
Monument -- A Factual Account of China's Project Hope," a book 
which chronicles the progression of Project Hope from its 
inception as a program to help school dropouts resume 
schooling," was published by the Anhui Junior Publishing House 
recently. "Comrade Wan Li wrote the book's preface." (Beijing 
XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 0721 GMT 18 May 94) 
  Zou Jiahua Meets Hong Kong Plastics Executives -- Zou 
Jiahua, 
vice premier of the State Council, on 18 May met with a 
42-member delegation from Hong Kong's plastics industry. During 
the meeting at Zhongnanhai, Zou Jiahua briefed the delegation on 
China's reform, opening up, and economic construction, and 
answered "some questions of concern" to the delegation members. 
(Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese 1114 GMT 18 May 94) 
  Song Jian Attends Environmental Protection Meeting -- A 
massive campaign to publicize environmental protection was 
launched at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on 18 May. 
Wang Bingqian, vice chairman of the National People's Congress 
Standing Committee, and State Councilor Song Jian attended and 
spoke at the launch meeting. The campaign, which was a sequel to 
a similar drive in 1993, will feature news coverage of local 
environmental protection issues and cultural activities on 
related themes to "promote coordinated economic, social, and 
environmental development." (Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in 
Chinese 1114 GMT 18 May 94) 
  Song Jian Serves as Environmental Seminar Adviser -- The 
China High- Technology Center and the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences (CAS) jointly held a seminar on "China's Environment 
and Development in the 21st Century" in Beijing on 19 May. The 
seminar, which was initiated by Nobel laureate Lee Tsung-Dao and 
CAS President Zhou Guangzhao, was the first academic seminar of 
its kind in China. State Councilor Song Jian served as adviser 
to the seminar and delivered a speech. Deng Nan (Deng Xiaoping's 
daughter) was among those in attendance. (Beijing XINHUA 
Domestic Service in Chinese 0916 GMT 19 May 94) 

