BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Mas'ud Khales: "An Eye for an Eye"] </F>
  [Text] In the early hours of Saturday a group of special 
commandos of the Zionist regime carried out a terrorist act and 
kidnapped Mustafa al-Dirani, the leader of Lebanon's faithful 
resistance. Supported by two helicopters and with the help of 
local elements, the commando group violated Lebanon's 
sovereignty, raided the home of Mustafa al-Dirani, and, after 
threatening al-Dirani's wife and children, abducted him and took 
him to occupied Palestine. Hours after this operation, the prime 
minister and foreign minister of the Zionist regime admitted the 
"kidnapping" and praised and encouraged the abductors. Lauding 
this attempt, Yitzhaq Rabin said al-Dirani was not abducted for 
the sake of a transaction, but to help find Ron Arad. Ron Arad 
is an Israeli pilot whose plane was hit by anti-air missiles in 
1986 when he was bombing Palestinian camps in Sidon and was 
taken captive by the Muslim forces. 
  This is the second such act by the Zionist regime since the 
release of all the Western hostages in Lebanon. Two years ago 
Zionist regime helicopters fired at a car carrying Hizballah 
leader Sayyid 'Abbas al-Musawi and martyred him, his wife, and 
his children. 
  The recent "kidnapping" is not the first such act by the 
Zionist regime; it will possibly not be the last. In view of 
the time at which this incident took place, there are some 
important points that should be stated and some lessons to be 
learned. 
  1. This act showed that despite the recent commotion and the 
ridiculous show by Cairo, the fulfillment of peace in the Middle 
East is nothing but a mirage. Actually, by kidnapping Mustafa 
al-Dirani at a time when the world community led by America is 
ringing the so-called bells of peace, Israel showed that the 
peace process is like a train full of Arab and Palestinian 
passengers who do not know their final destination. 
  2. The most optimistic assessment of the silence by the West 
and international forums on Israel's "state terrorism" is that 
this silence stems from their confusion over the actions by the 
Zionists ruling occupied Palestine; and if their silence does 
not mean confirmation, they should prove this by their deeds. 
It seems a new opportunity has emerged for all the governments 
that are accused of terrorism to question the U.S. policy of 
double standards on terrorism. Although propounding this topic 
in international organizations will be confronted with America's 
veto as usual, it will be an effort by the accused to put forth 
a new interpretation of terrorism and its limits. 
  3. This act also showed that despite what the world 
community thinks, the hostage file has not yet closed and Israel 
continues to use hostage-taking as a method to forward its 
objectives. In this case, combatant groups--wherever they 
are--should be granted the "right" to use the same method the 
enemy resorts to at the peak of its strength. 
  Unfortunately during the past years the enemy's 
psychological 
war against the combatant Palestinian and Lebanese groups has 
been effective and--at the peak of their oppression--these 
groups have been accused of terrorism and kidnapping, while--at 
the peak of its power and with international support for the 
so-called peace process--the enemy continues to use this method. 
The world community should clarify where the policy of "double 
standards" stands. Naturally the oppressed cannot be expected 
to unilaterally close this file. No sane person would make such 
a recommendation. If Mustafa al-Dirani cannot be safe in his 
home, why should the Zionists be safe in their homes? 
  4. With this act, the Zionist regime showed that it has not 
given up its efforts to advance its aggressive objectives under 
any condition and that world public opinion and reaction is 
worth nothing to it. If this is so, then those whose territory 
is occupied by the enemy will be entitled to reserve the right 
to set limitations aside to defend themselves and to oust the 
enemy and to choose the time and the venue for their 
confrontation with the enemy. According to Hizballah, no part 
of Lebanon is safe for the Muslims. Under such circumstances, 
rendering every area insecure for the Zionists and their mentors 
within the framework of the policy of retaliation is a just act 
that should not be protested. Any protest should be aimed at a 
usurping government that supports terrorism and attaches no 
value to public opinion. 

