Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Claudio Julio Tognolli: "Armored Car Holdups </F>
Reveal Backwoods CV"] 
  [Text] The newest modus operandi adopted by the Rio de 
Janeiro criminal organization known as the Red Command [CV] 
consists of holding up armored cars in Sao Paulo. The attacks 
are carried out in cooperation with Sao Paulo holdup men who 
have formed the so-called Backwoods Command (CC). That new 
command is said to have robbed 38 armored cars in the state and 
gotten away with $13 million. 
  Nilo Batista, Rio de Janeiro's secretary of Civil Police, 
said last week that the CC had been holding up armored cars in 
Rio de Janeiro. According to him, the CV is "exporting" its 
technology to Sao Paulo, while the CC is sending its technology 
to Rio de Janeiro. 
  FOLHA DE SAO PAULO has learned from the Civil and Military 
Police in Sao Paulo that the Backwoods Command's leader is Isael 
Marques da Silva, 38, of Sao Paulo. He escaped from the DEIC 
[Criminal Investigations Department] jail in Carandiru (in the 
northern zone) on 1 August of last year after all the 
closed-circuit television cameras had been intentionally put out 
of focus to enable 45 prisoners to escape. 
  Isael Marques da Silva is now being named as the link 
between 
the Red Command and the Backwoods Command. AR-15 rifles, Uzi 
submachineguns, grenades, and Mossberg shotguns--the Red 
Command's favorite weapons--were used in the 38 armored car 
holdups in Sao Paulo. According to agents of the Military Police 
Intelligence Service, Isael supplies the arms market in Sao 
Paulo through his contacts with Reginaldo Lucas de Souza, one of 
the top men in the CV. Reginaldo was arrested in Sao Paulo on 2 
August 1992 after holding up the L'Hermitage Apartments in 
Jardins (southern zone). On 30 January 1993, he was transferred 
from the North Sao Paulo Detention Center to the Marilia Jail 
(400 km to the north), from where he escaped on 6 February of 
that year. 
  A report by the Sao Paulo PM [Military Police] Intelligence 
Service says that the Red Command began establishing itself in 
Sao Paulo in December 1990, beginning in the Tiradentes housing 
project (in the eastern zone), where four members of the group 
died in a shoot-out with the PM. The report says that the CV "is 
sending in weapons and money and joining with the drug traffic 
and with big names in Sao Paulo's numbers racket." 
  According to the PM in Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro and the 
book Comando Vermelho (Red Command) by Carlos Amorim, 
the Red Command has 6,500 armed men, and 10,000 people involved 
in the drug traffic have ties with the organization. The CV's 
activities result in a turnover of $50,000 a day in Sao Paulo 
and Rio de Janeiro. The CV controls 100 major transit and 
distribution points in the drug traffic. The organization 
carries out an average of one holdup per day in Rio de Janeiro 
and an average of three per month in Sao Paulo. 
<H5>  Sao Paulo Used as `Tax Haven' </H5>
  FOLHA DE SAO PAULO's reporters checked 18 police districts 
and the files of the Sao Paulo Military Police looking for 
evidence of the CV's presence in the city over the past two 
years. 
  The most revealing evidence was found in the 36th Police 
District (Paraiso), and it involved Sergeant Jorge Luis de Souza 
Santos of the Rio de Janeiro PM. He was arrested in Sao Paulo at 
the end of 1992 as he was trying to extort money from an 
executive of the Barun [as published] Bovery firm by accusing 
him of cocaine trafficking so that he could then demand money to 
keep silent. 
  The sergeant is currently in the Bangu I maximum security 
prison in Rio de Janeiro. Before being transferred there, the 
sergeant told Police Chief Aldo Galiano, Jr., how he had been 
operating in Sao Paulo. "The sergeant told me that he was 
working for the CV and that he had lost two kilos of cocaine in 
Rio de Janeiro. The result was that he owed the CV $50,000, and 
he decided to come to Sao Paulo to get money so he would not 
have to pay 50 percent of his robbery proceeds to the leaders in 
Rio," the chief said. "Sao Paulo is undoubtedly a kind of tax 
haven for them." 
  A visit to the Sao Paulo Counter-Kidnapping Headquarters 
(Deas) turned up more evidence of the CV's presence in Sao 
Paulo. One of the CV's top leaders, Eroi de Lara, was arrested 
in Sao Paulo in 1992 on charges of being the leader in 
kidnappings. 
<H5>  Groups Active in Prison </H5>
  The CV and the Backwoods Command have formed the so-called 
Freedom Group, consisting of leaders of the two groups. Darcy da 
Silva, president of the Sao Paulo Union of Penitentiary 
Officers, says that the group exists not only on the street but 
also in the Sao Paulo Detention Center. "It consists of 90 
prisoners from Rio de Janeiro who are distributed between Blocks 
2 and 4 of the Detention Center," Darcy claims. He says the 
group is being formed because "no one looks into the past of Rio 
de Janeiro criminals arrested in Sao Paulo." 
  A survey conducted by FOLHA DE SAO PAULO at four police 
stations in Sao Paulo shows that the criminal records of three 
CV big shots now in prison in Sao Paulo are known. One is Adauto 
Teixeira. He is in the state penitentiary after robbing five 
apartments. He said in court that "the stolen money is used to 
pay lawyers and improve conditions for those who are prisoners." 
Rio de Janeiro kidnapper Eloi de Lara is serving a sentence in 
the state penitentiary. Valteir Polito was sent to the Detention 
Center for robbing an apartment in 1992. Arrested with him was 
Leonardo Martins, who has "FV" (Red Phalange) tattooed on his 
right arm. Leonardo was transferred to the jail in Assis, Sao 
Paulo, from where he escaped at the beginning of 1993, when 
Polito also escaped. Both men are said to be links between the 
commands. 
  Jose de Mello Junqueira, Sao Paulo's secretary of 
penitentiary administration, says he is not aware of the 
establishment of the Freedom Group. 

