Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On an NHK program recorded on 29 December, Yohei 
Kono, president of the Liberal Democratic Party [LDP], discussed 
pump-priming measures to overcome the current recession. He 
said: "I think it is necessary to implement income tax cuts 
worth about 10 trillion yen." He then said he would approve of 
the government issuing deficit-covering bonds to finance the 
cuts. Kono is the first LDP leader to approve the issuing of 
deficit-financing bonds. It is likely that his opinion will 
affect tax reform arguments within the government and the ruling 
coalition. Concerning political reform bills, he stressed that 
they should be enacted during the current Diet session and 
called on the ruling coalition to make concessions in electoral 
reform to agree to the LDP plan that in a single-seat 
constituency system combined with proportional representation, 
proportional representation seats should be decided on a 
prefectural basis. 
  Kono severely criticized the Hosokawa government's economic 
policy, saying: "Politicians should make difficult decisions. 
It is more important than anything else. It is no good that 
they just listen to what financial authorities are saying." He 
indicated a negative view on raising the consumption tax rate, a 
measure considered to fund the income tax cuts. He said: "The 
increase in consumption tax will adversely effect the economy." 
  He said the LDP would watch carefully what kind of economic 
policies and economy-boosting measures the government would 
formulate, and would cooperate with the government if it could 
launch a positive pump-priming package. 
  Kono also said if the government and the ruling coalition 
decide to dissolve the House of Representatives following their 
failure to enact the political reform bills during the current 
Diet session, "we have no choice but to accept the decision." 
In this way, he stressed that the LDP was not afraid of the 
dissolution of the House. 

