Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Andras Agoston, leader of the Democratic </F>
Community of Vojvodina Hungarians, by S.P. Stamatovic; place and 
date not given: "The Plan Involves Tripartite Autonomy"] 
  [Text] "According to our basic concept, we demand 
tripartite autonomy: territorial, personal, and local. 
Territorial autonomy would encompass regions where our 
delegates won a majority in the regional Assemblies in Subotica, 
Kanjiza, Ada, Becej, Backa Topola, and Mali Idjos," Andras 
Agoston, chairman of the Democratic Community of Vojvodina 
Hungarians [DZVM], stated in the interview to BORBA yesterday, 
in response to what the Hungarians demand in Vojvodina. 
According to Agoston, personal autonomy incorporates the 
possibility that ethnic Hungarians alone manage affairs in the 
fields of culture, education, and media ("alone, but in 
compliance with laws and the Constitution"). The planning and 
organization of the cultural, educational, and media activities 
under personal autonomy would be carried out through the 
minority council of personal autonomy. 
  [Stamatovic] What is the principle according to which the 
council would be elected, and who would constitute it? 
  [Agoston] The council of personal autonomy would be elected 
according to the multiparty principle and members of all 
nationalities in Serbia may be elected in it. Those who declare 
themselves Hungarians would be voting, as well as those who do 
not declare themselves Hungarians but are using our 
institutions. Included in the process of forming the council and 
voting on it would be those who do not use our institutions, but 
are giving financial aid to those institutions. 
  [Stomatovic] What does local autonomy mean? 
  [Agoston] Local autonomy would mean that in the 16 townships 
in Vojvodina where ethnic Hungarians are in the majority, they 
themselves vote on their local councils, as is the usual 
practice in classic examples of local self-government the world 
over. 
  [Stomatovic] Rumors indicate that you have already held 
several talks with the president of Serbia on that matter, and 
that certain things have been promised to you. 
  [Agoston] No agreement exists. In terms of a concrete 
agreement we have not yet spoken with the president of Serbia. 
In the discussion with the president I demanded the 
establishment of a publishing house that would collect news on 
the activities of ethnic Hungarians, the establishment of a 
network of ethnic Hungarian elementary and high schools, as well 
as the financing of cultural institutions, to be carried out 
through the association of ethnic Hungarian cultural 
institutions. We also demanded a change of the existing law on 
territorial organization, which would make possible the 
establishment of a county with an ethnic Hungarian majority, 
with an ethnic Hungarian governor. The president said that the 
first three issues might be discussed and an agreement might be 
reached. As for the fourth issue (foundation of a county with 
an ethnic Hungarian majority), the president brought up the 
possibility that the issue might be discussed, but without any 
notion that the proposal might be implemented. We believe it is 
a great step forward, and as far as I know, Vojvodina Hungarians 
have welcomed the results of those talks. We do not expect 
autonomy to be a gift of one party, but rather that the leading 
political forces in the Serbian Assembly understand that it is 
in all our interests, and that the acceptance of that proposal 
will lead us into Europe. 
  [Stamatovic] Many people believe that what you are demanding 
now is a result of your ability to considerably influence the 
voting results by voting for this or that party in the Serbian 
Assembly, which is to say, you can set terms. 
  [Agoston] Now we do not want to implement political force, 
but rather to settle our issues solely through political 
agreements. We do not want any political conditioning, but 
rather a consensus that is in our mutual interests. Our current 
behavior in the Assembly is in the interest of all ethnic 
Hungarians. We do not want to generate conflict with a segment 
of the political forces in Serbia because of our voting. I 
believe it is in the interest of all the citizens of Serbia to 
find a common language, which is to say, that the 
representatives of the great Serbian political parties first 
find it. It should be pointed out that no party has exerted any 
political pressure on us whatsoever. 

