BFN 

  [Text] The 1993 to 1994 sugar harvest is considered "vital" 
to halt the deterioration that has characterized Cuba's economy 
for several years and to begin a modest upward trend, an 
editorial for the weekly TRABAJADORES, mouthpiece of the Cuban 
Workers Federation [CTC], reports today. 
  It recalls that the sugar industry represents the main 
source 
of income for the island and that it is also "the measure of the 
nation's pulse, a crucial parameter on which all eyes are 
directed, with or without reason, to make a diagnosis" of the 
current economic situation. 
  The production goals for this harvest, which does not end 
until June, only exceeds by several hundred thousand tons the 
previous harvest of 4.2 million tons, the second smallest in the 
past 30 years, according to the CTC. 
  It also considers the effect the drop in sugar production in 
1993 may have had, both on the island and abroad. This 
repercussion was even more intense than the fact that in the 
same year importations were reduced by a little more than 70 
percent compared to 1989. 
  The last sugar harvest netted $700 million, $450 million 
less 
than in previous years. 
  "To produce more sugar than last year and not leave a single 
sugarcane unprocessed is a task that demands unlimited heroism 
and stoicism," the weekly states. 
  Among the negative factors it cites during this harvest are 
a 
lack of tires, batteries, and all kinds of spare parts for the 
harvest, transportation, and the selfsame industry [propia 
industria], a lack of electricity, and an irregular rain pattern. 
  The weekly notes industry and harvest workers have not been 
wearing appropriate clothes or shoes, and their food intake has 
been far below that received in other years to carry out their 
work. 
  It also notes that in May and June efforts were concentrated 
not only in cutting and milling but also in the harvest in order 
to increase sugarcane production levels to those of several 
years ago when results exceeded 8 million tons. 

