Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Senate of the German Research Association [DFG] 
has decided to set up 14 new priority programs and to extend 
three others. In the Senate's opinion, 13 other programs out of 
a total of 45 new applications and four for extensions deserved 
funding in full on technical grounds but had to be rejected 
because of the DFG's tight financial situation. The other 
applications were also considered to be interesting and 
attractive by the Senate. There will be three new priority 
programs in the humanities and social sciences, and in the 
biological sciences. Five new programs will be set up in the 
natural sciences and one will be extended. There will be three 
new programs in engineering sciences and two others will be 
extended. 
  Many of the priority programs deal with current problems. In 
the social sciences and humanities, the program entitled "Global 
Environmental Changes: Social and Behavioral Science 
Dimensions" will examine the role of man as the cause and victim 
of these problems. How does the individual cope with global 
environmental changes? How do social groups and nations react? 
This interdisciplinary program intends to develop environmental 
and economic solutions. It will also analyze the endangered 
ecosystem of the third world, with emphasis on population growth 
and migration. The program entitled "Efficient Organization of 
Financial Markets and Institutions" also deals with contemporary 
problems. Germany's financial infrastructure is about to be 
fundamentally reorganized so as to improve international 
competitiveness. It is envisaged that the problems raised by 
the reorganization will be identified and solved by coordinated 
research. The theme of the third new priority program in the 
field of social sciences and humanities is "Information 
Processing in a Social Context." 
  Priority programs in the biological sciences will be set up 
on the following topics: "Molecular Analysis of Regulation 
Networks in Bacteria," "Metabolism and Growth of Plants under 
Increased CO2 Concentrations," and "Genetic Analysis of Social 
Systems." In this last program, groups concerned with 
sociobiology and molecular genetics are working together. They 
are studying adaptation by natural and sexual selection during 
the course of evolution. How do pairing systems and propagation 
strategies develop in the animal kingdom? How can the division 
of labor and altruism be explained? 
  The five newly launched priority programs in the natural 
sciences are: "Ergodic Theory, Analysis and Efficient 
Simulation of Dynamic systems," "Theory of Relativistic Effects 
in the Chemistry and Physics of Heavy Elements," "Structure and 
Function of Polyhedral Structures Composed of Main Group 
Elements," "Change in the Geo-biosphere over the Past 15,000 
Years - Continental Sediments as an Expression of Changing 
Environmental Conditions," and "Refractory Organic Acids in Open 
Waters." The "II-VI Semiconductors" program is being extended. 
  The new programs in the engineering sciences are "Mobile 
Communications," "Efficient Algorithms for Discrete Problems and 
their Application," and "Supercooled Metal Melts-Phase Selection 
and Glass Formation." The programs "Ion and Plasma Surface 
Technology," and "Innovative Quality Assurance in Production" 
are being extended. Basic research and industry will work 
together in the "Mobile Communications" program. Experts from 
microelectronics and high frequency engineering intend to solve 
the problems of transmitting and switching long-distance calls. 
  The funding for the 17 newly launched and extended programs 
amounts to 48.2 million German marks [DM]. In 1994, the DFG 
will support 104 priority programs altogether with subsidies 
totaling DM224.9 million. A typical feature of these funding 
procedures is the supraregional cooperation between the 
participating scientists. Researchers from various institutions 
and disciplines work together for a limited time, mostly six 
years. In addition to special research fields, priority 
programs are the most important method of promoting 
interdisciplinary coordinated research. 

