BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with General Roman Harmoza, head of the Cadres </F>
Department in the Ministry of National Defense, by Tadeusz 
Mitek; place and date not given: "The First Principle Is 
Justice"] 
  [Excerpts] [Mitek] General, during one of your press 
conferences not long ago, you spoke about a new cadre policy for 
the Defense Ministry. This is a very broad and general term. 
Let us, then, explain right at the beginning our cadre policy 
and its inherent novelty. 
  [Harmoza] We should, perhaps, replace the word "policy," 
which, indeed, is very voluminous, with the word "strategy," 
which means preparation for something we may face. It is 
necessary to take a look at the cadre issue from such a long 
perspective because the entire political system of the state and 
of the Armed Forces is being transformed. Therefore, we must 
think about what kind of soldiers we will need, with what 
professions and personalities, so that they will be able to find 
their niches in the European security structures we are 
entering. Thus, one of the goals of our activities is to 
prepare a new model of the professional soldier. We are doing 
this starting with the military education system. 
  [Mitek] More specifically, what concrete cadre activities 
make up this novelty you have mentioned? 
  [Harmoza] We have introduced establishments and rules 
typical of an army in a democratic state, such as the apolitical 
character of the Army, ensuring freedom of religion and 
religious practices, granting the right for a soldier to 
resign--that is, the right of terminating the service 
relationship. We have created the possibility for appealing 
many personnel decisions related to the rights of the soldier, 
including decisions on dismissal from the professional military 
service. We have introduced a system of contract service and 
inactive state. These are all modern solutions that correspond 
to those that exist in the armies of Western countries. 
  [Mitek] However, is what we are discussing now not an 
abstract idea? Activities relating to cadre issues must be 
correlated with the entire structure of the Armed Forces, with 
the concept of restructurization, and with legislature 
concerning the defense system. All this is still in the stage 
of creation. How certain can we be, then, that the solutions 
that have been accepted are correct? Do we know where we are 
heading? 
  [Harmoza] You need not worry about that. The ministry, the 
General Staff, and the Polish Army know how the final structure 
of the Armed Forces should look. We are now going through the 
stage of discussions concerning how it should be reached. There 
is no use in concealing the fact that money is behind all of the 
problems that are arising. This is a costly operation. Even 
the operation of decreasing the number of professional soldiers 
is expensive because people do not just disappear--they still 
receive money from the state budget as reservists. Even the 
rich country of Germany has recently been experiencing the same 
problems, which only proves the scale of these difficulties. 
There is also the question of how to implement reform, the 
goals of which we know, and keep costs low, and also how to do 
this in such a way as to not be unfair to people. 
  [Mitek] That is correct. This feeling of injustice and 
concern is not uncommon among the cadres. There are also still 
doubts concerning the criteria of cadres activities. They were 
often interpreted as varying with the situation, dependent upon 
the configuration of power, calculated to meet the temporary 
interest of the ministry. Our daily receives many letters that 
suggest that it is still not certain whether the person who 
serves honestly and satisfies all of the criteria required will 
achieve the goals he has placed before himself in the service. 
Another restructurization idea or a new personnel configuration 
in the ministry will not stand in his way. 
  [Harmoza] I agree with you that there are such concerns 
among the cadres; I have recently visited many units, and I can 
confirm this. I want to say that one of our chief goals is to 
calm such moods. No one in the Ministry of National Defense is 
going to change the criteria that were in effect when a given 
professional soldier came into the Army. He concluded an 
agreement with the Army, and it is our duty to stick to it. The 
Army ensures every professional soldier the opportunity of 
working long enough to be entitled to a retirement pension. 
[passage omitted] 
  [Mitek] General, you have announced that you will make the 
Army younger. This statement has raised various fears, among 
others, because some are afraid that pretexts will be sought to 
make the Army younger. I will ask you bluntly: Are we going to 
witness dismissals among the cadre? 
  [Harmoza] I want to stress, as I have already done, that we 
will not seek any pretexts or methods to dismiss someone because 
he is nearing some age limit. However, there must be an 
awareness that rules will be applied rigorously--for example, 
the obligatory age limit for cadre dismissals, which is 
envisioned in the pertinent law. Everyone knows this 
regulation, and no one should be surprised that he ought to go. 
  At the same time, conditions must be created for individuals 
who want to leave earlier to be able to do so, after obtaining 
certain rights, and to arrange their lives anew. 
  I will stress once again that there will be no restrictions 
in the form of earlier dismissals. The rejuvenation of the Army 
will be a complex process, scheduled to take place over at least 
eight to 12 years. [passage omitted] 
  [Mitek] I think, General, that our readers would be 
resentful if I did not ask you whether there are any guarantees 
that there will no longer be the principle of promotion in line 
with the popular rule called PMF--passive, mediocre, but 
faithful. Is it really a thing of the past? 
  [Harmoza] The popularity of what you have just mentioned 
concerns the realm of jokes rather than reality. There was a 
time when such jokes were given publicity--perhaps for some 
deeper purpose... 
  [Mitek] Just as about every sphere of reality--however, 
there is no smoke without fire. What I was referring to were 
guarantees of objectivity in the promotion criteria, optimal 
selection for posts. 
  [Harmoza] As I have said, we have rejected the ideological 
criteria for evaluation. We will take into account universal 
criteria pertaining to professional expertise, to the morale of 
an officer. They are concrete and verifiable, and not much can 
be faked or concealed here. This provides the guarantee, or at 
least a considerable probability, that those who are indeed the 
best in the military will be promoted. 
  [Mitek] The entire Army would also like to have one more 
guarantee--independence of the decisions, trends, or the cadre 
policy in the Defense Ministry of the politics spelled with a 
capital P, of personal configurations in the upper structures of 
authorities, and of the subjectivity of these authorities. 
  [Harmoza] It is obvious that we are exerting efforts to make 
the cadre practice in the ministry apolitical. I believe, 
however, that certain rules of activities and behavior are 
already obvious. They will also be forced by our participation 
in Western military structures, where certain standards have 
been set. This does not mean that we must learn or imitate 
everything in the cadre work. Our Western partners consider many 
of our solutions to be model solutions. [passage omitted] 

