Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Nawwaf Abu-al-Hayja': "The Arab League Between </F>
Blockade of Iraq and Normalization With Zionist Enemy"] 
  [Excerpts] Official reports from the Arab League and 
statements by some Arab officials say that the subject of ending 
Arab boycott of the Zionist enemy will be included in the agenda 
of the next session of the Arab League Council. Officials in 
several Arab states have also been quoted as saying that certain 
governments in the Gulf, the Arabian Peninsula, and elsewhere 
will act independently on this subject regardless of the outcome 
of the Arab League meetings to be held at the level of foreign 
ministers. 
  It is astonishing indeed to watch Arab regimes hurtling 
toward Tel Aviv when their governments refuse to even mention 
the subject of lifting the unfair blockade on Iraq -- an Arab 
country and founding member of the Arab League. Worse, some 
regimes are willing to pay billions of dollars in bribes in 
order to prolong this blockade, which has continued for more 
three and a half years now. For its part, the United States has 
pushed, and is still pushing, matters in the direction desired 
by the Zionists, using both the carrot and the stick. Late in 
January 1994, the U.S. Congress approved a bill calling for a 
U.S. arms embargo on any government refusing to end the Arab 
boycott on the Zionist entity and on the foreign companies 
dealing with that entity. [passage omitted] 
  The logic on which the Arab League was founded says that the 
league should act in accordance with higher Arab interests. Do 
these interests now mean approving agreements of abandonment and 
surrender to the Zionist enemy, blockading Iraq and Libya, 
endorsing the occupation of Somalia, and acquiescing to the 
massacre of the Palestinian Arab people -- the massacre that has 
been continuing for more than six consecutive years? 
  Why are these heroes, who are ready with such great 
enthusiasm and unusual encourage to declare the lifting of the 
Arab boycott on the usurper Zionist entity, not showing similar 
enthusiasm and courage toward the continuous criminal blockade 
on Arab Iraq? 
  Their attitude should be at least similar to, or even 
stronger than, the attitude of certain foreign states and 
parties. It is a shame, especially when they have often talked 
about Arab nationalism, Arab solidarity, justice, Arab order, 
and Arab rights. It is as if they meant Zionist, not Arab and 
Zionism, not Arabism. 
  In view of this, one cannot help but wonder about the 
usefulness of the league, now that it has deviated from, in fact 
abandoned, its own principles, disavowed its aims, and has 
become a burden rather than a coordinator for joint Arab action 
and a catalyst for pan-Arab efforts. 
  Three and a half years have passed while the Iraqi people 
have suffered from the blockade of the brothers before the 
enemies, because Iraqi geography says that any blockade on Iraq 
cannot be effective unless it is supported by the regimes in the 
neighboring Arab countries to the west and to the south, 
regardless of who is to the north (Turkey) and who is to the 
east (Iran). Despite this bitter reality, which contradicts all 
Arab values and morals and the principles of the Arab League 
Charter, the subject of the blockade has not been included on 
the agenda of any Arab League Council session. On what basis is 
the boycott of the Zionist enemy now being included in the 
agenda when the Zionist enemy still occupies Palestine, the 
Golan, southern Lebanon, and remains the historical and crucial 
enemy of the Arab nation? [passage omitted] 

