Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Question of Competitivity"] </F>
  [Text] We are believers in the opportunity market that may 
be created by ISDN and so it appears are the national 
telecommunication companies (TELCOs) which shortly, before the 
end of this year, will begin to celebrate the birth of 
Euro-ISDN, Europe's ISDN showcase. In its most recent meeting, 
the European ISDN User Forum, which now boosts an average 
attendance of some 300 participants -- mainly service providers, 
at its six-monthly rendez-vous, announced TELCOs plans for 
launching the special EURIE '93 week from 12-17 December. 
  The demonstrations, to run concurrently in all main European 
cities, will come to a head on December 14 when, in a live 
broadcast from Brussels, top European Union (former European 
Community) executives and Belgacom chairman, Bessel Kok, will 
discuss ISDN and map out its European future. 
  In another meeting, recently held at one of Europe's 
best-known universities, ERASMUS in The Netherlands, we have 
already tested for ourselves some of the promises of ISDN. 
  Live videoconferences and all forms of multimedia 
transmission (what will come of Electronic Trade Data 
Interchange?) are possible with a modest Apple and a 64 Kbits/s 
channel. Two channels offer much better quality of course. 
Cost? Not more than ECU5,000-6,000 (dollars approx.), computer 
and telecamera included. 
  But this is only part of the Pandora's box that may be 
opened 
up by ISDN. Consider the opportunities for teleshopping, 
telebanking, interactive television and other multimedia 
wonders. British Telecom is likely to be allowed to send movies 
to the homes of all who have a telephone. Analogue may offer 
patchy quality, but ISDN, through the very substantial advances 
made in the past two years in data compression technology, will 
certainly be up to standard. 
  In the meantime, whilst Europe is struggling to find its 
ISDN 
identity, other developed regions are not waiting on the 
sidelines. East Asia, Pacific countries and North America are 
moving swiftly to be ahead of the game. Pacific Bell, one of 
the large United States "Bell" companies, has just announced 
plans, in line with the political motivation of Vice-President 
Gore, for the creation of the "super highways" data 
infrastructure, modernizing its California network with a fibre 
cable investment of some ECU16 billion. Forecasts are for some 
five million homes to be connected by the year 2000. To put 
this in perspective, that is more than all houses in Belgium. 
  Europe is also doing what it can, although, if one takes the 
recent announcement by Mr. Carpentier, Head of the powerful 
Directorate General XIII (Telecommunications, Information Market 
and Exploitations of Research), for a ECU90 million grant to 
help ISDN developments, one begins to wonder what sort of 
minimalistic policies Europe is beginning to implement. Sure, 
this is money that will go towards sharpening interconnectivity 
and convergence, but it is like spraying droplets of water on 
dry soil. Hopefully this will only be an interim measure, until 
the EU's Council of Ministers unblocks funding for some ECU13 
billion for the next quadrennial plan for research and 
development in the European Union. 
  Still, as this money must be shared amongst all sorts of 
R&amp;D, 
very little can be expected to be added to the ISDN pot. 
  It goes without saying that TELCOs prefer to address their 
investments to their own markets and may consider European needs 
as peripheral matters. Why release, for the common good, 
research and development effort that may give other operators a 
leading edge? 
  We must consequently accept with some reservations any claim 
that ISDN is fully available across frontiers. TELCOs' driving 
strategy may differ and so will the facilities that they 
provide. Full integration will be delayed by other important 
factors. Few European TELCOs aim to provide facilities wall to 
wall, something that would make ISDN really take off. France, 
the United Kingdom and a good part of united Germany may move 
perceptibly ahead, but most of the others show more than 
unwillingness to offer customers ISDN home-based facilities. 
  We, for one, resident in the capital of Europe, ten minutes 
by car from the headquarters of the powerful Directorate XIII, 
Telecommunications, will be unlikely to see the light of fibre 
optics in our office this century, if ever. Imagine the destiny 
of some of the more remote regions in this Europe of ours. 
  Then there is the problem of cooperation. We are all agreed 
that telecommunications knows no bounds, yet it looks as if the 
dismantling of those we have today may take sufficient time to 
ensure that we all become economically handicapped in the 
meantime. Size is the game of the next century: to have size, 
one needs alliances. It may be a shame that Europe's three 
giants (British, French and German TELCOs) did not manage to 
decide on a common penetration policy and have now gone their 
separate ways, forming two distinct blocks, one by the British 
Telecom and MCI alliance and the other codenamed Project 
Atlantic (French, German Telecoms and AT&amp;T). 
  It reminds us of efforts, in the late 1970s, to try to bring 
Euro manufacturers, ICL, Siemens, BULL and Olivetti around the 
discussion table to form a Euro-venture. See what has become of 
them now. 
  Of course, there is always the spectre of Directorate 
General 
IV, the Competition Directorate of the European Commission, to 
remind us that such alliances create almost monopolistic 
situations. Let's wait and see. 
  Yes, we are believers of the opportunity market that may be 
created by Euro-ISDN, but we know that this will only be 
possible if it is given size, spread and funding to implement 
killer, multimedia-based applications. In short, a joint 
investment in hard Euro-cash rather than soft Euro-words at 
Euro-ISDN festivities. 



  ISDN Coverage -- subscriptions -- migration to EURO-ISDN (Status on 01 Jan 93) 

               Territorial Coverage        No. of subscriptions   Migration to EURO-ISDN 


               BRA %         PRA %         BRA        PRA        Offering    Offering    Tariffs 
                                                                 existing    EURO ISDN   fixed 
                                                                 ISDN        from 
                                                                 until 

Belgium        15            100           821        9          end 1994    1993        1993 

Denmark (PTT   -             -             -          -          -           -           - 
Telecom) 

Denmark        100           100           1217       62         only        Jan 92      Jan 92 
(Tele                                                            EURO- 
Denmark)                                                         ISDN 

France         -             -             -          -          -           -           - 

Germany        -             -             138831     11304      2000        1993        Apr 93 

Germany (old   70            70            -          -          -           -           - 
Laender) 

Germany (new   ded.cities    ded.cities    -          -          -           -           - 
Laender) 

Greece         -             -             -          -          -           -           - 

Ireland        -             -             -          -          -           -           - 

Italy          37            37            1000       20         Nov 93      Nov 93      Nov 93 

Luxembourg     -             -             -          -          -           -           - 

Netherlands    10            10            400        15         1998        Jun 93      Apr 93 

Portugal       40            40            5000       250        end 1993    latest      latest 
(TLP)                                                                        end 1993    end 1993 


Portugal       -             -             -          -          -           -           - 
(CPRM) 

Portugal       -             -             -          -          -           -           - 
(CTT) 

Spain          10            10            150        -          -           -           - 

UK (BT)        -             -             -          -          -           -           - 

UK (Mercury)   -             -             -          -          -           -           - 


Notes: BRA = Basic Rate Access; PRA = Primary Rate Access. 



