CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nan Fangshuo (0589 2455 2592): "Go West? Go </F>
South? Official Policy Too Tangled To Unravel"] 
  [Text] In the 1990s, the situation of the entire 
Asia-Pacific region has on the whole changed, and the Chinese 
mainland and the six countries of the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations [ASEAN] have seemed determined to become the two 
great axes of the future economic order in Asia. Recently there 
has also been talk of the emergence of a number of secondary 
structures revolving around these two great axes, including 
various economic blocs and cooperative development plans. 
  So it is that at a time when the Asian economic system is 
entering into a period of reorganization, Taiwan, when it comes 
to key questions such as the orientation of its own role, and 
the place it will occupy in the future order, appears more and 
more confused. Therefore, mutual contradictions emerge from 
approaches such as suddenly "going south," suddenly "going 
west," or suddenly wanting to develop Hainan Island, and 
political and economic considerations become too tangled up to 
unravel. 
<H5>  "Going South" Means Losing a Great Deal and Receiving Scant </H5>
Benefits 
  The "southward policy" originated in March of last year, and 
its goal, in view of the fact that the enthusiasm of Taiwan 
businessmen for the mainland is on the ascendant, is to avoid 
vis-a-vis the mainland excessive reliance on political 
bargaining chips which can be lost, and successfully adopt a 
policy of distributed investment in Southeast Asia. In order to 
"go south," Taiwan is anxious to arrange investment guarantees 
with Southeast Asia countries and avoid dual tax agreements, and 
has established two investment groups for Vietnam and Batam 
Island, Indonesia, and converted party-owned and state-owned 
corporations with investment names have gone to South Vietnam, 
Papua New Guinea, and even Subic Bay in the Philippines, 
preparing to invest in developing industrial zones. "Going 
south" has brought about a situation that has surprised people, 
with Taiwan businesses investing more than $2 billion in Vietnam. 
  Nevertheless, this "going south" seems as if it involves 
losing a lot with little to be gained. First, from a long-term 
point of view, "going south" could allow Taiwan to enter a 
future "ASEAN Free Trade Zone," and thereby open up markets. But 
the bloc mentality of the ASEAN countries is strong, and the 
proposed "ASEAN Free Trade Zone" and the "mutual preferential 
tariffs" among member countries would not be extended to 
countries outside the region. For this reason, even if Taiwan 
goes all out, there is still no way for it to become a 
dialoguing partner of ASEAN. Second, the ASEAN countries have 
recently been courting Beijing, and under the circumstances of 
this major trend, Taiwan also will find it difficult to develop 
relations with ASEAN. When it comes to the real working 
administrative levels, the ASEAN countries' level of 
modernization is on the low side, and the political and economic 
aspects of the societies still lack a basic and efficient 
structure, while when it comes to electrical power, they all 
have insufficient quantities, not to mention the issue of the 
kidnapping and blackmailing of Chinese businessmen in the 
Philippines and the exclusion of Chinese in Indonesia and 
Malaysia. It is also precisely because of this that even though 
Taiwan businessmen take the policy lead, and for a time no small 
number of investors have been going to all the countries of 
Southeast Asia, at present this trend has shown a marked decline. 
<H5>  "Vacation Diplomacy" and Changing Policy Directions </H5>
  Hence Taiwan's avid promotion over the past year of a "go 
south policy" in fact can also be seen in the light of the 
discussion over this same period of the movement to "reenter the 
United Nations," and the proposal for a "staged unification of 
the two China's." It also may be said that "going south" seems 
to be a by-product of the staged "two China's" policy, with the 
hope that having penetrated the south it will be possible 
economically to maintain long-term relations with the Chinese 
mainland. 
  Nevertheless, at a time when the reputation of the 
"southward" policy has not yet become tarnished, it is possible 
that because "going south" will not be successful, while on the 
one hand the Chinese mainland has become a focal point for 
investment by countries all over the world, and on the other the 
United Nations General Secretary also clearly does not support 
Taiwan entering the UN, that Taiwan this year may also start to 
change its policy. 
  On 5 January, Executive Yuan head Lien Chan engaged in 
"vacation diplomacy" with Singapore's Prime Minister Goh Chok 
Tong over breakfast, reaching a common understanding to jointly 
form a company, with Taiwan providing money, and Singapore 
providing personnel, to jointly develop Hainan Island. 
  On the same day (5 January), the Council on Economic 
Planning 
and Development (CEPD) drafted a "go west" strategy, which would 
link Taiwan up with the mainland to form an "economic alliance": 
linking western Taiwan with the three areas of Shanghai, Xiamen, 
and Guangzhou to form a fan-shaped industrial complementary 
zone; at the same time, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Shanghai would be 
linked to form an integrated system with division of labor 
involving development, management, and manufacturing. 
  On 6 January, CEPD Deputy Director Chen Chi (7115 3823) 
stated that he would immediately propose that Hong Kong be taken 
off the list, and that the strategy be changed to have Taipei, 
Shanghai, and Singapore enter into financial, technological, 
shipping, and labor exchanges, coming together to form an Asia- 
Pacific region operated "Golden Triangle." Because Singapore 
replaced Hong Kong, Taipei suddenly seemed to be stretched 
across two regions, west and south. 
  This new concept, is not "go south" or "go west," or that 
"going west is contained in going south," rather it is "going 
west" and "going south" at the same time. Therefore, this is 
where the confusion of the people of Taiwan stems from. 
<H5>  Policy Contradictions Puzzle People </H5>
  First, isn't our policy, after all, both to "go south" and 
to 
"go west?" Originally, "going south" was the opposite of "going 
west," and the goal was to reduce economic links with the 
mainland, but "going west" then strengthens this relationship. 
For this reason, "going west" originally could not coexist with 
"going south." 
  Second, as for Taiwan cooperating with Singapore to develop 
Hainan, people say there is no harm in it, but the problem is 
that Taiwan businessmen early on had already been through a 
"Hainan Island craze," but due to the fact that Hainan both 
lacks a market, and does not have a good basic infrastructure, 
up to now the total investment has not exceeded $30 million. 
Businessmen are not going to invest for objective economic 
reasons. And secondly, in Taiwan's cooperation with Singapore, 
Taiwan is putting up the money, and Singapore is putting up the 
people; this type of arrangement is very dubious, because while 
Singapore's forte is management, when it comes to agriculture 
and mining type industries it has very little experience. In the 
final analysis what is so special about the linking up of Taiwan 
and Singapore? 
  Third, any three sided cooperative development requires good 
conformity of funds, technology, people and the market with the 
political and economic atmosphere, and when it comes to this 
aspect, what sort of skill do Taiwan and Singapore bring to the 
problem? How will they be able to reach a common understanding 
with the mainland? As for the "Golden Triangle" to be drawn 
between Shanghai, Singapore, and Taipei, this is even more 
unrealistic. There are no communications, banking, or personnel 
links between Taipei and Shanghai, so how can this triangle be 
formed? 
<H5>  With Such an Outcome, No Going South, No Going West </H5>
  Hence, with this tangle of "going south" and "going west," a 
reasonable conjecture under the current circumstances where 
"going south" will not work and Taiwan does not dare to "go 
west," should be that there is a singular compromise. Currently 
between the two sides of the straights there is no investment 
guarantee agreement, and so Singapore must be temporarily 
borrowed as a shield. Nevertheless, by the time the CPC has 
independent guarantee stipulations for Taiwan, whether or not 
Taiwan businesses will pass through Singapore, and register each 
company, is doubtful. In this manner, with many hidden costs, it 
will also make Taiwan's complete journey west even more 
difficult to develop. Go west? Go south? I am only afraid that 
in this continuing tangle, Taiwan will lose even more bargaining 
chips. 
  As long as Taiwan runs into problems with the mainland, it 
will promptly feel at a loss as to what to do. Over the past ten 
years, Taiwan businesses, under a situation where the government 
was at a lost as to what to do, had no procedures for investing 
in the mainland, and the government only put forward 
"overheating," "cooling," and industrial hollowization 
[kongdonghua] negative type proposals, and did not have a very 
active strategy. This blind "go west" strategy has on the 
contrary provided CPC officials with a "draw in the people, 
depreciate officials" strategic space. In fact, Taiwan 
businesses have not made mistakes, the mistake is that the 
government has been stuck in the quick sand of "unification or 
independence." 
  For this reason, the tangle of "going south" or "going west" 
is murky, and the only explanation is that Taiwan basically has 
no policy. 

