BFN 

  [Excerpts] Thousands of Iranian and foreign pilgrims to the 
blessed shrine of his eminence Imam Khomeyni, may he be admitted 
to God's paradise, this morning met the Vali-e Amr of Muslims, 
his eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i. 
  In this meeting, the eminent leader made a speech and said: 
In the most sonorous way, Imam Khomeyni put forward for the 
people of the world the issue of managing the affairs of life on 
the basis of the sovereignty of Islam and the fusion of religion 
and politics. The rejuvenation of this Islamic concept is the 
greatest lesson of the blessed life of the esteemed Imam. 
[passage omitted] 
  The eminent leader condemned the step by the pseudo-clerics 
of the royal court [darbar] toward reiterating the utterances 
concerning the need to separate religion from politics. He said 
that such moves constitute a slander against the lofty religion 
of Islam. He added: By Imam Khomeyni's efforts, resilience, 
and insight, today Islam has become a political entity in the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. However, the West, and worse still a 
group of the pseudo-clerics and the royal court-affiliated 
clergy in God's holy shrine [Mecca] utter slander and calumny 
against God's religion. They claim that religion and politics 
are two separate entities. We are sorry that a number of 
leaders, kings, and statesmen of the Islamic world have joined 
ranks with the enemies of Islam. 
  His eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i considers Hajj as a stage 
for the presence of world Muslims, and as a forum that is to 
benefit the Islamic ummah. He said: The Almighty has decreed 
that declaration of disavowal of infidels should take place in 
the course of Hajj. This is because Hajj is a forum for the 
declaration of disavowal by Muslims. [sentence as heard]. 
[passage omitted] 
  In conclusion, his eminence Ayatollah Khamene'i stressed 
that 
the various brands of propaganda waged by Western governments 
against the Islamic Republic of Iran are all contrary to 
reality. He said: The antagonism and contempt of the 
colonialist powers against the Islamic Iran is rooted in the 
antagonism of the colonialists against the sovereignty of Islam. 
However, despite all the contempt, the government, officials, 
and the people of Iran are standing firm, with all their might, 
behind the sovereignty of God's religion and the implementation 
of divine strictures. 

