BFN 

  [Text] On 21 April in Sevastopol negotiations began 
between government delegations of Ukraine and Russia, aimed at 
resolving the issue of dividing the Black Sea Fleet. The 
Ukrainian delegation is headed by Defense Minister Vitaliy 
Radetskyy, the Russian delegation -- by Defense Minister Pavel 
Grachev. After a face-to-face talk, the first round of 
negotiations began, in the course of which it became clear that 
Russia and Ukraine have absolutely different ideas regarding the 
number of Black Sea Fleet ships -- the figure cited by Moscow is 
substantially lower. The first attempt to coordinate the issue 
of stationing the Russian portion of ships has also failed. The 
Black Sea Fleet Press Service head pointed out that he has 
information that the Ukrainian side's proposal to deploy the two 
navies in two different Sevastopol harbors has become the 
stumbling block in the negotiations. Russia finds this option 
unacceptable. To remove the misunderstanding, expert groups have 
begun talks. They have to draft a compromising decision by 22 
April and submit it for the defense ministers' discussion. 
Crimean President Yuriy Meshkov did not participate in the 
negotiations; he was present in the square in front of the Black 
Sea Fleet headquarters, addressing the participants of a rally 
through a loudspeaker and arousing their emotions with slogans. 
  [Begin recording] [Reporter] Pavel Grachev has said that 
Russia has enough strength and means to buy the entire Black Sea 
Fleet and that he inclines toward this option. 
  [Radetskyy] Pavel Sergeyevich may say whatever he wants, 
because he is the Russian defense minister, this is his right. 
Let him speak; nobody objects. 
  [Reporter] However he said that he does not anticipate the 
negotiations to yield concrete results. Do you anticipate such 
results? 
  [Radetskyy] I anticipate concrete results. Otherwise, why 
would I fly here? 
  [Reporter] What if the Russian side continues to insist that 
Sevastopol is Russia's naval base, will we surrender it? 
  [Radetskyy] Sevastopol is a Ukrainian city and nobody is 
going to surrender it. Incidentally the Russian president 
voiced his opinion at the 15 April conference in Moscow, saying 
that Sevastopol, the political situation in Sevastopol, is an 
issue of Ukraine's domestic policy. However both Gromov and 
Grachev harmoniously say: We agree to have our base in 
Sevastopol, however Ukrainians should look for another site. 
  [Reporter] What site do they suggest? 
  [Radetskyy] I would decline to comment on this issue, 
because I do not want to create a precedent. [end recording] 

