BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] Raidi, executive deputy secretary of the autonomous 
regional party committee and chairman of the autonomous regional 
people's congress standing committee, recently conducted 
investigations and study in Xigaze Prefecture. After hearing 
briefings by the prefectural party committee and administrative 
office, Comrade Raidi, first of all, fully affirmed the work 
carried out by Xigaze Prefecture in recent years. He said: 
Under the prefectural party committee's unified leadership, and 
thanks to the joint efforts of the party, government, military, 
police, and people, Xigaze showed significant improvements in 
its work over the past few years, scoring tremendous results in 
all fields of work. Specifically, it has done plenty of fruitful 
work in carrying out reform, in opening up to the outside world, 
in developing the economy, in fighting against separatism, in 
keeping the situation stable, and in fortifying border defense, 
and has achieved notable results. The party's basic line of 
"one center and two basic points" has been implemented with 
fairly good results in Xigaze Prefecture. On the whole, the 
prefectural party committee and people's government are 
satisfied with and full of confidence in the work carried out by 
Xigaze Prefecture. 
  Next, Comrade Raidi offered a six-point opinion regarding 
the 
work in Xigaze Prefecture. 1) We should fully understand Xigaze 
Prefecture's important status. Xigaze Prefecture has 
historically been a strategic place which occupied an important 
position. Even now, it still enjoys a decisive position in the 
region. It takes up over one-third of the region's 
approximately 4,000-km border. Nine of the region's 22 border 
counties, or over one-third of the total, are in Xigaze. More 
than one-quarter of the region's 2.3 million-plus population, or 
580,000 people, live in Xigaze. Xigaze occupies more than 1 
million mu of farmland, or one-third of the region's 3.3 
million-plus mu of farmland. Of the region's more than 22 
million head of livestock, Xigaze Prefecture owns more than 5.6 
million head, or over one-quarter of the total. Xigaze 
represented one-sixth of the region's 1993 total annual value of 
goods and services, which amounted to more than 3.6 billion 
yuan. It accounted for approximately half of the region's 1993 
total grain output, which amounted to more than 1.2 billion jin. 
Xigaze Prefecture occupies a very important position in the 
region in many other fields. Besides, the Zhaxi Lhunbo Lamasery 
and other major temples are also located in Xigaze. Xigaze 
enjoys an even more prominent position in the realms of religion 
and traditional culture. For this very reason, the manner in 
which Xigaze carries out work, whether the situation in Xigaze 
is stable, whether the economy can be developed, and whether 
people's lives are improving constantly have a direct bearing on 
the entire prefecture. Those of you who work at the prefectural 
party committee and administrative office should fully 
understand this point. You should truly understand the 
importance of improving Xigaze Prefecture's work from overall 
and strategic perspectives, and clearly recognize the heavy 
responsibility on your shoulders. On the basis of current 
achievements, you should lead people across the region to raise 
Xigaze's work to a new high through the joint efforts of the 
party, government, military, police, and people. 
  2) We should further clarify the guiding ideology for our 
current work. A clear guiding ideology holds the key to 
improving work in a locality or department. This year, the CPC 
Central Committee has laid down a 22-character guideline for 
carrying out the entire party's work: seizing the opportunity, 
deepening reform, opening up wider, promoting development, and 
maintaining stability. This 22-character guideline fits the 
national reality completely, and certainly, it fits Tibet's 
reality completely. It is the basis on which we consider things 
and set our guiding ideology, as well as a general demand which 
we must meet in carrying out various fields of work. In my 
opinion, there are two basic aspects in applying this 
22-character guideline to Tibet's reality. First, we should 
correctly handle the dialectical relationship between stability, 
reform, and development. While representing tasks in three 
areas, these three factors are closely interconnected and 
mutually supplementary. Without political stability, we cannot 
speak of reform, and without reform and opening up, we cannot 
speak of development. Comrade Xiaoping clearly defined the 
relationship between these three factors long ago. The 
relationship between these three factors can be simply described 
as follows: Stability is the premise, reform is the driving 
force, and development is the foundation. So long as we 
properly handle the relationship between these three factors, we 
will identify the major contradictions in setting our guiding 
ideology, and will not deviate significantly from that ideology. 
This is true for the entire region as well as Xigaze Prefecture. 
  Second, we should steadfastly uphold the principle of 
performing two tasks simultaneously. Xigaze Prefecture is at 
the forefront of fighting against separatism, safeguarding the 
motherland's unity, and fortifying border defense. It is of 
great importance to fight against separatism, keep the situation 
stable, and fortify border defense while carrying out reform, 
opening up to the outside world, and developing the economy. 
This not only has a bearing on Xigaze Prefecture's stability 
and development but also on the region's overall situation. 
  3) We should make even greater strides in reform and opening 
up. Along with the ever-deepening drive of reform and opening up 
across the nation, our region has moved into a crucial phase of 
reform and opening up. Last year and this year saw the 
promulgation of one reform measure after another. 
Implementation of these measures is a crucial step to reach a 
new high in our economic development. All prefectures and 
cities face the formidable task of tackling key reform-related 
problems. According to the general guidelines of the guiding 
ideology and basic principles set forth last year by the fifth 
enlarged plenary session of the Fourth Tibet Autonomous Regional 
Party Committee regarding our region's transition to a market 
economy, we must steadfastly build a socialist market economic 
structure which corresponds to the national framework and 
converges with the national structure. We should proceed on all 
fronts while achieving breakthroughs in key areas. Meanwhile, 
we should advance reform prudently and steadily while keeping 
our region's reality in mind, maintaining stability, and giving 
full consideration to our region's realities in various aspects. 
We should also stress efforts to publicize and explain reform 
measures before unveiling them, consider things carefully, carry 
out meticulous ideological work, and implement various measures. 
We should ensure that most people will support the 
implementation of various reform measures, that a new system 
will replace the old one smoothly, and that all reforms will 
proceed successfully. 
  4) We should continue to place great importance on 
agriculture and devote serious efforts to it. Chairman Mao once 
said: We will not panic if we have grain in our hands, and we 
will be happy if we work in a down-to-earth manner. Our country 
is densely populated, and its major concern is to feed its 
people. Accordingly, the party Central Committee and the State 
Council have always set great store by agricultural issues. The 
rural work conference convened by the party Central Committee 
last year renewed the call for the entire party and country to 
take agricultural issues seriously. Judging by our region's 
reality, agriculture and animal husbandry have always occupied a 
very important position in the economy. Agriculture and animal 
husbandry are our region's basic industries, in which some 80 
percent of the region's population work, and whose output value 
accounts for 80 percent of the total industrial and agricultural 
output value. Therefore, we should take agricultural issues 
very seriously. Xigaze Prefecture is a major grain producer in 
our region; its total grain output reached 260,000 tonnes last 
year, or approximately half of the region's output. On the one 
hand, this illustrates Xigaze's success in grain production. We 
should say that Xigaze contributed tremendously to the region. 
On the other hand, it also shows that whether Xigaze Prefecture 
can continue developing its agriculture has a great impact on 
the region as a whole. Therefore, we hope that the prefectural 
party committee and administrative office will work unflaggingly 
and persistently in agriculture and animal husbandry; carefully 
sum up the positive experiences of the past few years in 
agriculture and animal husbandry; actively explore ways to 
further develop agriculture and animal husbandry in the new 
situation of establishing a socialist market economic structure; 
and strive for a new high in agricultural production. 
  5) We should do solid work in keeping the situation stable. 
To keep the situation stable, we should first genuinely solve 
the problem of conception while carrying out some specific tasks 
in a down-to-earth and meticulous manner. I would briefly 
discuss a number of issues which Xigaze should now tackle on a 
priority basis. First, we should tighten border control. With a 
border that extends more than 1,500 km, Xigaze faces very 
formidable tasks in border control. This is especially true 
because most of the region's important border ports are situated 
in Xigaze. How to tighten control represents a very important 
task. Taking one step further toward tightening control and 
plugging as many loopholes as possible are of great importance 
to keeping the situation stable and fortifying border defense. 
Second, we should further strengthen army-civilian and 
police-civilian relations. Chairman Mao once said: If the army 
and the people are united as one, who in the world can match 
them? Xigaze is an important border region where a substantial 
number of troops and armed policemen are stationed. 
Strengthening the relations between the army and police on the 
one hand, and the government and people on the other hand, is of 
great significance. On the local level, we should take the 
initiative to actively and regularly support the army and 
police, give preferential treatment to their dependents, help 
army and police units solve practical problems, and properly 
deal with the phenomenon of lack of coordination between the 
army and people, and between the police and people, while fully 
recognizing the great importance of army-civilian and 
police-civilian relations. 
  We should highly value and carry forward the good 
army-civilian and police-civilian relations which Xigaze 
Prefecture has fostered over the years, and strive to further 
strengthen such relations under the new situation. Third, we 
should properly solve new problems which have cropped up in the 
course of reform. As reform and opening up have deepened, many 
new problems and contradictions have emerged one after another. 
We should fully prepare ourselves mentally for these problems 
and contradictions, and try our best to give priority to our 
work while solving contradictions at the grass-roots level and 
nipping them in the bud. We should also strengthen work in other 
aspects. For example, we should tighten internal control; 
properly carry out ideological education; improve all facets of 
public order; successfully carry out united front, 
nationalities, and religious work; let patriots play their roles 
in keeping the situation stable; strengthen temple management; 
and exercise stronger leadership in keeping the situation stable. 
  6) We should further strengthen the cadre ranks. After we 
have set a clear political line, cadres represent the decisive 
factor. A strong cadre contingent is essential whether in 
reform and opening up or in the fight against separatism. 
Generally speaking, Xigaze has a good cadre contingent; 
however, it must further strengthen its cadres ranks in keeping 
with the new situation and new tasks. This is a long-term, 
strategic task. Currently, we must beef up the cadre ranks in 
accordance with the principle of carrying out two tasks 
simultaneously. On the one hand, we should continue to heighten 
the awareness of cadres, especially those holding leadership 
positions, about the fight against separatism, so that they will 
resolutely resist the infiltration of separatist forces 
operating within and outside the national borders, strengthen 
their basic political stand on safeguarding the motherland's 
unity and strengthening unity among various ethnic groups, and 
clarify some muddled conceptions in both theory and practice. 
We should project an image befitting a Communist or cadre among 
the masses, and ensure that our cadre ranks will be highly 
combat-effective in the fight against separatism. On the other 
hand, we should keep improving the ability of cadres at all 
levels to adjust to the new situation of fostering a socialist 
market economy by seriously studying Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory on building socialism with Chinese characteristics, 
studying the theory on socialist market economics, acquiring 
modern scientific and general knowledge, and improving their own 
quality. Moreover, cadres at all levels should further improve 
their work style, link theory with practice, foster close ties 
with the masses, diligently and honestly perform their official 
duties, and serve as good public servants. 
  In closing, Comrade Raidi said: The party Central Committee, 
the State Council, and the Central Military Commission show deep 
concern for and attach great importance to the work carried out 
by Tibet. Party, government, and military organizations at all 
levels should make concerted efforts to improve various fields 
of work in Tibet, thereby living up to the high expectations of 
the party Central Committee, the State Council, and the Central 
Military Commission. 

