BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by Latvian Prime Minister Valdis Birkavs at the </F>
Latvian University in Riga: "Latvian Security: Aspects of 
Internal and Foreign Policy" -- live] 
  [Text] Hello, esteemed colleagues. I am very happy to be 
here at the university, this time as a guest, but I am convinced 
that the time will come when I will be again among you. 
  So: Aspects of foreign and internal policy of Latvian 
security. I would like to begin this lecture with the idea that 
Latvian security is a regional constituent part of European 
security and stability. The significance of this topic today 
(?stems) not only from increasing international instability and 
countless reasons for possible conflicts, but also (?from) a 
very emotional and politicized discussion in Latvia on the 
signing of a pact between the Russian Federation and Latvia. 
There is no shortage of the most diverse opinions and 
arguments. However, in spite of whatever I may say today, one 
always has to bear in mind that Latvian security can be, and is 
partly already, seen as a constituent part of European security 
and stability. That is the first point which underlies all my 
considerations. The second is Latvia's specific feature that 
our foreign and internal security are unusually and closely 
interrelated. 
  I will pay attention today primarily to the political rather 
than military aspect of security; not to mechanisms, but to 
trying to define the cornerstones of Latvian security and 
reasons for instability. I will also try to determine what the 
response to the development of the international situation 
should be. 
  First, I will talk about the practice in international 
policy 
at the end of the 20th Century; next, about Latvia's place in 
the new world order; and then about the fundamental dimensions 
of Latvian foreign policy and the aspects of internal policy in 
Latvia, and connection (?between them). At the end we will try 
to assess possible responses and actions, and the consequences 
of those actions for Latvia. 
  During the major part of the 20th Century, in spite of the 
talk about the collective security system and also in spite of 
some real efforts to put into practice such a security system, 
priority has always been given to military security doctrines 
and, correspondingly, to use of force. Therefore, the concepts 
of security and national security have been practically 
synonymous with military security in international practice. To 
a certain extent that was understandable, because there was not 
only confrontation between great powers and between groups of 
states, but there was also the active struggle to divide the 
world, to redivide it and widen spheres of influence. Thus, the 
criteria of security of great powers and national security were 
mainly directed not inward but outward, toward spheres of 
influence and hegemonic satisfaction of national interests far 
beyond state borders. The best and the most striking example, 
of course, though I would not like to say the best, is the 
Molotov-Ribbentrop pact of 1939 and the forceful incorporation 
of the Baltic states into the composition of the USSR in 1940. 
  Principles of European security have changed considerably 
and have acquired new dimensions at the end of the 20th Century. 
In order to avoid a crisis and to reduce instability in Europe, 
Europe directs its attention mainly toward the dimension of 
various international institutions. That means that the final 
aim of the international community is to achieve a stable system 
of collective security so that its resolutions can also become 
significant. The concepts of classical security and security 
guarantees have become old-fashioned, and now participation in a 
collective security system comes into place as a guarantee. 
With this I want to stress that participation in the Conference 
on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the North Atlantic 
Cooperation Council, the Partnership for Peace program, and 
other European institutions is already, in its way, the Latvian 
security guarantee, because with this we are a constituent part 
of that process. 
  What is an alternative to this participation? Only isolation 
and the prospect of being left in the dark zone. It was planned 
in Europe some time ago to create a network of interrelated 
institutes, which would provide an opportunity to use various 
methods of handling crises--both political and economic crises; 
but in finding a solution, we must apply in such crises only the 
method of talks--not military methods, even though the time has 
already come for military methods. 
  As the new world order after the Cold War is characterized 
by 
rather great disorder, and there are the most diverse sources of 
conflicts, the concept of security has acquired a new definition 
and we cannot allow ourselves to repeat the failures of the 
international system in the past, especially those that followed 
the end of World War I, when the principles of self-isolation 
and nationalized security were gaining the upper hand. With the 
strictly fixed positions of the Cold War disappearing. as well 
as the time when situations could be easily modelled, the time 
of set concepts has passed too. The situation in the world, in 
Europe, and in and around Latvia is very dynamic. The most 
pragmatic approach at the moment is clearly to formulate the 
fundamental basis of Latvian security policy and foreign 
policy--and only the fundamental basis--so that we can choose 
the most appropriate solutions for Latvia when the situation 
changes. 
  At the moment, the state president and the government of the 
Fifth Saeima of the Republic of Latvia have come to face a 
significant choice which is related to Latvia's international 
and national interests, the choice which will determine whether 
we get involved in the new world order or not. The cornerstone 
of today's dilemma is a draft treaty between Latvia and Russia. 
Succeeding in signing a favorable and necessary treaty for 
Latvia, we can prove that in the international arena we support 
the most significant post-war achievements: international 
cooperation and integration. The significance of this event puts 
forward the requirement to coordinate the adoption of national 
political decisions with the still changeable situation in 
international security. 
  In this context I would like to recall that the working 
principle of a team operates on both national and international 
levels. At the moment we are getting involved in the teams that 
are favorable for us. Such a team has evolved in the framework 
of the Baltic cooperation, and such a team is evolving in the 
whole European process. However, a national consensus, or a 
national unanimity, has not developed in Latvia, and there is 
substantial political fragmentation when it comes to making 
crucial decisions. 
  It would be possible to believe that Latvia is too small to 
influence events that constitute this planet's political life. 
In reality, however, for the first time in our country's 
history the opportunity has arisen for Latvia to contribute to 
European and global security and stability. That is exactly why 
the world pays such serious attention to the treaties and why 
there is such exceptionally serious cooperation among the 
world's great powers. 
  What would this contribution be like? First, if our process 
of reform is successful, it will become significant for European 
security in general, because the economy and security policy 
overlap to a greater and greater extent. In ensuring long-term 
stability, integration of economic nature is dominating, 
undoubtedly dominating, over traditional security structures. 
So, for example, while European countries are still giving 
priority to NATO as a security organization, in the future this 
priority will probably be directed toward the structures of the 
European Union and the Western European Union, in which one can 
see a greater long-term potential. 
  A cooperation agreement which is being drafted between 
Latvia 
and the European Union and the possible status of being an 
associate member in the Western European Union should be 
considered as the expression of Europe's confidence in Latvia, 
which requires adequate steps in response. 
  Our foreign policy should conform to the changeable 
international situation. However, a long-term vision is needed, 
a vision that will give insight into the degree of ability 
needed to respond adequately to the most diverse situations. 
Only our system of values in foreign policy, which is currently 
evolving, will ensure that we will not find ourselves in the 
dark and clouded part of the European security zone. We should 
agree even now on resources that have to be dedicated to support 
such a concept, namely, to ensure the full integration of 
diplomatic, economic, and military ability in the future. 
  Although we can consider our values and the intuitive logic 
of our position self-explanatory, we should not isolate 
ourselves from other views. A draft pact on the army withdrawal 
from Latvia and a compromise on the issue of the Skrunda 
early-warning radar system are evidence of the fact that the 
system of our values is European, because talks always follow 
weapons. If there are no talks, weapons start talking again. 
The signing of a pact on the withdrawal of the Russian Army 
from Latvia is the only real guarantee for the withdrawal of the 
Russian Army from Latvia by 31 August, the only real guarantee 
for ensuring the opportunity for international control over this 
process, the only real guarantee to immediately begin the 
dismantling of the most dangerous part of the facility, i.e. the 
new Skrunda facility which, as long as it exists, if it is not 
dismantled, will always be a temptation. 
  The presence of the Skrunda facility on Latvian territory 
without an agreement determining a fixed deadline means 
uncontrolled functioning of this facility in Latvia 
indefinitely. The control of compliance with the agreement 
(?by) the trilateral commission, which also includes CSCE 
representatives, is an additional guarantee, in the same way 
that our participation in the Partnership for Peace program is 
an additional guarantee. The agreement will promote the 
opportunity for Latvia to cooperate with Western systems of 
collective security, and the president's visit to European 
countries is additional evidence. At the same time, it will 
prove that Latvia is a politically mature country able to carry 
out a policy of compromises in the interests of the 
international community, which in the end, are also Latvia's 
interests. 
  In the agreement, in addition to payment for the presence of 
the Skrunda radar station in Latvia, the Russian side also 
undertakes to compensate for damage done to the environment, if 
such is established. And it should be said again that European 
countries will actively support this compensation. 
  During his recent visit to Western Europe, the Latvian 
president received international support for setting up a 
special fund to eliminate ecological consequences of the Skrunda 
radar station and for dismantling the radar. Moreover, at 1100 
today the government set up a special commission to create a 
special fund for the repatriation of discharged military 
personnel, to which funds from Western countries will be given. 
  The treaty on social protection for Russian military 
pensioners and their families does not provide for the status of 
these people in the Republic of Latvia. It will be set by 
legislation in the Republic of Latvia, and aspirations for 
citizenship are completely ruled out. 
  Of course, the treaties include certain compromises and must 
be regarded together. Nevertheless, causes should not be 
confused with consequences and the main task with a secondary 
task. There is no more important task for Latvia than to set a 
deadline for the withdrawal of the Russian Army, thus achieving 
a real withdrawal. 
  Now, thanks to the initialled treaties, Yeltsin's so-called 
error, and the activity of the people, we are acquiring an 
unexpectedly great opportunity not only to rid ourselves of the 
army, but also to free ourselves from the discharged military 
personnel in a civilized manner. We will never have the 
opportunity to involve Western money so actively in the 
promotion of a real, not imaginary, repatriation process. If we 
miss this historic opportunity, we might also lose our state and 
turn into a provincial decaying country in Russia's shadow. I do 
not wish this for Latvia. 
  If no agreement has been signed after 31 August and the 
Russian Army is still in Latvia, the army personnel will all be 
Grinblat's, Sinka's, Kirstein's, and Straume's [right-wing 
parliament deputies] godchildren or godfathers, because they 
will be left here with their blessing which, I assume, is based 
on patriotism and misjudgment of the situation. 
  It would be very easy for me to joint the critics of the 
treaty, and I would do so if I did not see all of the 
interconnections of the process. I ask you and myself: Why do 
the Latvian and Russian oppositions' opinions on the treaties 
coincide? Why are apparently diametrically opposed forces 
working as a unified front to stop the signing of the treaty? I 
can clearly see the development of the situation both if the 
treaty is signed or if it is not. It is important not to be 
manipulated and not to allow others to be manipulated. It is 
important to assess our historic prospects and to act 
cool-headedly. Through correct action we should also attest 
that the basic idea of the new world order is that this order is 
created through talks, and that large and small countries can 
become equal partners through talks, if they have allies. 
  We have to define the critical and global factors that can 
influence our country in the middle of the 1990's and in the 
21st Century. What is the final aim of our foreign policy, the 
ability to guarantee, our ability to respond to future events 
that might threaten national interests? These threats, whether 
local or international, include demographics, social unrests, a 
conflict over minority rights, peacekeeping operations begun 
with a unilateral decision or for strengthening one's own 
security in other countries, political fragmentation, and 
economic decline. It should be clearly realized that real 
foreign policy cannot be based on several models simultaneously. 
Therefore, security policy, at least at the level of conceptual 
points, has to be above quarrels between political parties. 
However, discussions about foreign policy and security are 
unfortunately used to increase capital for internal policy. 
  What are the dimensions of Latvian foreign policy? We are 
striving for a new regionalism. In a more general sense this 
policy has already been crowned with Baltic cooperation in the 
framework of European integration and has marked a new element 
in the European architecture--five plus three, which is to be 
understood as the beginning of cooperation between the Nordic 
countries and the three Baltic states in the context of the 
enlarged European Union. The second element, the second circle, 
is the Union of the Baltic Sea countries, which as a regional 
organization outlines the Baltic region of northeastern Europe. 
  As for the second dimension, we want to continue placing 
increasing emphasis on the network of interrelated institutes in 
Europe. However, we must think not only about what we hope to 
receive from those institutions, but also about what we give to 
them. Not long ago Latvia's movement toward the European 
Community was a moving away from the former USSR, rather than an 
approaching of Europe. With relations between Latvia and the 
European Union developing, our security policy in the European 
dimension has acquired the greatest significance. The status of 
member state in the European Union, toward which we are going, 
gives us security dividends which could prove to be decisive in 
a critical situation. Each step closer to the European Union in 
the economic sphere increases Latvian security. As early as the 
middle of this year, a free trade agreement with the European 
Union will apparently be concluded at an accelerated pace, which 
will become effective on 1 January 1995. That is not the price 
for the feeling of security: Economically, Latvia has no 
alternative. Of course, Latvia can direct its attention without 
great effort toward the wide Russian market or the markets of 
other CIS states. However, predicting future Latvian 
development, I am convinced that such an orientation will 
maintain the technical backwardness of Latvian industry. 
Moreover, we will needlessly put ourselves at risk because of 
that disordered and unpredictable market. This does not mean 
that we should reject a promising market. However, it is better 
to open it up with the European Union, rather than compete 
against it. 
  The European Union is our way and hope for the future. The 
free- trade regime will not apply to agricultural products. 
However, the transitional period is planned to last four years, 
during which we should agree on the principle of protection for 
the asymmetrical internal market. It is important for our 
farming and agriculture, quickly restructuring themselves, to be 
able not only to survive but to flourish. 
  The European Union plans to strengthen political dialogue 
with the Baltic states; after that, there will be preconditions 
which have to be met to secure the status of associate member. 
The strengthened political dialogue has already begun, and now 
you will see the results of this political dialogue. However, 
if we act incorrectly this political dialogue may die down. By 
granting the Baltic states the status of associate members, the 
European Union will clearly define the boundaries of its 
political interests, and that will definitely allow us to 
neutralize Russia's implementation of its concept of the near 
abroad in Latvia. In essence, defining our policy is defining 
where the West European border will be: in Zilupe [town in 
eastern Latvia on border with Russia] or on this shore of the 
Baltic Sea. This moment is a part of these days and these 
weeks. Each step we take now will either bring us closer to our 
goal or bar us from that goal for a long time, if not forever. 
  We have an opportunity to participate actively in the 
Western 
European Union, which is an organization like the military union 
of the European Union [as heard], which is practically the 
European pillar of NATO. I obtained arguments and evidence 
during my visit to the Western European Union and during the 
talks with the secretary general. But it is clear that it will 
be the Western European Union that will play the decisive role 
in the common defense policy of the European Union. A possibly 
higher level of participation for Latvia will allow us to work 
on the shaping of this policy from its origins. That is also 
the way we can come closer to NATO. 
  Latvian policy in relation to NATO is directed toward the 
status of a full-member state, toward the most serious security 
guarantees that Latvia can possibly get. There is very much to 
be done because we cannot be only security consumers. Changes 
in the international situation have changed the NATO philosophy. 
Therefore, the Partnership for Peace program has evolved, in 
which we can gradually develop, and we have begun to develop, an 
individual dialogue with the NATO alliance, corresponding to the 
possibilities and wishes of our country. 
  Partnership for Peace is one of those threads that has to be 
woven into the fabric of Latvian security. The government's aim 
in this economically difficult time is to find a balanced 
distribution of funds for tackling the many problems of the 
Latvian state. We have to understand, to analyze, and to be 
convinced how much we will pay for our security now and 
tomorrow. But we can talk about this only if this state, our 
state, exists. 
  The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe is 
another element in the architecture of European security, in 
which professionals in diplomacy are actively working and which 
has already been involved in bringing order into Latvian-Russian 
relations. CSCE representatives will take part in the 
supervision of the agreement on the temporary functioning of the 
Skrunda radar station and the implementation of social 
protection for discharged military personnel. To be truthful, a 
whole range of foreign representatives is already here to ensure 
compliance with the treaty if it is signed. 
  The European stability pact, or Balladur plan, opens up new 
opportunities. Weekly and monthly we see it quickly become part 
of the common foreign policy of the European Union. Latvia has 
undertaken to become aware of the most essential problems of 
this pact. In the nearest future a large delegation will be 
here. My visit to France is also scheduled before the 
inauguration ceremony, at which that process will be launched. 
The inaugural conference of the pact is scheduled for the 
second half of May and presents a great opportunity for us in 
the interests of our security. Twelve countries of the European 
Union and nine countries to which this initiative directly 
applies, that is, the three Baltic states and Eastern and 
Central European countries, will take part. 
  In any event, Latvia considers that, apart from the 
consolidation of borders and the tackling of problems concerning 
minorities, round-table talks which are envisaged in the 
framework of the Balladur pact have to be given a wider horizon. 
Economic and social aspects of security and stability are also 
important here. But there is one very significant "if": if 
talks and decisions that will be passed, or are being passed, 
are worked out according to basic UN, CSCE, and European Union 
principles, namely that borders cannot be changed by force and 
that they should be regarded inviolable. These issues should be 
discussed in the same way as other issues, like minorities' 
issues: considering the occupation of the Republic of Latvia, 
and legal and political aspects of the annexion which followed 
it, as a starting point. 
  We are also looking at security cooperation through 
bilateral 
agreements, several of which have recently been concluded. They 
are the threads based on common interests that connect us to 
individual countries. So, first Estonia and Lithuania. The 
road to Europe serves as the catalyst for Baltic cooperation. 
In their movement toward Europe, the Baltic states more and 
more clearly realize and more and more successfully implement 
this cooperation. Criticism that we do not coordinate our 
standpoint with Estonia is completely groundless. Tomorrow 
evening [15 April], I am meeting again with Estonian Premier 
Mart Laar. After each significant international or other 
incident the first talks we hold are between us and also with 
our nearest neighbor Bildt [as heard]. 
  It is extremely necessary to coordinate among ourselves the 
participation of the Baltic states in new worldwide security 
processes, including the Partnership for Peace program and the 
stability pact, defining the status of participation in the 
Western European Union. The world community and international 
organizations have recognized the successful cooperation between 
the Baltic states, as well as the work we are doing to create 
the peacekeeping force battalion that will be preparation for 
participation in UN and other organizations' peacekeeping 
operations. I received more assurances just recently when I 
visited the United Nations. I should tell you, to calm you, 
that this does not mean that our boys will be immediately thrown 
into the hottest spots; this is the responsibility of the state, 
and there should be an agreement about where they are sent. In 
any event, the Nordic countries have begun their training. 
Yesterday I received assurances from and saw concrete steps 
taken by the Swedish commander in chief, who was on a visit to 
Latvia. 
  We are united with Scandinavia in the sphere of regional 
security by common interests, with an understanding of the 
independence of the Baltic states, and their significance in the 
security building of all of Europe. Scandinavian countries are 
actively implementing the so-called program for the support of 
sovereignty, which helps to ensure domestic order and stability 
in the Baltic states. 
  After Polish President Lech Walesa's visit, a new stage 
began 
in Latvia in Latvian-Polish relations. Latvia, Poland, and the 
other so-called Visegrad countries have common aims in coming 
closer to both European structures and NATO. 
  We have very highly commended Germany's and France's 
positive 
role in the development of the European Union. Germany, as a 
neighbor which is one of the great powers of the European Union 
and which is geographically closest to Latvia, has given us 
essential assistance, supporting our accelerated movement toward 
Europe. 
  I do not think a U-turn will appear in our relations if the 
treaty is not signed. The situation can, of course, be assessed 
in different ways, but all indications, direct and indirect, 
which are coming from the most diverse sources of information, 
are evidence that the decisive thing in our future relations not 
only with our neighbors but also with the partners of our 
longer-term orientation in Europe and the world is extremely 
dependent on our action at this time. 
  The first task for us all, when developing foreign and 
security policies of our state, is the following: We as a 
nation should be united on very significant matters. Therefore, 
national accord and political will to preserve a long-term 
adherence to the chosen strategy instead of jumping from one 
extreme to another are significant elements in our development. 
The national accord in the Czech Republic is the basis for its 
being the fastest developing country among all the Eastern 
European countries. 
  Speaking of our strategy, we should clearly define our 
nation's interests: the preservation of the Republic of Latvia 
as a free and independent country, in which democratic values 
are respected, a free market economy is being developed, and the 
protection of human rights is guaranteed; the economic 
development of the Republic of Latvia, which provides for the 
opportunity for individual well-being; and sound and cooperative 
relations with neighboring countries. Regardless of how the 
world order, the building of the world, changes, these interests 
and aims should remain for us unchanged. 
  However, political and ideological threats to national 
security stem not only from our international actions, but also 
from our internal situation. Organizations and groups which are 
against the state, which do not support the independence of our 
country, and whose aims are opposite to those of our country 
continue to be active in Latvia. One does not need to go far to 
find obvious examples. [Word indistinct] they manifested 
themselves in October 1993 during the Moscow putsch. 
  We are all worried about our country's future and our own. 
Our future and the stage of security are always dependent upon 
not only how we understand the situation, but on what we do. 
Individual insecurity of people and the feeling of being 
endangered also influence the country's political stability and 
public safety. I could mention many dangers to the state, and 
the discharged military personnel are considered to be a source 
of danger. At the moment the headquarters of the Northwestern 
Group of Forces pays pensions to 22,000 people. Their family 
members and children also live in Latvia, totaling approximately 
100,000 people, or three percent of the Latvian population. 
Many of them are active in the Association for the Protection 
of Veterans' Rights. 
  I think that if these Russian Army pensioners really want to 
prove that they are loyal to Latvia, they should publicly admit 
the fact that Latvia was occupied. This is absolutely logical. 
It does not matter how long they have lived in this country or 
how long they hope to live. They should be loyal to this 
country and publicly admit unpleasant historical facts--the 
occupation of Latvia. Only then can we talk about other things. 
I think there is a possibility of their being used for various 
kinds of domestic destabilization. However, we should not create 
the image of an enemy. The problem of the military can and 
should be tackled in a civilized manner. 
  I have already said that we have the most favorable 
conditions to tackle this problem and to move forward 
considerably on this issue that is very painful and sensitive, 
not only for Latvia but also for Russia, because these are 
Russia's interests that are being implemented here through the 
military. 
  The aspects of internal policy can be analyzed from other 
angles--from the angle of the crime-related processes, in spite 
of the figures that show that crime is decreasing. However, 
there is a specific explanation for this, if viewed from the 
economic aspects which showed themselves very clearly at the 
time the concluding of agreements between Latvia and Russia 
entered the decisive stage. Indicators in March concerning west 
to east and east to west transit through Latvia increased 
dramatically, though at the moment they have died down 
dramatically. 
  Of course, internal security is also dependent on the level 
of social security and on a range of other factors which would 
have to be analyzed separately. 
  At the end I would like to say that we have to tackle our 
security problems, as I have said on many occasions, weaving 
thread by thread our security fabric, not simply in one move 
acquiring a ready-made bullet-proof vest. On his visit here, 
Swedish Prime Minister Carl Bildt also said that it would be 
ideal if from zero in security we would immediately get 100 
percent, but that is impossible. Cooperation in both foreign 
policy and military spheres with NATO, the European Union, the 
Western European Union, the CSCE, and bilateral cooperation with 
countries that are also interested in tackling issues of vital 
importance for us should be considered as such threads. In 
reality we also have to weave this thread in Latvia, in our 
everyday life -- in economic, social, and all the rest. 
  At the beginning of this discussion I already noted Latvia's 
specific feature, namely the fact that our foreign and domestic 
security are unusually closely related. Speaking of that, I 
thought that our society swayed as if it were on scales of 
balance. The slightest touch, each initiative in foreign 
policy, results in a very perceptible reaction on the inside, 
destroying the state of equilibrium of the balance. Why are we 
so sensitive in Latvia? What are the causes of tension in 
domestic policy? Of course, they are the poor state of 
pensioners, the bill on citizenship, the issue concerning the 
military, and the signing of the Latvian-Russian Treaty. It is 
very well understandable that the Latvian people are very 
worried about treaties. There is then, the historical damage, 
there is then the analogy with 1939, but it is forgotten here 
that the documents signed in 1939 began this process. These 
documents [the present draft treaty] will bring an end to the 
process that began in 1939. 
  Discussing today the signing of the treaty and creating a 
crises, we are unavoidably increasing Russian influence on the 
environment of our domestic security, which is evidence that one 
end of the thread in our security fabric is in Russian hands. 
We are staging rallies in connection with the signing of the 
Russian-Latvian Treaty. However, nobody rallies against 
Russia's pretensions in connection with the recent Yeltsin 
order. Therefore, opinions that direct the development of 
domestic policy from the state of equilibrium are in fact 
threatening the existence of our country. Our public with its 
sensitiveness in its turn, lead to perceptible enough attitude 
of Western countries. However, internally unstable countries 
cannot be and will not become equivalent participants in 
European institutions and processes. Agreements are the basis 
of relations with both East and West. However, they are not a 
guarantee. The guarantee is participation in processes. I 
would like to recall that if we act recklessly we will become a 
dispensable part of these processes. If we want to get involved 
in international relations, then our domestic policy problems 
have to be tackled according to the European system of values. 
  These relations open up the opportunity to tackle any 
conflict or threat on an international level. The 14th Clause 
of the Partnership for Peace program also provides for support 
and consultations in the event of a crises or threat to 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. As a member state of the 
CSCE, we brought the Yeltsin order, known to everybody, to the 
international arena, and made it known to the presiding country 
with a request to include it for discussion on the agenda of the 
Vienna group. 
  Only moving, weaving the fabric, we will be able to use each 
step that is directed against Latvia to strengthen our position 
in Europe and in the world. Our foreign policy initiatives have 
to find international support. Then we will strengthen our 
position in the new world order, then we will preserve our 
national interests in this changeable world, then we will ensure 
Latvia as an independent state in the future. 
  Forty-five minutes. Thank you. 

