BFN 

  [Text] On the afternoon of 4 June, the standing 
committee's study center group of the Tianjin Municipal Party 
Committee, chaired by Gao Dezhan, municipal party committee 
secretary, conscientiously studied and discussed Comrade Jiang 
Zemin's important speech made in the concluding meeting of the 
fourth study and discussion session of principal leading cadres 
at provincial and ministerial levels. Gao Dezhan emphasized: 
We should conscientiously carry out the important spirit of 
Comrade Jiang Zemin's speech, take studying Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as a long-term basic task, make efforts to 
master the scientific system of Comrade Xiaoping's theory, keep 
closely in view the overall work situation of the whole party 
and contemporary China's overall developing situation, pay 
attention to studying and resolving the practical and important 
problems in Tianjin's reform, opening up, and modernization 
drive, and promote the study of the Volume 3 of the 
Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping and Tianjin Municipal 
Party's ideological and theoretical level to a new height. 
  At the study and discussion meeting, focusing on Comrade 
Jiang Zemin's important speech, everybody discussed about their 
study experiences and understanding on how to further deepening 
the study of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. Everybody held that the 
speech by Comrade Jiang Zemin expounded profoundly the boundless 
significance of studying Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory by the 
whole party, especially by the party's leading cadres, under the 
new situation, analyzed the study situation comprehensively by 
seeking truth from facts, and set forth new and higher demands 
on deepening the study of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory. To 
conscientiously study and carry out the speech's spirit is very 
important for us when we further put into effect the strategic 
task of arming the party with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics, conscientiously 
strengthen the building of the party, and ensure the smooth 
operation of reform, opening up, and modernization drive. 
  Everybody held: Since last year, especially after the 
publication of the Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, Tianjin's party committees at all levels, in line 
with the plan of the central authority and municipal party 
committee, have conscientiously organized the broad party cadres 
to study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory and unfolded a study 
upsurge. Tianjin has successively held 12 district, county, and 
bureau leading cadres' theoretical study and discussion sessions 
and training classes, and 598 leading cadres attended. With a 
good start, leading cadres' theoretical study attained the real 
results of arming the mind, unifying thoughts, and carrying 
forward tasks. The current Tianjin broad party cadres' 
theoretical study has shifted from a thorough reading of the 
original work to conducting the study on special topics, and the 
study situation is good. But we should perceive that Tianjin's 
study is still preliminary. The current municipal situation is 
very good; and the task to deepen reform, open up wider, promote 
development, and remain stable is strenuous. Shouldering the 
heavy burden, leading cadres need to further deepen theoretical 
study and make more efforts to guide practice by applying 
theory. We should build a strong atmosphere in the entire party 
of Tianjin for the theoretical study and for resolving practical 
problems by investigation and study and thereby promote to a new 
height both the study of comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory and the 
ideological and theoretical levels of the entire party. 
  At the study and discussion meeting, Gao Dezhan talked about 
his study experiences in attending the fourth theoretical study 
session held by the central authority for provincial- and 
ministerial-level principal leading cadres and expressed his 
significant opinions on how to conscientiously carry forward the 
crucial spirit of Comrade Jiang Zemin's speech and persistently 
deepen Tianjin's theoretical study. 
  Gao Dezhan pointed out: To deepen study, we should resolve 
problems in two aspects. First, we should further upgrade 
understanding and strengthen the awareness in studying Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory. We should fully understand both the 
party's situation in the new period and the party's historical 
task on shoulder and thereby request cadres at all levels, 
especially the leading cadres, to attach more importance to 
theoretical study than ever before and to upgrade theoretical 
accomplishment. Leading cadres' theoretical levels influence 
the awareness of carrying out the party's basic line and also 
influence the level and ability of leadership. Only by being 
clear-headed and firm in theory can we remain clear-headed and 
firm in politics; and only by comprehensively, with awareness in 
mind, carrying forward the party's basic line can we achieve the 
success of socialist modernization. To arm the minds of the 
broad party cadres with comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory is a 
long-term basic task; and leading cadres at all levels should 
keep the overall situation in view and, with a high sense of 
historical responsibility and mission, persistently pay 
attention to and achieve success in the study and conduct it to 
a profound level step by step. Second, we should master the 
scientific system of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory, keep 
closely in view the actual conditions and the general task of 
the whole party, and study and eliminate the important problems 
in reality. Having a rich and profound content, Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics is a scientific theoretical system. When we 
deepen the study of the theory, we should concentrate our 
efforts on mastering the scientific system. We should 
conscientiously and attentively study the original work and 
firmly grasp the theme of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics; focusing on the party's basic line, which is 
the principal line, profoundly understand the quintessence of 
emancipating the mind and seeking truth from fact; and master 
the generality and inner link of the scientific system of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory. To keep reality in view is to 
study theory based on reality; and the purpose of studying 
theory is to resolve practical problems and concentrate our 
efforts on using what we have studied. 
  Using Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory as a guideline, we should conscientiously 
measure our thoughts, sum up tasks, upgrade understanding, 
master the overall situation, persist in the correct, overcome 
the erroneous, and check what is lopsided. We should go deep 
into the realities, investigate and study, and make efforts 
seeking the proper measure to counter the new situation and new 
problems in reform and construction, especially in developing a 
socialist market economic system. At present, we should 
correctly handle the relationship between reform, development, 
and stability by keeping the overall work situation of the whole 
party in mind and taking Comrade Xiaoping's theory as guideline, 
educate and lead cadres and the masses in and outside the party 
to safeguard the general task with more initiative, promote the 
realization of the general task, and maintain and develop the 
good trend of Tianjin's various work. 
  Gao Dezhan also made concrete requirements on ding a good 
job 
in theoretical study. First, we should concentrate efforts on 
understanding and analyzing the theoretical study situation in 
Tianjin, do research on some problems, conscientiously sum up 
the proceeding stage of study experiences, strengthen the 
guidance to Tianjin's theoretical study in a timely manner, and 
deepen the study persistently. Second, leading cadres at the 
municipal level should set good example on deepening study and 
take the lead in learning to master the scientific system of 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory and in analyzing and resolving 
the new things and problems occurred in practice by applying 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theoretical analysis. Third, the study 
of the study center group of the municipal party's standing 
committee should be further improved and upgraded. We should 
closely integrate the practice of Tianjin's reform, opening up, 
and modernization drive; focus on the study on special topics; 
have the practical problems in mind while studying theory; and 
resolve practical problems by the guidance of theory. According 
to their own division of tasks, leaders at the municipal level 
should, in grasping the division of tasks with individual 
responsibility, be aware of taking Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory as guidance, truly integrate the study and the practice, 
and make efforts to upgrade work level. By studying, we should 
not only upgrade the theoretical level but also promote the 
ability to do research and resolve problems. We should 
integrate theoretical study with investigation and study and 
with the effort to resolve practical problems; have practical 
problems in mind while studying theory; and resolve practical 
problems by the guidance of theory. Fourth, By using Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's theory to guide practical tasks, we should give 
prominence to key points. Judging from Tianjin's situation, 
currently we should work hard for new progress and breakthrough 
in the four aspects of paying particular attention to deepening 
reform, opening up wider, invigorating the spiritual 
civilization, and strengthening the party building, with the 
focus on the general task of the entire party. 

