Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ma Lanmei (74356 5695 2734), party secretary in </F>
charge of family planning in Rugao City, Jiangsu Province: 
"Cursory Discussion of Shortcomings in the Performance 
Evaluations of Family Planning and Possible Remedies"] 
  [Excerpt] First, the target figures set in the performance 
evaluations are unrealistic, one and the same target is being 
assigned to lower levels, in a sweeping manner, at one time 
high, at one time low, or without differentiating between good 
and poor foundations at those lower levels. For instance, in the 
last few years, almost all the provinces and cities assigned a 
target of 15 per million as the norm for population birth rates. 
Taking Rugao as example, the city of Nantong assigned to Rugao 
an annual birth norm of 22,000 and a birthrate of 15 per 
million, while that city's actual birthrate for the last few 
years had only been around 10 per million, with around 15,000 
births. On the average, every village and township has a surplus 
of over 130 over the set birth norms, which also means that all 
these villages and townships, including even those that are 
backward in family planning work, can fulfill the norm without 
any effort. This has also the side effect that some regions that 
are backward in family planning work still feel very pleased 
with themselves because they have fulfilled the birthrate norm 
that had been assigned to them by higher authority, little 
caring that this was only possible because the target they were 
given had been set too loose. There are also other cases where 
equal targets were handed down, regardless of how large a 
disparity existed in the foundations of the different regions. 
The tendency will then be that region which have a very good 
working foundation, will need make no further effort, but may 
sit back and quietly await attainment of the target. But in the 
regions which originally had poor working foundations, it will 
then happen that their target is set very high, and since they 
will in that case anyhow not be able to fulfill their targets, 
they will assume a negative attitude, disheartened by the 
difficulties and the idea that all hard work would get them 
nowhere. Both these above-mentioned tendencies are having a 
detrimental effect on the further development of family planning 
work. 
  Second, the performance evaluation targets are too sweeping 
and too intricate; they are not scientific, and lack coherence 
and applicability. Targets are frequently set haphazardly, some 
targets set are later not checked, some items that ought to be 
checked had not been set down as required to be checked. No 
careful consideration is given to whether an item is reasonable, 
necessary, and useful, and as a result there are unpredictable 
changes in policy, there is no coherence between the targets, 
all this adding to the difficulties in the performance 
evaluations. For instance, for the evaluation of village and 
township populations in connection with the responsibility 
system for achieving the objectives of family planning, some 
counties (cities) will set five norms this year and ten norms 
next year, without inner connection between evaluation targets, 
and will thereby create difficulties for the actual operations. 
There are also some targets that are impracticable; for 
instance, the evaluation of the responsibility system for 
persons in the position of assistants in village and township 
family planning work, where norms had required strict abstinence 
from accepting dinner invitations and accepting gifts. There is 
simply no way to check things like that. Here, an evaluation can 
only rely on qualitative analysis or on the general impression. 
  Third, mere formalistic and insignificant performance 
evaluations. The special characteristics of these audits are 
that they don't touch on the realities, they merely pay lip 
service, appear on paper, or are stuck on walls. Sometimes false 
evaluations are prepared to humor higher authorities who want 
them for their investigations and appraisals by comparison. Some 
do not audit at ordinary times but prepare an estimation in 
place of a proper evaluation at the end of the year (or in the 
middle of the year). Others again do audit at ordinary times and 
keep records, then at the end of the year (or in the middle of 
the year) "play out their winning card," while those in higher 
authority will willfully add or reduce to balance things out. 
Others will again prepare performance evaluations in surges, 
sometimes they do and sometimes they do not, sometimes they are 
strict and sometimes they are lax, and sometimes they are 
ineffectual performance evaluations. 
  Four, no prior verification of the data in the statistical 
report forms submitted from towns and townships down to the 
villages in the areas under evaluation, and also no verification 
of the relevant registers of persons. This leaves loopholes, of 
which the units under evaluation may take advantage. Take, for 
instance, the case of a certain county that evaluated the actual 
performance of a town in 1990. The report form of the said 
village showed three persons with extra-plan births and 99 
percent plan-conforming births. On spot-checking two villages, 
there were indeed three persons with extra-plan births. Because 
the evaluating personnel did not first check the reports of 
birth conditions and register of persons submitted from the 
towns down to the villages, it was questionable whether these 
three extra-plan births had indeed originally been reported in 
the original report forms or whether it was fraudulently 
reported that checks had been made? The evaluating personnel had 
no clear idea about it. The unit that had been subjected to 
evaluation plausibly and at length also stated in support: It so 
happened that you precisely selected for investigation two of 
our aberrant villages, and you have indeed found out that in 
1990 there had been three extra-plan births throughout the 
entire town and township area area. Only after a lengthy 
reverification did the evaluating personnel come to know the 
true situation, namely that of the three extra-plan births, only 
one had been mentioned on the original report form, the other 
two were fraudulently reported. Similar cases must have happened 
many times during the performance evaluations. The units under 
evaluation frequently provide only the aggregate figures of the 
entire area, and do not provide the detailed figures and 
relevant registers of persons which villages and townships 
reported to the village organization, which would then allow 
getting hold of oversights and omissions, i.e. loopholes that 
some people will take advantage of. 
  Fifth, ignorance of the various ways in which units that are 
to be evaluated cope with evaluations and suitable 
countermeasures. To weather the critical evaluation process, 
some units that are to be evaluated adopt the strategy of 
"meeting a policy formulated by higher authority with 
countermeasures that will in fact inactivate that policy." Some 
will use every possible means, both hard and soft tactics, and 
will do their best to destroy or close off to access specimen 
points or draw lots to determine the specimen points. Others, 
after getting knowledge of the specimen points, will get busy 
day and night to fabricate false ledgers, false report forms, 
false birth records, false immunization certificates, etc. Some 
will even conspire with non-family planning households and 
people not practicing birth control, teaching them methods to 
cope with the performance evaluation, forming a united front 
against the outside. Others, about whom some shortcomings have 
been discovered would try at all costs to buy over the 
investigators, and with soft and hard tactics ask for data to be 
changed. On the other hand, some of our evaluating personnel, 
faced with these tricks to counter the performance evaluations, 
either are ignorant of the facts, or lack countermeasures, or, 
knowing that it is wrong, participate in these doings. This will 
have the performance evaluation become permeated with falsehoods 
and get it completely out of shape. 
  Sixth, specimen points are either too few or too many, which 
gives rise to two tendencies, one is to generalize basing on one 
partial aspect, and the other is tiring the people and draining 
the treasury. For instance, if a certain provincial party 
organization institutes sample evaluations in 33 counties 
(cities) ranked as key family planning administrations, and then 
uses the evaluation results as data to determine whether to 
abrogate their designation as key county (city) family planning 
administrations. In evaluations of such great import, one county 
(city) should only select three village work teams, i.e. one 
county (city) should select three towns and townships, each of 
these, in turn, to select one village. In a certain city where 
the actual level of family planning work is low, it so happens 
that three well-grounded "cun" villagers' work teams were chosen 
for evaluation. In that case, it will be a smooth process for 
the province to abrogate the designation of "laggard in family 
planning" for that city. If, instead, three poorly qualified 
villagers' work teams would have been selected, the designation 
of "laggard in family planning" would certainly not have been 
abrogated. Then there is the example of a certain province which 
in November of 1992 instituted a 1 percent sample investigation 
of family planning work throughout the province, choosing a very 
large number of specimen points, in general around 100 for each 
county (city). The huge expenditure of manpower, money, and time 
proved simply too much to bear for some of the economically less 
fortunate regions. It stands to reason that with so many 
specimen points, the investigation should have shown outstanding 
success, but not having given sufficient consideration to such 
problems as mentioned under numbers 4, 5, and 7 of the 
above-listed shortcomings, the malaise was not cured. As a 
result, in some few places misrepresentations abounded, and that 
had a serious detrimental effect on the actual outcome of the 
evaluation. 
  Seventh, the personal quality of a few of the evaluating 
personnel is deficient, as is their sense of principle. Some of 
the cadres in the regions under evaluation are not very 
proficient in their routine work, but prove masters in coping 
with performance evaluations. They have high standards in the 
cordial reception and treatment of evaluation personnel. Top 
leaders of party and government will make a personal appearance, 
and in addition to feasting and other excellent treatment, gifts 
will also be presented. Some will even pronounce that regardless 
of costs no shortcomings must be discovered in the evaluation. 
On the other hand, some of our investigators are, ideologically, 
not of high quality. After having accepted favors, they become 
pliable, kindnesses oblige, some violate discipline by 
abolishing or closing off access to specimen points prior to 
evaluation, some falsify investigation results according to the 
wishes of the unit under evaluation, and some close one eye to 
problems. No wonder that some people say, evaluation personnel 
come with one small empty bag, but leave with several bulging 
bags. What practical use are performance evaluations of this 
kind? [passage omitted] 

