Kazakhstan 

<F P=102>   947C0173D Almaty ZDRAVOOKHRANENIYE KAZAKHSTANA in Russian 
No. 6, Jun 93 pp 12-14--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 947C0173D </F>
<F P=104>  Almaty ZDRAVOOKHRANENIYE KAZAKHSTANA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Kh. Kadyrova, Scientific Research Institute </F>
of Hygiene and Occupational Diseases, Kazakh Republic Ministry 
of Health, Almaty; UDC 614.2:577.4] 
  [Text] A conclusion can be reached regarding Kazakhstan's 
industrial potential from the fact that it produces 90 percent 
of the titanium, magnesium, yellow phosphorus and chromium, 70 
percent of the zinc, over 60 percent of the lead and more than 
half of the silver mined in CIS states. Rich deposits of ore 
(Kustanay Oblast), nonferrous metals (East Kazakhstan, 
Zhezkazgan), coal (Karaganda, Pavlodar), phosphorus (South 
Kazakhstan, Dzhambul) and oil (Atyrau, Mangistau) are being 
developed in the republic. 
  Oversaturation of mining and processing industry and 
outdated 
production procedures resulted in dramatic worsening of the 
environment and the people's health, and in a number of cases, 
in global ecological changes and formation of biogeochemical 
provinces. Thus, the East Kazakhstan industrial complex contains 
enterprises of nonferrous metallurgy and mining industry. The 
Ust-Kamenogorsk lead and zinc works are located practically at 
the city center, and large polymetallic works are located in 
Leninogorsk in poor ventilation conditions. Pollution of 
environmental objects by heavy metals in this region has 
attained levels dangerous to the people's health. This is 
chiefly true of lead, zinc and cadmium, which accumulate in the 
human body in higher quantities. 
  A complex situation is also evolving in South Kazakhstan. 
The 
environment of Shimkent is being polluted by releases from lead 
and phosphorus plants, while that of Dzhambul is being polluted 
by releases from phosphorus and superphosphate plants, which 
contain fluorine and phosphorus compounds that settle on the 
soil far away from the pollution sources. It is no accident that 
cases of fluorosis have been noted here among farm animals. 
  In Aktyubinsk, the ferroalloy and chromium compound plants 
and the heat and electric power station release a large quantity 
of chromium and boron impurities, while plants in Alga release 
hydrogen fluoride. Development of the Chilisayskiy phosphorite 
deposit is creating additional ecological difficulties in this 
region. 
  In addition to ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy, mercury 
pollution of the air of Temirtau, the water and bottom deposits 
of the River Nura, and of farming and livestock products in its 
basin is the most urgent problem in Central Kazakhstan. Use of 
metallic mercury in the production process was the cause of this. 
  The public of Kazakhstan continues to be troubled by the 
ecological situation around the Semipalatinsk nuclear test 
range. And although according to official data the radiation 
situation there no longer raises any apprehensions, there are no 
grounds for reassurance. 
  Swift development of coal industry and power engineering in 
the Pavlodar-Ekibastuz fuel and energy complex, which burns 
brown coal with an ash content of up to 45 percent, has 
seriously aggravated the ecological situation there. 
  Oil and gas extraction industry developed intensively in a 
number of regions of the republic in the last 5-7 years, 
worsening the ecological situation there. Thus, the air is being 
polluted by releases of gas, especially during its combustion, 
at concentrations dangerous to human life. The water of 
subterranean and surface sources is highly mineralized, and it 
is being polluted additionally by petroleum products. Elevated 
concentrations of chemicals--vanadium, barium and others--are 
being detected in soil and in farming products. Anthropogenic 
biogeochemical provinces with a radius of up to 20 km have begun 
forming in these places. 
  Many of Kazakhstan's cities have found themselves hostage to 
the deleterious influence of not only large industrial complexes 
but also motor transportation. 
  Besides the substances named above, the air of population 
centers is being polluted by the combustion products of coal, 
fuel oil, and sometimes crude oil. In this case toxic metals 
such as strontium, barium, lead, arsenic, vanadium, cobalt and 
beryllium are released into the environment, while vanadium is 
released by the burning of fuel oil and oil. During combustion 
of fossil fuel, carbon monoxide, nitric oxides and sulfur 
dioxide also enter the air. 
  The complex ecological situation that has established itself 
in the republic is noticeably reflecting upon the health of the 
population, including on demographic processes. Thus, high 
population mortality is observed in the most unfavorable 
regions. These are East Kazakhstan (9.9 cases per 1,000 
population), North Kazakhstan (9.5) and West Kazakhstan (8.6) 
oblasts and Almaty (8.8), as compared to an average republican 
indicator of 8.0. The highest level of infant mortality is in 
Kzyl-Orda (33.8 cases per 1,000 births), Mangistau (33.4), 
Atyrau (33.4), Turgay (33.2) and South Kazakhstan (30.8) 
oblasts, as compared to an average republican indicator of 27.4. 
Thus a low birth rate and a high death rate are the main causes 
of the low natural population increase that has evolved in East 
Kazakhstan (6.1 per 1,000 population), Karaganda (6.9), North 
Kazakhstan (7.8) and Akmola (10.1) oblasts, as compared to the 
republican average (13.0). 
  In addition to this, a high level of population morbidity is 
also typical of the republic's ecologically unfavorable regions. 
Thus in the most highly polluted cities (Shimkent, Dzhambul) it 
is 2-2.5 times higher than in relatively clean ones 
(Tselinograd). Nonetheless, respiratory diseases occupy the 
leading place in the morbidity structure of all cities, diseases 
of digestive organs and the circulatory system dominate in the 
dirtiest ones, while diseases of the nervous system and sensory 
organs, the skeletomuscular system and connective tissue 
dominate in relatively clean ones. 
  As far as concerns information on the ecological situation 
in 
the Aral region, it is simply astounding. People living in 
Kazakhstan, and in all contiguous states as well, are alarmed by 
the state of affairs in the zone of the Aral Sea, where the fate 
of the peoples of Central Asia and of a vast part of Kazakhstan, 
and the fate of civilization in this region of ancient cultures, 
hangs in the balance. In this connection the Kazakh Republic 
Supreme Soviet adopted the law`` On Social Protection of 
Citizens Who Suffered From the Ecological Disaster in the Aral 
Region.'' In compliance with the law, the Cabinet of Ministers 
decree ``On Immediate Measures to Fundamentally Change the 
Living Conditions of the Population of the Aral Region'' 
proclaimed the Kazakh part of this region to be a zone of 
ecological catastrophe. All of the territory of the Aral region 
has been divided into three zones with regard for the gravity of 
the ecological situation and the influence of desertification 
and the environment's pollution upon human health--the zone of 
ecological disaster, the zone of ecological crisis and the zone 
of an ecologically precritical state. 
  The ecological catastrophe occurring in the region is having 
a negative influence upon different sectors of the republic's 
national economy. The situation is aggravated not only by 
dramatic shallowing of this large water basin, but also by 
worsening of the quality of the water--high mineralization and 
pollution by pesticides and agents of intestinal infections. The 
sea level has dropped 14 m, the shoreline in the Kazakh part of 
the sea has receded 60-80 km, and by over 100 km in some places, 
water salinity has climbed to 28-30 gm/liter, and the sea has 
transformed into a lifeless body of saline water. 
  Together with unfavorable socioeconomic factors, degradation 
of the ecosystem in the Aral region significantly worsened the 
human habitat and is negatively influencing the health of the 
population. In almost all zones of the ecological catastrophe 
the birth rate is decreasing and population 
mortality--especially infant mortality--is high, primarily 
because of the weaker condition of women (in connection with 
dramatic worsening of their health in view of the habitat's 
degradation) and bronchopulmonary, infectious and parasitic 
diseases. 
  Mortality of children in their first year of life due to 
congenital developmental abnormalities is growing. The number of 
children with congenital defects in this region is 10 percent 
above the republican average. 
  While in the late 1970s the Aral region was typified by high 
incidence of infectious and parasitic diseases, tuberculosis and 
oncological diseases, in recent years the number of mental 
disorders, suicides and other abnormalities is growing in 
addition. Today the structure of pathology in the population of 
the Aral region is dominated by infectious and parasitic 
diseases, by diseases of digestive organs, blood, hemopoietic 
organs and the circulatory system, and by mental disorders. 
Moreover these groups of diseases are exhibiting a persistent 
rising trend in all zones of ecological catastrophe. Of interest 
is the fact that in the Aral region, where the population is 
ethnically homogeneous (Kazakhs) and has developed a negative 
attitude toward interruption of pregnancy through centuries of 
tradition, the number of abortions has recently increased, over 
half of pregnant women suffer extragenital diseases, and 
maternal mortality is high. 
  The level of sanitation in the region's population centers 
is 
extremely low, the availability of housing per inhabitant is the 
lowest in the republic, and the quality of drinking water is 
poor. Owing to this, the incidence of typhoid fever, 
paratyphoid, salmonellosis and other acute intestinal 
infections, as well as of viral hepatitis, is growing from one 
year to the next, significantly surpassing the average 
indicators for the republic. 
  The highest indicators of primary disability were noted in 
the Aral region's ecological catastrophe zone, with the main 
causes being tuberculosis, malignant tumors and circulatory 
diseases. 
  And finally, all of this lies heavy on the hearts of all who 
have a part in protecting the health of the inhabitants of the 
Aral region. This is why the republic's medical community and 
population have voiced their approval of documents drawn up by 
medical scientists--the ``Interim Statute on Changing the Status 
of Citizens Who Suffered From the Ecological Disaster, and on 
the Procedure for Establishing (Terminating) Compensatory 
Payments and Granting Benefits to the Population for Damage to 
its Health'' and the ``Interim Criteria for Evaluating the 
Health of People Residing in the Aral Region.'' These documents 
have made it possible to somewhat improve social protection to 
citizens who suffered from the ecological catastrophe. 
  In order to improve the ecological situation and the health 
of the population both in the Aral region and in the republic, 
we need to develop short, medium and long term improvement 
measures. There is a lot of hard work ahead, and it should 
produce positive results. 


