Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Baghdad, 5 Feb (INA)--An international symposium 
on war crimes and the blockade's violation of human rights in 
Iraq, organized by human rights organizations in Iraq, opened 
here this morning. 
  Dr. Riyad 'Aziz Hadi, chairman of the Iraqi Human Rights 
Society, delivered an opening speech in which he reviewed the 
negative effects of the blockade, which was imposed on the Iraqi 
people in flagrant violation of human rights. All nations, 
regardless of their different cultures, believe in human rights 
and man's dignity and rights in life. 
  He said that the economic blockade has caused the death of 
thousands of children, women, and elderly because of the lack of 
medicine and food and because of hospitals' serious lack of 
equipment and other requirements and their failure to extend 
services and medical care. [passage omitted] 
  Former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, who chaired the 
first session, delivered a speech in which he recalled the 
reasons for the martyrdom of hundreds of thousands of Iraqis 
during the past four years, and said that these deaths were 
caused by the criminal acts committed by the United States and 
its allies with the Security Council's support. 
  He pointed out that the Security Council has become a tool 
for war and is treating nations in an inhuman way through the 
veto right, which only five states enjoy. 
  He said that in a modern age and in various wars, the 
prevailing principle should be care for society as the source 
for all laws and not to threaten the society with law. He noted 
that experts of human rights and of war and peace are now 
raising their voices to say that sanctions against the Iraqi 
people constitute a crime against the whole of humanity. 
  Ramsey Clark also urged serious action by the humanitarian 
organizations and world figures to prevent the use of economic 
sanctions as a tool to strike at people since they constitute a 
crime against humanity and against the individual's right to 
live in prosperity and peace. 
  He said the economic sanctions are an ugly crime that cause 
the death of more people than those killed in military 
aggression, and especially deaths among the weak, the sick, the 
elderly, and women. He noted that the economic sanctions 
constitute a weapon of mass destruction since it paralyzes an 
entire country by starving it and spreading killer diseases. 
  He added: We in the World Criminal Court have found that 
economic sanctions constitute a continuous crime against 
humanity since it is a crime that seeks to murder children. He 
stressed that humanitarian and world organizations must act 
seriously to put an end to the sanctions that kill children, 
women, and old men daily. 
  Ramsey Clark noted that economic sanctions now threaten many 
countries because they have turned into a tool at the hands of 
the superpowers to intimidate other states. He explained that 
the United States had confessed that it refused to export 
foodstuffs to Iraq despite previous agreements. He said such a 
method is criminal and it is unacceptable to use food as a tool 
to strike at peoples. 
  He explained that the main purpose for this symposium was to 
find the means [words indistinct] the United States and its 
allies to immediately end the economic sanctions imposed on Iraq. 
  Concluding, Ramsey Clark said: I am seeking support for the 
Iraqi people whom I love and I wish them prosperity and hope to 
end the current suffering caused them by the sanctions that 
constitute a crime against humanity. 

