CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Captain 1st Rank Albert Ivanovich </F>
Khraptovich, former commander of a nuclear-powered 
missile-carrying submarine, by Vladimir Voronov: "The Admiral's 
`Paper' Truth"] 
  [Text] In the article "Paper Nautiluses" (STOLITSA, 
No 45, 1993), Captain 1st Rank Ilya Kolton asserted: The Russian 
strategic submarine fleet is not combat effective--the potential 
adversary tracks literally every one of our ships. The whole 
point is that our domestic submarines make too much noise. 
  Fleet Admiral Vladimir Chernavin, former commander in 
chief of the USSR Navy, did not agree with this, which he 
reported in PRAVDA ("Paper Nautiluses in the Sea of Life," 9 
February 1994), calling our article a "monstrous lie." The 
arguments of STOLITSA were not to the admiral's liking also 
because the author of the magazine article was "an 
engineer-mechanic--nothing more, but who had assumed the role of 
a strategist-analyst." 
  Well, today we give the floor to a person whom even 
former Commander in Chief Chernavin would not dare to accuse of 
lacking professionalism or being ignorant of strategic problems. 
Albert Khraptovich is a captain 1st rank of the reserve, 
commanded a nuclear-powered missile-carrying submarine for 11 
years, and is the holder of many state awards. 
<H5>  Who Needed "Atrina"? </H5>
  [Voronov] Albert Ivanovich, Fleet Admiral Chernavin tells 
about the super-secret fleet operation of 1987 under the code 
name "Atrina". At that time a group of nuclear-powered 
submarines seemed to have successfully broken away from NATO 
antisubmarine forces. Does it turn out that the assertions of 
Captain 1st Rank Kolton were far from reality? 
  [Khraptovich] Let us first try to understand, why did 
Admiral 
Chernavin conduct Operation Atrina in general? 
  "We had to teach a little lesson to the potential 
adversary, who had gotten a swelled head, and show that, when 
necessary, we can become illusive `avengers', that is, operate 
in a sufficiently concealed manner to deliver a retaliatory 
strike..." 
  So, from the very beginning everything was conceived for 
show? The submarine fleet should be "illusive" without such 
operations. But here it was--"when necessary!" 
  The retired admiral even said that such a large-scale and 
devastating action was needed, in general, only by him--his 
personal "international prestige" depended on its success. 
Someone naive could even believe that combat effectiveness 
concerns Chernavin! 
  So, it is only a desire to establish oneself! Instead of 
normal work--to organize a rush job and report. 
  [Voronov] But according to Chernavin, they were successful. 
  [Khraptovich] The victory was only in the reports; in 
practice, everything was different. It is even apparent from the 
ex-commander in chief's article that the NATO forces had the 
capability to detect virtually all our submarines easily. An 
"illuminated" submarine can be considered destroyed. Do I have 
to explain how effective a Navy is whose submarine forces are 
being constantly monitored by a potential adversary? But instead 
of trying to correct the situation, the admiral conducts a 
special operation; he says, on such ships we sometimes get away 
from you. Well, that is simply nonsense! And all this in order 
to "teach" the opponent one time. What is the cost to the budget 
for such a dashing move? 
  The admiral also does not try to hide the fact that neither 
he himself nor the Navy were even minimally prepared for 
Operation Atrina. Preparation took a lot of time--ships had to 
be brought to the proper degree of technical readiness. For the 
first time in the Navy's history, in the admiral's words, joint 
training of commanders of submarines and aircraft was 
conducted--an entire division of naval aviation was used in the 
operation. There also was no experience of a simultaneous 
long-range cruise by five nuclear-powered submarines 
immediately. How did he plan to fight? 
  After all, if there indeed was a serious desire to 
fundamentally change the strategy and approach the problem of 
undetectability of the submarine fleet in a new way, why whip 
everyone into a fever, why such massiveness and haste? 
  The Americans noted the departure of the division of 
submarines, but paid no special attention to it. They are going, 
they said, and we know where and why. Yes, in the event of 
combat operations, they would have eliminated our ships back 
when they were departing base! 
<H5>  Maritime "Cat-and-Mouse" </H5>
  It seemed that we had broken away. Success! Victory! In the 
words of Chernavin, three squadrons of antisubmarine warfare 
[ASW] aircraft, six nuclear-powered submarines, and three 
hunter-killer groups from the U.S. and British navies were 
thrown into the search for the detachment that had 
disappeared... What power! But any professional will tell you 
that actually these are more than modest forces for searching 
for give nuclear-powered submarines at sea. So what? Without 
exerting any special effort, the Americans soon detected the 
detachment of our ships. Perhaps Admiral Chernavin himself is 
not fully aware how badly he let the cat out of the bag? After 
all, no one forced him to say this: "They tracked Captain 1st 
Rank Shevchenko's detachment almost the entire return route and 
did not stop working until the Norwegian Sea..." 
  You see, this is a total catastrophe, a failure! It can be 
considered that five crews and five ships were already listed 
among the casualties. The detected submarine was a dead 
submarine. In essence, the mission facing the detachment was 
thwarted. Even if only one submarine is "illuminated," the 
causes of the failure and the specific parties responsible are 
carefully investigated and analyzed in any Navy in such a case. 
Here the Americans did not simply detect the whole detachment, 
they practiced methods of tracking and attack as much as they 
wanted. And this most serious defeat of ours is passed off 
almost as an outstanding achievement! 
<H5>  Towards the Fondest "Star" </H5>
  Then something happens that is unprecedented in any normal 
navy, but traditional in ours: An extravagant report to the 
"very top," a downpour of orders, medals, ranks, expensive 
gifts... Incredible? The submariners themselves who carried out 
Chernavin's order, of course, are not at all to blame. With the 
equipment they had, the armament and acoustics available, and 
with the noise level which Captain 1st Rank Kolton justly wrote 
about, detection of the submarines by a potential adversary was 
simply a foregone conclusion. Admiral Chernavin knows this 
perfectly well, too. Incidentally, he considers one of the main 
achievements of the cruise to be the fact that everyone returned 
to base "without any human losses or serious damage." We 
submariners know how much "minor" damage there what and what its 
cost was. So, the seamen received their awards deservedly, and 
their leaders... 
  I think Chernavin himself would very much like to add the 
fond words "of the Soviet Union" to the rank "fleet admiral." 
<H5>  Confidentially--to the Whole World </H5>
  If Operation Atrina actually would have been a serious 
operation to practice or test new methods of deploying 
submarines in areas of possible combat operations, it would have 
still remained in strictest secrecy to this day! The admiral 
would not have dared to even mention it in PRAVDA or any other 
paper. This was a cheap game on the public. Just one fact: In 
order to "break away" from the NATO ships that were "stuck" to 
them, Chernavin authorized the submarine commanders to use even 
sonar countermeasures equipment. But, you see, this is 
categorically forbidden, since it gives away to the potential 
adversary their specifications and performance characteristics 
and combat capabilities. This can only be done in actual combat. 
Chernavin, it turns out, declassified that which should remain 
classified right up until the first round is fired! And even 
this did not help... 
  All such activities of comrade Chernavin are from the known 
series of measures for show, like building the largest 
missile-carrying submarine in the world. Enormous amounts of 
money have been spent and for nothing--it is virtually 
impossible to hide such a submarine; it will easily be 
destroyed. Or take the epic for constructing a nuclear-powered 
aircraft-carrying cruiser. The whole country, overexerting 
itself, is building it. Later it turns out that it will be 
unable to defend itself, not mention inflicting battle damage on 
the enemy! There were no docking platforms or power support for 
the gigantic monstrosities. They rusted and rotted, and a 
considerable amount of money is also needed to utilize them. 
There was no money left for housing for the officer and warrant 
officer families. 
  The words of the former Navy leader are blasphemy to a real 
seaman: "We also restored our reputation in the eyes of 
the potential adversary". (It turns out, the commander in 
chief was interested not in combat effectiveness but in 
"reputation"). "When all is said and done, we only 
achieved equality with you, NATO admirals, in the number of lost 
nuclear-powered submarines," the admiral joyously informs 
us. How can he flaunt this?! After all, Chernavin is still 
"cunning"--by that time we had already "overtaken" our opponents 
in losses, using the admiral's terminology. 
  [Voronov] Is Chernavin personally to blame for such a 
deplorable state of the submarine fleet? 
  [Khraptovich] According to his colleagues, he was a pretty 
good ship and task force commander. But as soon as he became 
commander of the Northern Fleet, it was as if someone had taken 
his place. Therefore, I would not begin to assert that the 
entire problem is in the system--it, they say, pulverized and 
subordinated anything to itself. Much also depends on the 
person. For example, such admirals as G. Yegorov, N. Amelko, R. 
Golosov, and E. Baltin did not forgo their conscience, trying to 
do all that was dependent upon them, even during those years. 
  I had occasion to run into Admiral Chernavin face to face, 
including in the office of the USSR minister of defense. This 
was in 1988, when a series of serious accidents had forced 
Gorbachev to question the status of the Navy. But the commander 
in chief, more concerned about his personal situation, 
completely denied that there were any shortcomings in his 
department and convinced Marshal Yazov that everything was in 
order in the Navy. 
  But you see, the ones who criticize Chernavin himself and 
talk about the condition of the Navy are the professional 
submariners. And they only want to create a special commission 
made up of independent experts to finally tell the truth about 
our naval forces. Do we need security or the illusion of it? 
Only uninformed citizens of our own country can be deceived by 
myths. The potential "adversary," like our own seamen, know 
everything. 
  Okay, we will wait until the next Tsushima incident... 
  From the editor. To be honest, we did not at all plan 
to open up a naval debate on the pages of our magazine. But the 
point is that it is impossible for people independent of the 
military-industrial lobby to express themselves on the pages of 
"their" military journals and newspapers. Moreover, as it seems 
to us, this is not so much a military problem as it is a problem 
of security of the society and the state. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Stolitsa", 1994 

