Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Installments No. 67-70 of the serialized memoirs of Xu </F>
Jiatun (6079 1367 1470): "Xu Jiatun's Hong Kong Memoirs"] 
<H5>  [10 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Reshuffling Leadership Groups of the Hong Kong 
and Macao Working Committee (Part 1 of 2) 
  Mao Junnian [3029 6874 1628], Qiao Zongzhun [0829 1350 0402] 
Promoted Deputy Directors 
  Song Renqiong [1345 3067 2781] and a deputy director of the 
Central Organization Department in charge of Hong Kong and Macao 
cadres asked to see me together to ask about my opinions on 
reshuffling the leading group of the Hong Kong and Macao working 
committee. 
  I put forward a plan under which Li Zhuwen [2621 6308 2429] 
would retire and be transferred back to the mainland and Mao 
Junnian and Qiao Zongzhun would be promoted deputy secretary and 
deputy director, respectively. I also asked the CPC Central 
Committee to name someone to help me assume overall charge of 
the work as my right-hand man and succeed me in the future. The 
deputy director suggested that since Chen Daming [7115 6671 
2494] had also reached retirement age, we should consider 
recalling both him and Li Zhuwen to the mainland. I realized the 
intent behind this suggestion--to make the change less traumatic 
for the latter--and indicated my agreement. But I did note that 
Chen Daming, being from Guangdong, had an intimate knowledge of 
the situation in Hong Kong. I proposed that he stay on as 
adviser for a period of time, as Qi Feng [4359 6912] had done in 
the past. Song Renqiong said he could go along with the idea of 
Chen Daming remaining in Hong Kong to help with the work, but 
not as adviser. As for my bold suggestion of promoting the two 
men, they indicated that in principle they would consider having 
the Organization Department send people to Hong Kong to inspect 
their performance, with a decision to be taken later. They 
instructed me not to discuss the elders' retirement with the 
working committee upon my return to Hong Kong since it was up to 
the CPC Central Committee to decide what to do. As for promoting 
the new people, the working committee should solicit opinions 
broadly. 
  Back in Hong Kong, I sought out the views of cadres above 
the 
office level in all working committee organs as instructed by 
Song Renqiong. While there was no consensus, the reactions were 
largely positive. The inspection group from the Central 
Organization Department came and concluded that the two people 
should be appointed deputy director but refused to consider 
making one a deputy secretary for the time being. The leader of 
the inspection group and his deputy briefed me on the findings 
of their group and asked for my opinions. I voiced no objection 
and agreed to try out Mao Junnian and Qiao Zongzhun on the job 
before reconsidering whether or not they should be appointed 
deputy secretary. 
  Zheng Hua [6774 5478] was very cautious even about the most 
minute of things. He did what he was told by his superiors in 
all things, never taking a personal initiative, and lacked drive 
and creativity, which made him unfit to be my right-hand man. 
More than once I asked the CPC Central Committee to send a 
replacement. On his own initiative, a concerned Hu Yaobang 
nominated Wu Guancheng [0702 1351 2973], then mayor of Wuhan, 
for the position. But it was not long before Hu Yaobang came 
back to me with the word that Wu Guancheng had another job lined 
up and could not come to Hong Kong. He asked me to name another 
person, saying, "You know Jiangsu well. Find someone from 
Jiangsu." I said, "I don't want to do that for fear of causing 
any misunderstanding." There were rumors both within the party 
and in society at large that I was putting together a 
"Jiangsu-Zhejiang faction." He nodded in approval. 
  An overwhelming majority of the cadres on the original Hong 
Kong and Macao working committee were natives of Guangdong, 
which abuts Hong Kong. There is no linguistic barrier between 
the two places, which are bound by numerous ties. For these 
reasons, the cadres from Guangdong got along very well with the 
locals readily, a plus for getting our work done. However, the 
former leaders of the working committee were narrow in thinking 
and sectarian in outlook. To put an end to that situation, we 
must look for new cadres from "all corners of the world." As 
part of my restructuring, I suggested to the CPC Central 
Committee in 1984 that some cadres be transferred from the 
interior to beef up the Hong Kong and Macao working committee. 
  In addition to a few cadres to be transferred directly from 
Beijing by the Central Organization Department, I proposed that 
we go talent-scouting in the four provinces of Guangdong, 
Fujian, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang as well as the municipality of 
Shanghai. The CPC Central Committee accepted the idea and 
decided that the Central Organization Department and the working 
committee should visit the provinces and municipality jointly to 
look for qualified people. Representing the working committee on 
this trip was Zheng Hua. More than a month later, over 20 cadres 
above the office level were selected, most of them the cream of 
the crop in their respective locality, such as Tan Fuyun [6223 
5397 0661] (later assistant to the director of Xinhua She Hong 
Kong office and minister of economic affairs) and Yang Zhenhan 
[2799 2182 3352] (younger brother of Nobel Prize winner Yang 
Zhenning [2799 2182 1337] and head of the Dongnan information 
center), both of Shanghai; Zhang Junsheng [1728 3182 3932] 
(minister of propaganda) of Zhejiang, and Weng Xinqiao [5040 
1800 2890] (vice minister of culture and education) of Fujian. I 
also named several people in Jiangsu, none of whom, however, was 
approved by the provincial CPC committee. Only after some 
negotiations did they agree to the transfer of "scholar" Niu 
Zhao [3662 6856] to help me with writing. The new group of 
cadres got on well with the existing cadres in most cases and 
quickly adapted to the work environment in Hong Kong, giving 
rise to a new atmosphere at Xinhua She Hong Kong office. 
Society's negative perception that Xu was putting together a 
"Jiangsu-Zhejiang faction" reflected the thinking of just a 
handful of people. (Installment No. 67) 
<H5>  [11 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Reshuffling Leadership Groups of the Hong Kong 
and Macao Working Committee (Part 2 of 2): Zhang Jingfu [1728 
0513 1133] Recommended Zhu Rongji [2612 3579 1015] As Second In 
Command; I Argued in Favor of Appointing Lu Ping [767 1627] as 
Deputy Director of Xinhua She Hong Kong and Macao Office 
  State Councillor Zhang Jingfu was full of enthusiasm. He 
made 
me this suggestion, "Zhu Rongji (currently member of the 
politburo of the CPC Central Committee and the standing 
committee of the CPC Central Advisory Commission, and vice 
premier of the State Council) is well suited to be your right 
hand man." Zhang Jingfu used to be Zhu Rongji's boss so he knew 
him well. Zhang Jingfu thought highly of his caliber, 
considering him competent and open in his thinking. Naturally I 
welcomed the idea. We talked it over and decided that I would 
ask the CPC Central Committee to let the man go while Zhang 
Jingfu would put in a good word. Some time passed and we heard 
nothing. I asked Zhang Jingfu about it. He said, "The CPC 
Central Committee has decided to appoint Zhu Rongji mayor of 
Shanghai. Go look for somebody else." Once again it did not work 
out. 
  Someone recommended Li Hao [2621 3493], then deputy 
secretary 
general of the State Council, to be my deputy, telling me Zhao 
Ziyang had a high regard for him back when Zhao Ziyang was in 
Guangdong, which was why Li Hao was later transferred to the 
State Council. A transfer to Hong Kong must be approved by Zhao 
Ziyang. Later I met with Zhao Ziyang and asked him to release Li 
Hao. He shook his head and said, "Don't think of asking him." It 
turned out that Tian Jiyun [3944 4764 0061] then vice premier, 
had come to rely heavily on Li Hao's work and was reluctant to 
release him. Not long afterwards, however, Li Hao was 
transferred to Shenzhen as both mayor and secretary of the 
Shenzhen CPC committee. So why did Tian Jiyun let him go? Later 
I heard that Li Hao had fallen out with Tian Jiyun over 
something. Privately I congratulated myself on the fact that 
Zhao Ziyang had refused to let Li Hao go. Otherwise I would be 
in big trouble now. 
  I talked to Ji Pengfei [1213 7720 7378] about transferring 
Lu 
Ping to the number two spot on the working committee. I had been 
favorably impressed by him, especially his familiarity with the 
situation in Hong Kong and Macao and his liberated thinking. Ji 
Pengfei said he had already submitted a report to the Central 
Organization Department promoting Lu Ping to be deputy director 
of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office. Later he said to me, 
"I submitted the report a long time ago. For some reason the 
Organization Department has shelved it. Look into that for me 
and put in an explanatory word for Lu Ping." He knew I had close 
ties with the department. After talking to the deputy minister 
involved, I learned that Lu Ping had been a rebel during the 
Cultural Revolution and written big-character posters attacking 
the leadership. I put in a good word for him, "Didn't Li Hou 
behave badly during the Cultural Revolution?" If the mistake was 
not serious and has been admitted to, just let it go." Soon 
afterward the Central Organization Department approved Lu Ping's 
appointment. Did my intercession play a part? I don't know for 
sure. 
  After all these twists and turns, Zheng Hua was still the 
deputy secretary of the working committee. 
  Wang Fang [3769 5364], then minister of public security, 
approached me about transferring Zhang Junsheng to Zhejiang. He 
said, "When Zhang Junsheng balked at coming to Hong Kong, I 
promised him a two-year stint at the end of which he could 
return to the province." Zhang Junsheng himself also asked the 
working committee to send him back to Zhejiang. 
  Before coming to Hong Kong, Zhang Junsheng was deputy 
secretary of the Hangzhou CPC committee as well as deputy mayor 
of the city. The provincial CPC committee had decided to make 
him deputy governor. Aware of this decision, Zhang Junsheng had 
balked at coming to and working in Hong Kong. He yielded to Wang 
Fang's persuasion only after the Hong Kong and Macao working 
committee and the Central Organization Department explicitly 
used the word "borrow" with reference to his appointment. 
  Zhang Junsheng was an enthusiastic and highly adaptable 
worker, liberated in thinking too. In my discussions with Wang 
Fang about him, I had already proposed to the Central 
Organization Department that he be made deputy director of 
Xinhua She Hong Kong Office. The department approved that in 
principle but put off taking a decision until after the 
investigation group had a chance to do its work. I told Wang 
Fang about this and he said, "I can go along with that." 
  The department then proposed, reportedly on the 
recommendation of Yao Yilin [1202 0181 2651], that the deputy 
directorship be offered to Pan Cengxi [3382 2582 6932], a former 
general manager of the ocean-going engine manufacturing company 
(or some such name. I cannot remember the exact title now) under 
the Ministry of Communications. I agreed. Then Zhang Jingfu 
again approached me with another name: Wang Pinqing [3769 0756 
3237], vice minister of foreign economic relations and trade. He 
said that although Wang Pinqing had reached retirement age, he 
had expressed an interest in being deputy director of the Xinhua 
She Hong Kong office to take charge of Chinese capital affairs. 
Since the Central Organization Department had recommended Pan 
Cengxi first and I had approved the decision, my plan being to 
have him assist Zheng Hua handle Chinese capital affairs, I 
explained the situation to Zhang Jingfu and he agreed to 
withdraw his recommendation. 
  The fact that there were 30 to 40 people on the Hong Kong 
and 
Macao working committee rendered it difficult to meet in full 
session, given the reality in Hong. I suggested to the CPC 
Central Committee that it be reconstituted as a new streamlined 
working committee comprising the director, deputy director, and 
the secretary of the Macao working committee so that a meeting 
could be called anytime to discuss and adopt a resolution on a 
matter. In conjunction with the drafting of the Macao Basic Law 
soon to be launched, I also proposed to the CPC Central 
Committee that a Xinhua She macao office be set up to be headed 
by Zhou Ding [0719 7844], instead of having Nanguang Company 
represent the Chinese Government, as originally planned (End of 
Installment No. 68) 
<H5>  [12 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Reshuffling Leading Group of Hong Kong and 
Macao Working Committee: Report On Transition Praised by Zhao 
Ziyang; Li Hou, Lu Ping Asked To Keep Their Mouths Shut 
  More than two months later, the CPC Central Committee 
approved the new working committee as follows: 
  Member and secretary of the working committee and director 
of 
XINHUA SHE Hong Kong Office: Xu Jiatun 
  Member and deputy secretary of the committee and deputy 
director of XINHUA SHE Hong Kong Office: Zheng Hua 
  Members of committee and deputy directors of Xinhua She Hong 
Kong Office: Mao Junnian, Qiao Zongzhun, Zhang Junsheng, Pan 
Cengxi 
  Members of committee, secretary of Macao working committee, 
and director of XINHUA SHE Macao office: Zhou Ding 
  Since Deng Xiaoping and the CPC Central Committee asked me 
to 
remain on the job for a while longer, I went to Zhao Ziyang with 
a request that the leading group be reshuffled. I also told him 
there were neither coherent planning nor complete instructions 
in the work of XINHUA SHE Hong Kong office and noted the lack of 
response to a report that the working committee had submitted. I 
told him I would do some more research and studies on the basis 
of the original report and submit to the CPC Central Committee a 
new report outlining plans and policies for Hong Kong during the 
transitional period in the hope that the CPC Central Committee 
would approve it as a basis for our work. I told Zhao Ziyang 
that I would inform Ji Pengfei about this. Zhao Ziyang said 
fine. When I briefed Ji Pengfei, he also was agreeable. Back in 
Hong Kong I spent between three and four months putting together 
a new report and sent a copy of the draft to the Hong Kong and 
Macao Affairs Office for its revisions and comments. The office 
made some changes in wording but otherwise left the content and 
principles largely intact. 
  Next I formally submitted the report to the CPC Central 
Committee, the State Council, and, of course, the Hong Kong and 
Macao Affairs Office and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In my 
report I adhered to the ideas I had raised in the heart-to-heart 
talks, ideas that I thought to be correct. In my analysis of 
Hong Kong, for instance, I stuck to the "unrest, division, and 
reorganization" theory, the only change being the deletion of 
the word "great." As for Sino-British relations, I again 
emphasized that the Sino-British conflict lay at the heart of 
the contradiction during the transitional period. In the past, 
we used to say, "There is unity as well as conflict in the 
Sino-British conflict. Emphasize unity and use conflict to 
achieve unity." Now unity had been replaced by cooperation. 
These days we said there were both cooperation and conflict in 
the Sino-British conflict. Emphasize cooperation and use 
conflict to achieve cooperation. Turning to united front work, 
the report emphasized that the main target was intermediate 
forces and that we should continue to zero in on the big 
bourgeoisie and big rightists. Once we won over these people, 
our influence would increase among the intermediate forces. The 
report also reiterated the notion that relying on the 
proletariat, on the one hand, and launching patriotic united 
front work broadly, on the other, were the two wings of Hong 
Kong work. In mass work, the report stressed considering the 
interests of both management and labor. We must do a good job 
not only in working with the laboring people but also in working 
with the residents. Basically the new report elaborated some of 
the points in the original document. 
  After the report was sent to the CPC Central Committee, Zhao 
Ziyang told me in person that it was very well written, that 
they all endorsed the report in principle, and that as far as 
the details were concerned, I should ask Ji Pengfei for his 
opinions. I assumed Zhao Ziyang was speaking for the CPC Central 
Committee and State Council. I told Ji Pengfei what Zhao Ziyang 
had told me. He did not offer many suggestions. I said, "Since 
you are all agreeable, I would like some sort of written 
response. In the future, we will simply do our work based on the 
report." My idea was to have the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office instead of the CPC Central Committee or State Council 
draft something. I recalled my last words in the heart-to-heart 
meeting: "When something important happens in the future, I 
would ask for instructions." The report was an important event. 
Ji Pengfei verbally agreed at the time that I should have some 
response in black and white just in case. Yet in the end nothing 
ever happened. 
  In Hong Kong work, the Hong Kong and Macao working committee 
took the initiative on many occasions. It occurred to me that 
the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office and the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs were critical of that. During the drafting of 
the Basic Law, Ji Pengfei called countless meetings to discuss 
the detailed issues. We too made many suggestions and did some 
studies on, among other things, the future system of government 
for Hong Kong. Some meetings were held only after the working 
committee asked to hear a report. Li Hou and Lu Ping spoke on 
several occasions and society reacted strongly to their remarks. 
We thought that wasn't quite right. I asked Ji Pengfei time and 
again to tell Lu Ping and Li Hou to cut back on public speaking. 
If they had to open their mouths at all, they should first do 
some thinking. Once or twice I even made the same point to them 
personally. Ji Pengfei did not take any position. 
  These contradictions only intensified after the June 4 
incident. (End of Installment No. 69) 
<H5>  [13 Jul 93 p 2] </H5>
  [Text] Let the Pearl Sparkle Even More Brightly: 1) 
Campaign To Retain British Capital (Part One of Two); Boosting 
Chinese Capital Would Not Divert Profits From Hong Kong People; 
Possibility of Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation 
Withdrawing Before 1997 Analyzed 
  Hong Kong earned the name "Pearl of the Orient" because of 
its prosperous economy. How were we to keep the Hong Kong 
economy prosperous and growing so that the "pearl" could sparkle 
even more brightly during the transitional period leading to its 
return to the mainland? This question was of intense interest to 
the CPC Central Committee leadership. It was also what our work 
in Hong Kong was all about. 
  In my work report to the leaders of the CPC Central 
Committee 
in September 1983, I summarized the principle of our economic 
work in Hong Kong with five phrases consisting of 20 characters: 
"Keep British capital, stabilize Hong Kong Chinese capital, woo 
foreign capital, unite overseas Chinese capital, and boost 
Chinese capital." Among the leaders on the CPC Central 
Committee, I believed Zhao Ziyang essentially approved the 
principle, Hu Qili [5170 0796 4539] was even more enthusiastic, 
while Li Xiannian [2621 0341 1819] had a different opinion 
regarding, for instance, the increase of Chinese capital in Hong 
Kong. 
  Within the working committee, most colleagues supported the 
principle. However, top officials at the Bank of China in Hong 
Kong as well as a number of local cadres did not. The bank 
leaders did not consider it an economic principle. I realized 
their perspective was the banking industry, not the Hong Kong 
economy as a whole. I explained to them that we were not in Hong 
Kong to run the place. It was not within our power to put 
forward a coherent set of detailed principles and even if we 
did, it would be to no avail because we could not translate them 
into policies and laws. That would be up to the Hong Kong 
British Government. 
  Some local cadres did not approve of the idea of boosting 
Chinese capital in Hong Kong, which they considered neither 
necessary nor possible. I pointed out that as long as we ran 
Chinese-funded organizations using the same methods commonly 
used in Hong Kong and did not seek privileges or vie for profits 
at the expense of the Hong Kong people, our participation in the 
Hong Kong market would not only add to the wealth of the nation 
as well as that of Hong Kong, but would also provide many new 
opportunities for development for Hong Kong and boost the 
confidence of the locals. The enlarged presence of Chinese 
capital in Hong Kong would also have stabilizing effects on the 
Hong Kong economy in the future. 
  As far as economic work in Hong Kong was concerned, I stuck 
to this 20-character principle, which turned out to be in line 
with the reality in Hong Kong. 
  Among the major British-funded conglomerates in Hong Kong, 
some, like the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, 
Jardine Matheson and Company, and Kadoorie, are basically based 
in Hong Kong, while others, such as Swire and the Chartered 
Bank, have their headquarters in Britain. As Hong Kong Chinese 
capital grew, it has acquired a number of British-funded 
conglomerates. For instance, Hutchison-Whampoa and Wheelock have 
been purchased by Li Jiasheng [2621 0857 6134] and Bao Yugang 
[0545 3768 0474], respectively. Nevertheless, it would be 
difficult for Chinese capital and Hong Kong Chinese capital to 
dislodge British capital from its dominant position in the Hong 
Kong economy in the near future. The standing of the Hong Kong 
and Shanghai Banking Corporation in the local banking industry, 
for example, is unparalleled. 
  British-funded conglomerates are characterized by support 
from the colonial government and owe their rise and development 
to monopolies of varying magnitude. A classic example is the 
Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. 
  The Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation is a 
commercial bank but has been granted a number of special 
privileges by the Hong Kong government that are normally enjoyed 
by a central bank. It can print banknotes and acts as the 
treasurer and cashier of the Hong Kong British government. It 
also supervises and manages financial institutions on behalf of 
the government and takes care of the local banks' account 
settlement, which gives it a knowledge of the business 
activities of other local banks. The Hong Kong and Shanghai 
Banking Corporation serves as chairman of the Hong Kong Banking 
Association. Its board of directors consists almost entirely of 
ex-officio members of the Executive Council and has much say and 
wields a good deal of influence in the formulation of local 
financial and economic policies. There is a local joke that Hong 
Kong has three governors, one of them being the chairman of the 
board of the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, which 
gives you an idea of the bank's standing and role in Hong Kong. 
The bank's board of directors is made up almost entirely of 
Britons. Under the charter of the bank the board chairman is 
elected by the board. In fact, we have never been able to 
determine just who picks the chairman, the Hong Kong British 
government or some organization in London. I have personally 
posed this question to Bao Yugang, an ex-vice chairman of the 
board. He did not know for sure either. According to information 
made available by a long-time employee of the bank, 
decision-making power in the bank resides in the hands of just 
five or six Britons, including the board chairman and its 
general manager. 
  How would the bank react to the prospect of China taking 
back 
Hong Kong? This was something we must study and determine in 
advance. In late 1983 I set up a special investigation group 
made up of people from the economics department and research 
section of the XINHUA SHE Hong Kong office to conduct a study on 
the bank. The gist of its 10,000-character report was that owing 
to the enormous losses suffered by the bank when it withdrew 
from the mainland in 1949, the memory of which still haunts it, 
the bank may leave Hong Kong before 1997 without, however, 
evacuating completely. It would decide whether to remove some or 
most of its operations from Hong Kong depending on the economic 
situation here and in China. 
  This assessment differed from that of the leaders of the 
Bank 
of China in Hong Kong. They believed that "as long as it can 
make money here, the bank will not withdraw from Hong Kong." 
Echoing this viewpoint were the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office in Beijing, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the head 
office of the Bank of China. No follow-up study was done at the 
time. (70) 
leadership. 
  China's reform and opening up once again brought the Hong 
Kong people's spirit of seizing every available opportunity into 
full play. China was a main target of Hong Kong investments. 
Prior to 1990, Hong Kong had accounted for more than 60 percent 
of all investments made by foreign nations and regions. Today, 
although there are substantial Taiwanese and foreign 
investments, the percentage of Hong Kong investments remains 
high. Today, not only small ad medium-sized businesses are 
investing in the mainland, but some of the biggest names such as 
Li Ka-Sheng and Wu Kuang-zheng [0702 0342 2973], Pao Yu-Kang's 
son-in-law, are also doing business there. No doubt they will be 
very successful. 
  We can say that Hong Kong has not failed to seize every 
political and economic development opportunity the world and 
Southeast Asia have to offer; it has made timely development 
every time. Hong Kong has become a free, open, diversified 
market. Despite its tiny size, it has shown tremendous capacity. 
Today, Hong Kong businessmen and Hong Kong money are showing up 
all over the world. To different extents the continents have 
become Hong Kong's market and business arena. 
  Hong Kong is indeed a miracle to be proud of. 
(Installment No. 70) 

