Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Levon Ter-Petrosyan by Armen Khanbabyan; </F>
place and date not given: "The Formation of the CIS Enabled Us 
To Avoid the `Yugoslav Scenario': Armenian President Levon 
Ter-Petrosyan Believes That Russia and the CSCE Should 
Consolidate Efforts for a Settlement of the Karabakh Conflict"] 
  [Text] 
  [Khanbabyan] You are the sole head of state of the 
Transcaucasus who has right from the start participated in the 
work of bodies of the CIS: Aliyev and Shevardnadze joined their 
colleagues only in Ashgabat. To what extent will it be possible 
to harmonize positions now, when the easiest part of the path 
has already been covered? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Armenia, the first of the former Soviet 
republics to subscribe to the Belovezha Treaty, proceeded from 
the obvious fact that the Soviet Union was falling apart. It was 
important to lessen the danger of its uncontrolled collapse, and 
the CIS accomplished this mission brilliantly. We prevented the 
"Yugoslav scenario" and did not allow local intrastate conflicts 
to grow into a large-scale war, and this is to the credit of all 
countries, primarily Russia. 
  A second important fact: the former Soviet republics had to 
consider that they could be left out of world systems, security 
systems primarily. The fact of the new states' acquisition of 
independence did not in itself increase their essential options, 
either political or economic. Under these conditions the CIS was 
and still is the sole system guaranteeing the security of the 
former Soviet republics. 
  And the third--economic motives. We proceeded from the fact 
that while a search for new economic relations, new markets, and 
new world and regional structures was still under way, it would 
be beneficial for all states to have or, at least, try to 
preserve the economic relations and markets that existed in the 
time of the Soviet Union. This factor will exert a pronounced 
influence on the behavior of all states for the coming decades. 
  [Khanbabyan] The Armenian premier observed in Ashgabat that 
we have created something unprecedented--all current unions are 
united by rich countries; we, however, have a union of poor 
countries.... 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Whatever you say, whatever new relations are 
established, the reality is that the "intra-CIS" market remains, 
for all that, the priority for all the republics. But this is a 
very distinctive market. 
  There is no economic union in practice as yet. 
Implementation 
of its basic principles--a common tax and financial policy, a 
harmonized budget deficit, single customs tariffs--will take a 
great deal of work and a long time. We have signed hundreds of 
documents and will sign hundreds more, but no multilateral 
treaty regulating the relations of several members of the CIS is 
operating. Everything is supported at the present time on 
something entirely different--exclusively on bilateral 
intergovernmental agreements. Private business also operates 
mainly on a bilateral basis, but there is greater cooperation 
there currently than at the interstate level. Free enterprise is 
less dependent on political relations between countries. We 
should be developing multilateral cooperation at the state level 
also. It is very important now, for the period of formation of 
the economic union, to create new mechanisms. 
  Proceeding from these considerations, Armenia made a 
specific 
proposal at the Ashgabat meeting. Its essence is as follows: 
there is as yet no common financial entity, an interstate bank, 
which could make payments in the national currencies, and we 
need to create a payments union--a practical mechanism that 
would under no circumstances contradict the idea and principles 
of the Treaty on Economic Union. Clearing, which we perform 
currently on a bilateral basis, needs to be made multilateral. 
This would afford an opportunity for alleviating reciprocal 
payments. I am pleased that our proposal was received with great 
enthusiasm in Ashgabat, and this matter will be on the agenda at 
the next meeting of heads of government. 
  [Khanbabyan] Nonetheless, there was one decision which 
affected everyone and which adjusted somewhat the mutual 
relations of the members of the CIS--Russia's decision to "end" 
the ruble area. It was, by all accounts, the cause of economic 
problems in the republics and weakened the political positions 
of regimes "friendly" toward Moscow. 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Under no circumstances am I about to accuse 
Russia. A very serious internal debate on the strategy of the 
Russian state was, truly, conducted for a long time there. On 
the one hand a team of new politicians and brilliant reform 
economists, which took as the basis purely economic 
considerations.... 
  [Khanbabyan] Pragmatic.... 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] No, this was not opportunist, their position 
was based on a very serious analysis, and I understand them full 
well. 
  On the other hand, there is in Russia also a purely 
political 
current which originated in traditional-state considerations. 
The struggle between these two currents of political and 
economic thought is of an objective nature and is not dependent 
on Russia's sympathies for or antipathies toward other states. 
It is hard to say which considerations will be predominant in 
the future, but it had become clear to everyone last fall 
without declarations and without any explanations that Russia 
had at that moment adopted a decision in support of its own 
economic interests. After which the other states had no choice 
but to take their own action. 
  [Khanbabyan] Was Armenia prepared for such a turn of events? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] We anticipated it, and not only us--all the 
states had ahead of time been keeping their own, already printed 
currency in their safes. But it was not we who chose the moment. 
Had anything been up to us, Armenia would not be introducing its 
own money at this time. We needed to prepare for this step, 
preserve mechanisms of normal trade with our partners, and 
gently, preparing currency and commodity reserves, move toward 
such radical reform. 
  [Khanbabyan] You believe that the debate in the Supreme 
Council of Armenia to the effect that the dram should have been 
introduced earlier, in a more propitious economic situation, was 
without foundation? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Yes, it was. It was not in our interests to 
sever the common ruble space with Russia, there would in this 
case have been great difficulties and more complications than 
there are now. 
  [Khanbabyan] Have the "model" Armenian-Russian relations 
changed as of late? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] There has been essentially no change in our 
relations. I have already cited one factor--proceeding from 
economic considerations, Russia made its choice, which had 
negative consequences for the economy of Armenia, but I do not 
believe that this step was aimed against our country. 
  And, the second: problems arose for us with Russia, as, 
equally, with other countries, in connection with the Karabakh 
conflict. Naturally, the world community and Russia, which is a 
part of it and which, in addition, has its own interests in the 
region, are concerned at the development of the conflict. They 
recognize that its continued escalation threatens the danger of 
a wider international conflict, which is in no one's interests. 
  [Khanbabyan] Did the incident involving Ambassador Kazimirov 
influence the situation in any way? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] No, not in the least. The incident involving 
Kazimirov was ultimately seen by everyone as an annoying 
misunderstanding. 
  [Khanbabyan] Let us return to Ashgabat, where you met with 
Aliyev and Shevardnadze--a kind of small regional conference. 
What was the discussion about? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Armenia is concerned first and foremost for 
the possibility of normal freight shipments, and for this reason 
we have many day-to-day problems connected with Georgia. We are 
inclined to believe that these problems are not a consequence of 
an official policy pursued by the leadership of the neighboring 
republic. It is simply that the state in Georgia is not strong 
yet and that the authorities are not in control of the situation 
in the country. There are no political problems with Tbilisi, we 
have full mutual understanding. The discussion with Shevardnadze 
was only about him, considering our difficult situation, doing 
everything he can to normalize transportation. 
  As far as Aliyev is concerned, this was not our first 
meeting. I do not say that it will have any practical results. 
Until Azerbaijan switches from words to deeds and until it 
substitutes a realistic policy for propaganda, all negotiations 
and meetings are useless. But I support a continuation of 
contacts, in any event. What do I mean by a realistic policy? 
There are two long-suffering plans of a settlement of the 
Karabakh problem. The plan of the CSCE and the Russian plan of a 
settlement, which, in terms of content, the phased nature of 
fulfillment, mechanisms, and satisfaction of each party's 
requirements does not differ from the CSCE plan. The sole, but 
appreciable, difference between the two documents is that the 
Russian plan contains a clear-cut mechanism guaranteeing a 
nonresumption of military operations--the presence of a 
peacemaking force. This is a powerful argument. 
  The CSCE plan is the result of a compromise, and each side 
has its complaints about it, naturally. That is the point of a 
compromise. Armenia and Karabakh agreed to this plan; 
Azerbaijan, on the other hand, rejected it. 
  Armenia and Karabakh also consent to the Russian version, 
even in the preliminary form presented by Russia. Azerbaijan is 
evading this also. At the Ashgabat meeting Aliyev delivered the 
customary statement, propaganda, rather, at which I proposed a 
switch from words to deed: "You have rejected the CSCE plan, let 
us sign the Russian proposals, getting together in a few days 
with Boris Nikolayevich in Moscow--you, I, and Robert 
Kocharyan." Yeltsin supported me.... 
  [Khanbabyan] Aliyev agreed? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Aliyev once again put forward conditions. 
The 
fact is that Azerbaijan is not yet prepared to accept this plan 
either. But we agreed to work at it, and working meetings of the 
presidents' personal representatives will, most likely, begin in 
January. If they are successful, a meeting of foreign ministers 
is envisaged, and the culminating stage will be a meeting of the 
presidents, at which an agreement could be signed. 
  [Khanbabyan] And what is the explanation for the existence 
of 
two plans--rivalry? And will work on the CSCE plan continue? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] They are not mutually exclusive so it should 
not be thought that this is a counterpoise. Disagreements have 
arisen, and there is no need to conceal this, but currently both 
Russia and the CSCE are seeking opportunities to consolidate 
efforts, the efforts of the parties involved in the conflict 
included, for the formulation of a single plan of settlement of 
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. 
  The existence of two plans is in itself pushing back the 
start of a solution of this problem because it affords both 
Karabakh and Azerbaijan opportunity for maneuver. But, as I have 
already said, a paradoxical situation has now arisen: Karabakh 
and Armenia are prepared to agree to both plans, implying that 
in time they will merge because they do not contradict but 
complement one another. But Azerbaijan rejects them. I am 
convinced that Russia and the CSCE will find a way to unite 
their efforts, and sooner or later Azerbaijan will be forced to 
agree. 
  [Khanbabyan] If agreement is reached, how, in this case, do 
you evaluate the prospect of a normalization of relations with 
Azerbaijan--several years, several generations? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] No, this will happen very quickly if peace 
is 
established and a compromise is found. And compromise means that 
the solution should more or less satisfy all parties. 
  [Khanbabyan] But there would continue to be forces in 
Armenia 
and in Karabakh and in Azerbaijan which a compromise would not 
satisfy. 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Handling them is the duty of the state; 
otherwise, it will perish. It should be remembered that there 
cannot be a common opinion in a normal society; there will 
always be those unhappy with the authorities and with this 
decision or the other of theirs. 
  [Khanbabyan] But I do not recall alternative solutions of 
the 
Karabakh problem having been seriously discussed in Armenia, 
there has been debate.... 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] We have two problems connected with 
Karabakh--a cease-fire and its status. The first is discussed 
daily at all levels--it is a problem of war and peace. The 
second we have deliberately taken off the agenda, and we have 
sought to ensure that the question of status not be broached in 
a single international document--not in resolutions of the 
United Nations, not in documents of the CSCE, not in the Russian 
plan. 
  We have proceeded from the fact that the efforts of the 
parties concerned need to be channeled primarily into the 
achievement of peace. After this a lengthy negotiating process, 
where legal problems, primarily, of course, the question of the 
status of Karabakh, will be resolved, will begin. 
  [Khanbabyan] A regime has been created in Karabakh which 
differs greatly from the one that exists in Armenia--a military 
regime. How will it be possible to harmonize positions when 
there are two different systems of power? And how subsequently 
can this military state be adapted to peaceful life? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] What you say really is the case--different 
regimes and different forms of government in Armenia and 
Karabakh. There is a wartime regime there, and this is justified 
as yet: everything is centralized, everything is subordinated to 
the requirements of wartime. If the war ends, civilian 
authorities will be formed there, naturally. 
  In Armenia there is a civil state, which under these 
difficult conditions is endeavoring to preserve all the 
structures of peacetime. Although this is creating certain 
difficulties. 
  [Khanbabyan] Have there been proposals for application of 
the 
Karabakh experience here? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] The opposition is demanding stringent 
measures. But even in the present situation we are managing 
without this, thank God. We have no such intention. 
  [Khanbabyan] But in voting in 1990 the people hardly 
suspected what ordeals awaited them. What will they vote for 
next time--for light, gas, and transportation that operates 
normally or for strict authorities? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] I fear nothing that is constitutional. If 
some political force comes to power by having mustered a 
particular number of votes, this choice has to be respected. 
  [Khanbabyan] Levon Akopovich, the Russian experience has 
shown that even such a democratic procedure as the adoption of a 
constitution and new elections leads in a difficult economic 
situation to the electorate voting for people on the political 
fringe--in expectation of change. 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] Unfortunately, no one, not a single person, 
or entire peoples even learn from the mistakes of others. If 
this is a mistake of the people, it is they who will rectify it. 
The main thing is that we under no circumstances permit an 
illegitimate change of power. This always ultimately damages the 
state. I am prepared to accept the results of any elections, but 
do not consent to the assumption of office of the worthiest 
people unlawfully. 
  [Khanbabyan] During discussion of the government program the 
opposition once again demanded the resignation of the cabinet 
and a reallocation of competent authority. You once said that a 
coalition government is the result of compulsion. 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] The opposition's demands are entirely 
sincere--it believes throughout the world that it is more fit to 
run the country than those who are in power. But in saying that 
there are circumstances that compel a coalition I did not mean 
that the opposition should compel it. If there arises in 
parliament a situation where no one force can form a government 
and the president cannot get enacted a single law or a single 
decision--a situation threatening total paralysis of the 
executive--two possible paths of a solution remain. Either the 
creation of a coalition government in accordance with the 
percentage representation of the parties in parliament or the 
president dissolves parliament. These mechanisms exist in many 
countries, they are constitutional. They are lacking in Armenia 
as yet, as were they in Russia also, which led to the tragedy of 
3-4 October. 
  As far as the claims of the opposition are concerned, it is 
its right to criticize, but it is my right to disagree with its 
assessments. In the language of mathematics, I am not required 
to take into account what the deputies say until they muster a 
majority of votes and parliament adopts decisions with which I 
am obliged to reckon. This is the language in which we should 
converse with one another. At the state level there are two 
mechanisms for determining the truth--elections and the voting 
of the elective bodies. 
  [Khanbabyan] You rule out the "Georgian" or "Tajik" options 
in Armenia? 
  [Ter-Petrosyan] I am convinced that this will not happen. 
The 
people of Armenia, despite the most difficult living conditions, 
recognize that the sole guarantee of the preservation of an 
independent state is society's internal stability. 

