BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, April 8 (AFP) -- A Belgian priest 
described here Friday [8 April] how eight Rwandan priests, nine 
young women on a spiritual retreat and another two Rwandans were 
slain Thursday by Rwandan troops at a Jesuit mission in Kigali. 
  Quoting survivors' eyewitness accounts, Father Fernand Butz 
said Rwandan soldiers had burst into the Christus mission and 
herded all the Rwandans they could find into one room. 
  They locked all the foreigners in the mission's dining room 
some distance away. 
  Among the foreigners were three Belgian Jesuits, three 
Spaniards accompanying the young women during their Kigali trip, 
and an official of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. 
  When they were let out hours later, they found the 19 bodies 
-- the Rwandan priests and nuns plus the cook and a social 
worker who had been staying temporarily at the mission, Butz 
said. 
  The toll could have been much higher. The Belgian 
religious-oriented Press Information Centre said the nuns and 
sisters of the neighbouring St Vincent mission were not 
disturbed. 
  The agency said this was apparently because they were 
celebrating the eucharist at the time of the massacre and the 
killers did not dare interrupt a religious service. 
  Church officials in Kigali said another six priests and a 
nun 
had been killed at the town of Nyundo, in the northwest province 
of Gisenye, in a wave of violence that started on Wednesday. 
  The victims have included the presidents of Rwanda, Juvenal 
Habyarimana, and of Burundi Cyprien Ntaryamira, killed with 
another 10 people when their aircraft crashed near Kigali, 
reportedly shot down over a military camp. 
  The incident triggered anarchy in Rwanda. Among the victims 
were Rwandan Prime Minister Agathe Uwilingyamana, reportedly 
killed by ethnic Hutus of the Rwandan presidential guard. 
  Ten Belgian members of the 2,500-strong United Nations 
Assistance Mission to Rwanda, who had been guarding her, were 
executed. 
  The Belgian aid organisation Medecins sans Frontieres 
(Doctors without Borders) said Friday that some Rwandan 
employees of foreign aid workers had been slaughtered. 
  There were also reports that the Hutus of the presidential 
guard were killing many Tutsis and burning their homes. 

