CSO 

  [Text] After a relatively short interruption, efforts to 
elevate 'Ali Khamene'i to the level of source of emulation have 
begun anew. The new element in this effort is that this time 
'Ali Meshkini, Yusef Sane'i, Mohammad Fazel Lankrani, Judari 
Amoli, and Ebrahimi from Qom Seminary have joined the effort. 
Before this, Mohammad Yazdi and 'Ali Akbar Nateq-Nuri said in 
Tehran that Khamene'i is qualified in every way to serve as 
source of emulation. Meanwhile, Ahmad Azer-Qomi, one of the most 
influential clergymen in the government, says only ambiguous 
things on this subject. 
  In a statement published in Iran, 'Ali Meshkini wrote that 
it 
is religiously lawful, reasonable, and incumbent on all the 
Muslims of the world, "both Shiite and Sunni," especially the 
clergy and the high scholars and all those who want the Islamic 
revolution to continue, to accept His Excellency as chief 
theologian and vice regent of the Muslims of the world. 
  Reacting to 'Ali Meshkini's call, a statement was published 
in Qom rejecting 'Ali Khamene'i's competence in relation to that 
call "for reasons of religious law and reason." In this 
statement, which was distributed secretly in Qom, and a copy of 
which also reached KEYHAN, "essential problems and objections" 
were raised against Meshkini's remarks. The statement asks, what 
position is to be given to Mr. Khamene'i? Is he to be ranked as 
a person with independent discretion in matters of religious 
jurisprudence, leader of the Islamic Republic or vice regent of 
the Muslims? If Meshkini wants to rank him as a person with 
independent discretion in matters of religious jurisprudence, 
two things could happen: He will either consider himself higher 
than him, "better than him," so to speak, or lower. If he 
considers himself higher, then asking the people to follow him 
will be inappropriate, and if he considers himself lower, then 
in that case a person of lower rank cannot appoint another 
person to a position of higher rank in independent discretion in 
matters of religious jurisprudence. This would be "unworthy 
innovation, in violation of the current traditions in the 
seminary centers." 
  The statement emphasizes that "independent discretion in 
matters of religious jurisprudence for Mr. Khamene'i was never 
approved by the late Imam. If he had considered Mr. Khamene'i 
qualified, he would have confirmed him in writing or verbally." 
The statement notes: In those days when Khamene'i was president 
of the republic, he said at a Friday prayer sermon at Tehran 
University: "Whenever Salman Rushdie repents, his sin will be 
forgiven...." Ayatollah Khomeyni, disturbed, reprimanded him: 
"Who gave you permission to express your views on these kinds of 
theological and religious law issues?" 
  Mr. Khamene'i, chanting that only God has power, said: I am 
not a person with independent discretion in matters of religious 
jurisprudence. I am a follower of the source of emulation, like 
His Holiness the Imam's other followers. 
  The statement says Khomeyni was disturbed not because he 
disagreed with Khamene'i as a person with independent discretion 
in matters of religious jurisprudence, but because he did not 
consider him to have the competence of a person with independent 
discretion in matters of religious jurisprudence. Otherwise, 
"differences among those with independent discretion in matters 
of religious jurisprudence on matters of religious law and 
theology is commonplace, and no person with independent 
discretion in matters of religious jurisprudence corrects 
another for expressing a theological point of view." 
  As an example the statement cites the case of Ayatollah 
Montazeri, who repeatedly expressed views contradicting 
Khomeyni's clear decrees. "Since the Imam considered him to be a 
person with independent discretion in matters of religious 
jurisprudence, he never reprimanded him for expressing a 
conflicting theological point of view..." 
  The statement says if the intent was to confirm the rank of 
leader of the Islamic Republic, "this does not require the 
issuance of a new statement, especially after five years." 
  However, if the intent was to elevate Khamene'i to the rank 
of regent, Meshkini should take note that in his book, A 
Rejection of the Secrets of A Thousand Years, Ayatollah 
Khomeyni said only the imams can exercise regency over the 
affairs of Muslims, and that "shahs, caliphs, and rulers are not 
regents." In the same book "he curses those who say that anyone 
but the chaste imams can exercise regency over the Muslims..." 
  The statement, addressed to those who issued the order 
granting Khamene'i the rank of regent in the affairs of Muslims, 
warns that with acts like this "they are shaking the pillars of 
Shiite emulation authority" and "they have distorted the truth 
and then derived his overall position and rank from that." 
  The statement adds: "Is it possible to address someone whose 
position is no higher than the third echelon in the clerical 
hierarchy in some other way, and present him as someone whom all 
the Muslims of the world must follow and obey, merely by 
publishing a few announcements and statements?" 


