BFN 

  [Text] Santiago, 24 May (EFE) -- Chilean businessmen fear 
that the labor and environmental demands that various U.S. 
organizations want to introduce into a free trade agreement with 
Chile would leave this country out of the competition. 
  Jose Antonio Guzman, president of the Production and Trade 
Confederation, said that the demands being rejected by Chilean 
businessmen are sectoral collective negotiation and mandatory 
unionization, which have already been left behind in Chile. 
  The businessmen also reject the environmental regulations 
for 
production, which according to Guzman exceed the Chilean 
capabilities of investment, and is a requirement that is not 
even met in the United States. 
  Guzman made this comment to local journalists after 
returning 
from the United States, where he contacted various U.S. 
organizations, including union leaders. 
  Regarding the talks he had held, Guzman said he perceived 
strong pressure to impose the labor and environmental 
regulations in the future free trade agreement to be negotiated 
between Chile and the United States. 
  In reference to the environmental demands, Guzman said: "We 
have to be very careful and alert, because a clause of 
protectionism under the disguise of protecting our interests 
could be introduced, which is logically something we will not 
accept." 
  Regarding the labor clauses, Guzman said the two suggested 
regulations have already been left behind in Chilean labor 
legislation, and that business is not willing to reincorporate 
them "because they are harmful to various labor sectors and 
consumers." 
  He added that Chilean business is willing to reach an 
agreement with the United States, but only, he added, "if it is 
beneficial for the country, and does not impose environmental or 
labor regulations that exceed Chilean capabilities and leave us 
out of the competition." 
  Guzman explained that his organization is studying the 
advantages and disadvantages of joining NAFTA, or the 
possibility of a free trade agreement with the United States. 
  Guzman said the businessmen will thoroughly study the two 
choices before issuing a declaration. 
  Chile and the United States reaffirmed their decision to 
sign 
a free trade agreement, to be defined during the negotiations. 

