Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News briefing by Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso </F>
at the Finance Ministry conference hall in Brasilia -- live] 
  [Text] I would like to thank [Labor Minister Walter] 
Barelli, [Mines and Energy] Minister Elcio Alvares, [Armed 
Forces Joint Staff Chief] Minister Arnaldo Leite Pereira, 
Secretary [General of the Presidency] Mauro Durante, [Social 
Security] Minister [Sergio] Cuotolo, [Planning Minister Alexis] 
Stepanenko, [Federal Administration Secretary Romildo] Caim, 
Attorney General of the Republic Geraldo Quintao, Messrs. 
Secretaries, presidents of government organizations, ladies and 
gentlemen, for accompanying us this afternoon. 
  A few months ago I said that I thought inflation and misery 
were the Brazilian peoples' two greatest problems. 
  Today we are taking another step in this struggle against 
inflation, so that we may continue to fight misery and be 
successful in our struggle against these two problems. 
  Every Brazilian citizen knows it is not easy. We have been 
dragging inflation with us for decades. During these past 
decades there has been a great concentration of wealth, an 
inflationary process in which those who did not have the 
economic means to make their money work were unable to protect 
their wealth, their income, their salaries, and were hardly able 
to meet their economic needs. This situation, that which had 
crystallized in Brazil, needed and needs to be reversed. 
  This is a process, a battle that must be waged by everyone. 
President Itamar Franco's government is taking the first steps. 
It has resolutely decided that instead of remaining idle, 
instead of just worrying about the current problems and those 
issues that could concern a government which, due to its own 
nature, is temporary and does not have much time, another path 
must be taken. It decided to tackle the problems from their 
roots. We have identified these two problems, that is, misery 
and inflation, and we are tackling them. It is the duty of the 
finance minister and of the ministers of the economic field, 
always following the guidelines established by the government 
and the president of the Republic, to fight inflation. But this 
does not mean that these ministers, together with the other 
ministers of the social field, should ignore the struggle to 
fight hunger, poverty, unemployment, and misery. 
  This is a convergent process. The economic field's direct 
combat front sought to reorganize the 1993 and 1994 national 
budget. I am not going to elaborate on this subject. I am 
merely going to point out that if the government spends more 
than it collects, more than it obtains from tax collection, it 
would be forced to issue papers, ask for loans, and have to pay 
high interest rates, thus becoming the main one responsible for 
nourishing the financial merry-go-round that keeps the country 
in perplexity, witnessing the great expansion of the debt at 
high interest rates and the government unable to face its most 
basic needs. It was a difficult battle which we could not have 
fought without the support of Congress. The role played by 
Congress in this struggle is essential. The government cannot 
complain. With the normal difficulties of this process, 
Congress granted us the necessary tools to fight inflation, 
starting with the budget. We reorganized the budget with great 
sacrifice from the legislators, from ministers who showed their 
solidarity. It is not easy to cut back expenditures when you 
are already working on a very tight budget. 
  Now that we can say that Brazil is starting balance things 
fiscally, we can take another step. We will start taking this 
new step tomorrow, in compliance with the provision approved by 
the president of the Republic and published in today's OFFICIAL 
GAZETTE. This step will be as difficult as the previous ones. 
But we are not seeking the easy way out. 
  We have announced each phase of the program and anticipated 
the next ones, even knowing that giving information ahead of 
time would create obstacles and reactions. But the ministers 
who are here and those who could not be here, like the 
president, and the ministers who are from areas not directly 
involved, are not afraid of obstacles, and prefer to face the 
obstacles by struggling, negotiating, and trying to win instead 
of hiding. 
  We are not going to do any magic; we are not illusionists. 
We did not lay the ground for what would have made everybody 
happy, such as an abrupt stop to inflation and eventually a 
price freeze, which also always means freezing salaries, a 
freeze that begins with prices and salaries and ends with 
salaries. That was not our path. We realized it was necessary 
for Brazil to follow a different path, a path the country as a 
whole would follow in solidarity with the struggle against 
inflation, poverty, and misery. 
  From now on the program of the Franco administration is a 
program for the country, not for a party, a candidate, a 
faction, or a class -- it is for the country. And the public 
should take into its own hands the responsibility to continue 
with this struggle; otherwise there will be no program. 
Congress was in solidarity, and some decisions will have to be 
reviewed. We need Congress not to forget to promulgate the 
Social Emergency Fund, which is a vital part of the program for 
balancing public financing. We need the solidarity and the 
understanding of Congress to be able to implement the new 
measures being taken now. 
  The important thing is not to lose our path and be 
unfaithful 
to the announcement made. There are problems. Who could not 
perceive that? Who would deny that? Certainly not the 
ministers, certainly not the president. But we decided to face 
them. Once the stage of reviewing the budget is over we must go 
into a great national dialogue, and to face a great national 
dialogue we are proposing to the Brazilian people a more stable 
and firm reference of value. Where is the Brazilian who really 
knows about relative prices? How much is a pair of shoes, a 
bicycle, a television, a car, or a house? We have to refer to 
foreign currency to have some idea of their relative value. Our 
poor cruzeiro, called real, disappears from our hands, it melts 
like ice cream, it disappears. We must again get used to having 
our prices established by a lasting unit system, and this is why 
we created the real value unit, the URV. The URV is now part of 
the monetary system, and it will serve as a fundamental basis 
for the benefit of prices and salaries, the prices of 
merchandise and salaries. And this is a very important news. 
Until now no government has ever given the workers the 
guarantee that the money he will get at the end of the month 
will have the same purchasing power the money had at the 
beginning of the month. The workers will now have that 
guarantee. 
  Now a full salary established on 1 March will have the same 
value on 1 April, based on the URV. On 1 March the minimum 
salary will be worth about 55,000 real cruzeiros, and on 1 April 
this salary will be 58,000 and some cruzeiros. The salary will 
not lose its purchasing power. The pensioner who gets his 
pension on the 12th of each month only has 80 percent of his 
pension by the end of the month, and receives only 60 percent of 
it on the 12th. Now this is no longer the case. Now for the 
pensioner who will get his pension on the 12th of the month, if 
the inflation rate was 40 percent, the full inflation percentage 
will be added to his pension. For the pensioner who has the 
minimum salary of 55,000 real cruzeiros, when he gets paid on 
the 12th he will get 70,000 real cruzeiros. Why? Because the 
salary is based on the URV. 
  As for prices, the entire country, as well as this 
minister, is sick of the speculation and abuses by the 
oligopolies and those who do not seem to understand that this is 
the time to support this decent, open, and clear program rather 
than continue to rob the people. 
  Why aren't we converting prices into URV's? Why don't we 
want to protect prices as we protect salaries? The salary 
earners are now protected by the URV. If prices go up, and I 
hope they will not -- and those who have abused the people's 
patience should beware -- salaries will go up automatically. 
Why? Because the URV is measured by three price indexes, and 
therefore any price increase automatically increases salaries. 
But we are not going to establish a price freeze, because this 
no solution; it only encourages those who operate on the black 
market, those who are going to bet on shortages. There will be 
no price freeze because it does not work for the people. Either 
prices drop or nobody will buy. And when a price is set by 
monopolies or oligopolies, they will have to face the government 
for a stern -- a very stern -- negotiation to make them 
understand that this transition process needs the unity of all 
Brazilians. These are not mere words. Brazil is tired. Brazil 
is tired of magic formulas, it is tired of experiments. 
  President Itamar Franco's government, which has always 
expressed its social awareness, knows that economic growth is 
important. 
  We are not designing a program to fight recession; we are 
designing a program to attain balance. We cannot attain a 
balance with unemployment. There are norms, within the 
provisional measure itself, that make unjustified dismissals 
more difficult. But rather than dismissals, we want people to 
think about employment, about increasing the number of job 
opportunities. This program, in the short term, will allow for 
safe investments. The stock exchange reflects this. We are not 
implementing measures that may harm the investors; quite the 
contrary, we want to attract national and foreign investors, we 
want to generate opportunities, we want to create more job 
opportunities. 
  Neither are we going to neglect specific programs such as 
the 
one to fight hunger, the program to generate job opportunities 
that I have just mentioned. We are depicting Brazil's real 
situation. Our new currency will be called the real. This 
process, this program, is a realistic program. We are not 
offering dreams. This is probably why we are enhancing some of 
the existing injustices, which will make the country even more 
anxious to solve them. We are already taking a step in this 
direction. We are going to seek paths that will improve the 
foundations of our society. What the finance minister is doing 
now is not a salary policy, because other ministers will be in 
charge of that. What the finance minister is doing now is to 
convert the currency by protecting salaries, the real income, as 
much as possible -- and it is possible because charts here show 
us it is so. 
  I am certain that when the time comes to take the next 
steps, 
when the time comes to convert the URV into the new currency, 
the real that will freely circulate throughout the country, we 
will do so in the same way, as we have done so far. We will 
take the next step making an announcement, anticipating the 
following steps, without straying away from our goals, 
negotiating. I do not think there has ever been such an open 
stabilization program as this one. 
  I talked with labor leaders whenever possible. I talked 
with representatives from practically all the labor federations. 
The most important labor leaders came here, to this ministry. 
Jair Meneguelli, Vicentinho [Vicente Paulo da Silva], [Luis 
Antonio de] Medeiros, [Francisco Caninde] Pegado, Urbano from 
the (Contagie), and [Antonio] Neto visited us. I never avoided 
a conversation, or the possibility of showing figures, or asking 
for suggestions. I always said that the government was open and 
will continue to be open. I maintained that I wanted solutions, 
not impasses, because Brazil cannot stop whenever claims cannot 
be answered immediately. 
  We did the same thing at Congress. We opened up the entire 
budget to discussion. We will do the same thing with society. 
This stage in the implementation of the real value unit will 
permit contracts to freely accommodate and adapt. We regulated 
only what was necessary. The few salary adjustment rules we 
implemented were to protect salary earners. We abstained from 
establishing price regulations because we wanted to protect 
salary earners, those who do the purchasing. 
  We will do the same thing now. This plan contains enough 
room for negotiations, negotiations over rents, school tuition, 
health plans. We hope society will adapt. 
  Contracts written in URV's, and all new contracts to be 
written in URV's as of 15 March, will be good for a year without 
adjustments. They will be stable bec9use they will be in URV's. 
The same rules will be applied when these contracts are 
renegotiated. This is a moment for great negotiations. Then we 
will look for the right time to implement the new currency. The 
media have been asking me questions every day. I need help from 
the media, the written, spoken, or televised media, to explain 
the program to the country. 
  Everybody wants to know when the government will implement 
the new currency. The answer is that we will implement it when 
the people think it is right. It will be implemented when the 
country has matured and has understood the rules, has understood 
that we will not implement any unfair practices here or there. 
Then the time will be ripe for the new currency. 
  If we change our currency now the gain will be small, 
because 
society will not have time to adapt. Something that looks 
unimportant now might change, become important, and make prices 
go up, breaking the plan's back. This is why we thought it was 
necessary to adjust things by their mean values. We wanted to 
protect the possibility of maintaining the program. We wanted 
the mean values used at one point to serve as the basis for 
future negotiations. 
  We are not freezing anybody's salary. The free negotiating 
system is on. I think we must all learn to negotiate more and 
more. From now on salary earners, civil servants, all those for 
whom we established a basic salary floor on 1 January, will be 
able to discuss real adjustments. It will no longer be a matter 
of recovering losses. Losses are automatically recovered by the 
URV. From now on the issue will be to correct injustices, 
negotiate their elimination, work more, increase productivity, 
earn more, make Brazil grow. Brazil can grow and it will grow. 
  When the real is implemented it will be the expression of a 
new country, a country such as the one I mentioned when I was 
installed, a country that has found a new dignity. The country 
must again believe in itself, because it cannot continue walking 
with a currency that melts away. It must have a new pataca [old 
Brazilian silver coin], a strong and firm currency with which to 
pay for the work of those who have been sweating all this time, 
those who will no longer be deceived by disappearing earnings. 
  From now on the job will be increasingly large. But I have 
faith. I have a lot of faith. I can feel this faith in the 
people. The people are looking forward, despite all the 
difficulties and hardships, to negotiating and discussing with 
firmness. I feel this faith in the government. This is a 
democratic government. I have never seen a more democratic 
government. This is President Itamar Franco's characteristic. 
He listens. He listens a lot, and permits the ironing out of 
differences. A government cannot work well if only one person 
speaks, even if he is the president, and least of all if he is 
just a minister. We all have the right and the obligation to 
give our opinions. Once something is decided we go ahead and 
implement the decision. That is real democracy, a lot of 
discussion, consensus, and spirit of solidarity to make things 
happen. This is our case. And we will march ahead; we will 
march ahead. 
  And I will conclude by saying that this year was a 
difficult year for the stabilization of the economy due to the 
historical pecularities of the elections. Perhaps for that same 
reason, in a country tired of so much corruption, tired of 
leaders who did not take risks, make decisions, and remain firm, 
the time has come for us to really stabilize the economy, and 
there should be no political process interfering in national 
decisions. Politicians, yes, but no partisan, individual, or 
candidate's interests interfering in decisions. 
  We really believe there is still a patriotic spirit, a 
desire 
by civilian and military men to serve the country. Here we are 
both civilians and military, discussing issues within a 
democratic framework. We make decisions together. Either we 
believe this or the situation would be serious, but we do 
believe this is the case. We are certain that this is the case: 
We are certain there will be no electoral promises capable of 
destroying the economic goal. 
  We thought Congress was sensitive to the clamor of the 
people, and it was; the people do not want influence peddling, 
the people do not want money spent uselessly on electoral 
promises, the people do not want a minister to say yes to 
something that should be rejected because it is no good for the 
country. The people want something else; the people want simple 
and decent individuals who work and believe. 
  The ministers who are here are making a great effort in that 
direction. This is how we are. We could make mistakes here and 
there, but as whole there is a great effort, stimulated by the 
president. As a whole we do not believe we are the only ones 
with the truth and the only ones fighting for our convictions. 
We are not used to fringe benefits; we are used to working like 
all Brazilian people. This program was made to be positive and 
affirmative for the people who work; not for those who make 
profits from usury, speculation, and monopolies; not for those 
who are not concerned for their fellow men, who feel no 
solidarity, and who do not believe this country has what it 
takes to put an end to hunger and misery. 
  The stabilization program will serve to increase growth, 
develop the country, and give a just and honest means of 
livelihood to all Brazilians. Thank you very much. 

