CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ma Jiali (7456 0502 0500): "Post-Cold War Era </F>
India's Relations With China"] 
  [Text] Enormous changes have occurred in the international 
situation in recent years. A post-Cold War era, in which a 
multi-polar trend is an important mark, has begun. How to regard 
the effect of the post-Cold War era on India's foreign policy, 
what opportunities and challenges the post-Cold War era offers 
for India's China policy, and what the trend of development of 
India's relations with China will be are all questions meriting 
diligent study. 
<H8>  I </H8>
  With the end of the Cold War, very many changes have 
occurred 
in many factors affecting India's foreign policy, particularly 
its China policy. 
  (1) No Revival of the Special Relationship Between 
India and the USSR (Russia). For a long time, India used 
the strategic confrontation between the United States and the 
USSR, as well as the serious antagonisms between the USSR and 
China to build a special relationship with the USSR that 
encompassed the political, economic, military, and security 
areas. Following dissolution of the USSR, a great easing in 
relations between Russia and the United States, and maintenance 
of normal relations between Russia and China, bilateral 
political relations between India and Russia began to cool, 
economic and trade relations declined severely, and the buying 
and selling of arms virtually halted for a period. During a 
visit to India in January 1993, Boris Yeltsin said openly, "Past 
relations between the USSR and India had a marked coloration of 
joint opposition to the United States and China. Today, all that 
has passed." India, 70 percent of whose conventional weapons 
came from the former USSR, is now urgently waiting for Russia 
and other Commonwealth of Independent States countries to supply 
spare parts. However, how to pay the hard currency that Russia 
wants is an extraordinarily difficult problem for India, which 
is extremely short of foreign exchange. On the issue of Russia's 
selling low-temperature rocket launchers to India, for a time, 
Russia suspended contracts for selling and transferring 
technology to India in response to U.S. pressure. Later on, 
though it decided to sell the rocket launchers, Russia did not 
honor its contract for the transfer of technology, thereby 
arousing intense Indian dissatisfaction. This fully shows a 
decline in India's stature on Russia's diplomatic chessboard. 
India has no choice but to re-evaluate its strategy toward other 
countries, and readjust its outmoded foreign policy, including 
improvement of relations with China. 
  (2) India Both Improves Relations With the United 
States and Also Must Counter American Pressures. With the 
end of the Cold War, India decided to improve its relations with 
the United States because of its own strategic interest. India 
figured that vigorous strengthening of India-U.S. relations 
could effectively contain its adversary, Pakistan; reduce its 
own defense pressures; win American investment and assistance; 
and improve its own international standing. To this end, India 
took some strong actions and made some gestures for drawing 
close to the United States. In the economic field, for example, 
it steadily reduced policy restraints, widened the degree of 
economic liberalization, made efforts to open markets, and 
improved the investment climate. In the military field, it also 
began to build a cooperative relationship with the United 
States. However, because of different Indian and American 
strategic interests, conflicts and frictions continued between 
both sides on many important issues. With the end of the Cold 
War, the United States became the world's only super power. 
Impelled by its "strategy of expansion, and relying on its 
powerful position, it flagrantly meddled in the affairs of other 
countries, frequently applying embargoes in an effort to forces 
the countries concerned to act according to its will." Out of 
concern for its own strategic interests, the United States 
pressured India on the prevention of nuclear and missile 
proliferation issues, and on the human rights and intellectual 
property issues. Under these circumstances, India's improvement 
and strengthening of relations with China could improve its 
position for dealing with the United States, giving it more 
diplomatic leeway. 
  (3) Changes in the Non-Aligned Movement Position and 
India's Role. India has always made the nonaligned movement an 
important mainstay of its diplomatic activity, in negotiating 
between the United States and the USSR, and in maneuvering among 
political groupings to achieve the goal of using contradictions 
for its own benefit, and gaining advantages from both sides. 
From the time of its birth in 1961 until the present day, the 
nonaligned movement has developed into a quite influential 
international political force of more than 100 nations. India 
was one of the non-aligned movement's founding nations. Its 
distinctive position and its important role in the movement has 
received wide attention from international society. 
Consequently, India has benefitted greatly. However, the 
non-aligned movement was a product of the United States-USSR 
confrontation era. After the post-Cold War era, its premises 
changed enormously. Fairly early on, the non-aligned movement 
paid attention largely to economic development issues, but in 
recent years, Indonesia has consistently chaired it, so 
conditions for India to gain diplomatic advantage through the 
non-aligned movement have changed. In addition, during the 
post-Cold War era, the stature and role of the United Nations 
has risen. China is a permanent member of the Security Council, 
has very good relations with numerous non-aligned nations, is a 
non-aligned movement observer, and has very great power to 
influence numerous major international issues such as the new 
international political and economic order, and United Nations 
Security Council reform. Under these circumstances, improvement 
of relations with China, expansion of bilateral cooperation on 
international issues, and gaining China's support for India's 
becoming a permanent member of the Security Council to increase 
its international standing are the main considerations in 
China's further improvement and strengthening of relations with 
China. 
  (4) Increasing Competition in Overall National 
Strength. Following the end of the Cold War, India made 
vigorous development of its economy the main goal of its 
national strategy. It is already profoundly aware of the 
following as a result of the Cold War and its aftermath: a 
nation's existence and development, and its standing and role in 
the world are determined largely by its overall national 
strength. Moreover, the most important factor in overall 
national strength is economic strength. Only when a country has 
great economic strength in being can it occupy a fairly leading 
position in the contest for overall national strength, and only 
then can it have a stronger position and gain the right to speak 
out on international affairs. This being the case, India's task 
is how better to remain on top of changes in the situation, 
create a peaceful and stable surrounding environment, do all 
possible to promote economic growth, and raise the standard of 
living of its people. In order to do this, India has given 
improvement of India-China relations a fairly high priority on 
its diplomatic agenda. It desires to use improved India-China 
relations to ease the tense situation on the India-China border 
in order to cut back on military outlays for defense in its 
north. In addition, economically, it has further opened the door 
for trade and technical cooperation with China. Borrowing from 
China's experience and lessons in reform and opening to the 
outside world enables India smooth performance of the economic 
reform now underway in India. 
<H8>  II </H8>
  Favorable conditions and a reliable basis exist for the 
improvement and strengthening of relations between India and 
China. 
  (1) The Position of Both Parties Is Close on Quite a 
Few Regional and International Issues, and the Common Ground Is 
Increasing. Both India and China hope that the south Asia 
region will become increasingly peaceful, stable, and 
prosperous. They hope that the nations concerned will resolve 
problems existing in bilateral relationships through discussion 
and negotiations. They hope that south Asia regional cooperative 
alliances will develop further, and that substantive 
breakthroughs will be scored in promoting regional economic 
progress and raising the people's standard of living. 
  India and China speak a common language on many issues 
including the building of new international political and 
economic order following the Cold War, north-south relations, 
human rights, and environmental protection. Both India and China 
oppose hegemony, oppose power politics, and oppose domination of 
the world and issuance of orders to other countries by a single 
or a small number of nations. Both India and China believe that 
the five principles of peaceful co-existence are the standard 
for handling relations between one nation and another, and 
should be used as a foundation for building a new post-Cold War 
international order. On the human rights issue, both sides 
believe that the right to develop is an important aspect of 
human rights, and that human rights are a matter legally within 
the purview of a nation's sovereignty. Both sides oppose a small 
number of western nations use of human rights as a pretext for 
meddling in internal affairs, and they do not approve of certain 
western nations use of economic assistance as a means of 
exerting pressure on developing nations. Both parties have 
reached agreement in discussions on human rights issues in the 
forums concerned, and they have several times foiled the 
intentions of certain western countries to use human rights to 
meddle in the internal affairs of other countries. 
  (2) Steady Advances Have Been Made on Bilateral 
Relations Thanks to the Joint Efforts of the Governments of Both 
Nations. Politically, following the visits of Rajiv Ghandi 
to China and Premier Li Peng's visit to India, in September 1993 
Indian Premier Rao made a successful visit to China. This was an 
important chapter in the history of relations between the two 
nations that is bound to produce a profound and far reaching 
effect on exchanges and cooperation in the political, economic, 
cultural, and other fields. During Rao's visit to China, India 
and China formally signed Agreement on Maintenance of 
Peace and Tranquility in the India-China Border Actual Control 
Line Area, together with three other documents, namely: 
Cooperative Agreement Between the Indian Ministry of News 
Broadcasting and the Chinese Ministry of Radio, Cinema, and 
Television, Agreement Between the Governments of India and China 
on Environmental Cooperation,and Protocol Between the 
Governments of India and China on Widening Border Trade on Both 
Sides of Shibuqila [phonetic] Pass. 
  The Agreement on Maintenance of Peace and Tranquility 
in the India-China Border Actual Control Line Area provides 
that India-China border problems shall be discussed and resolved 
through peaceful and friendly means, neither side using weapons 
or threatening the use of weapons against each other. Until such 
time as both nations resolve border problems, both sides shall 
strictly respect and observe the actual line of control between 
both parties. Both sides shall maintain its military forces at 
the minimum level in the actual control line areas to improve 
chances for the steady development of neighborly and friendly 
relations between the two nations. This agreement is bound to 
improve further the political atmosphere for India-China 
relations and create favorable conditions for ultimate 
resolution of border problems. Actually, both nations are taking 
actions in the border area to build confidence. Although some 
issues require further discussion, a very good beginning has 
certainly been made. That the Indian and Chinese armies have 
begun to build a relationship with each other has attracted 
attention. This is greatly beneficial for improving bilateral 
understanding and increasing mutual confidence. Not long ago, 
diplomatic and military expert teams from both sides held 
discussion on both nation's reducing the size of military forces 
garrisoning the border, and demarcating a control line in 
contested areas in which certain progress was made. Both sides 
expressed a desire to adopt a constructive attitude about the 
handling of border problems. 
  Economically, India is a large nation with a 
population of nearly 900 million, which is in the process of 
pursuing a new economic policy in an effort to change quickly 
its impoverished and backward circumstances. Improvement of 
economic and trade relations with China is a universal desire of 
Indian industrialists and businessmen. Some advances have been 
made in economic relations between India and China in recent 
years, but far from the amount befitting the economic size and 
potential of the two nations. In 1993, bilateral trade between 
the two nations increased to $675 million. This is a heartening 
advance, but still far from enough. A very great potential 
remains. 
  In addition, border peoples on both sides of the India-China 
border yearn for further development of border trade. Although 
some progress has been made on bilateral border trade, it still 
does not meet needs. Foreseeably, with further improvement of 
relations between the two nations, China and India will open up 
more trade channels in a steady expansion of the amount of 
border trade. 
  In the realm of scientific and technical 
cooperation, India's peaceful uses of atomic energy 
technology, agricultural technology, genetic engineering, and 
computer technology -- particularly software development 
technology and marine development technology -- have attracted 
the interest of China. China's small blast furnace technology, 
small hydropower technology, and space technology have 
benefitted India. By making use of the strengths of each other 
to remedy weaknesses, and by cooperating with each other in 
these regards, both sides can speed up development of their own 
economy, reduce technological dependence on other nations, and 
help make relations between both nations more mature and solid. 
Currently, the two nations have begin technical cooperation in 
the fields of agriculture, biological engineering, and 
metallurgy. 
<H8>  III </H8>
  It cannot be denied that further development of India-China 
relations requires further efforts to overcome some obstacles 
and difficulties. 
  India still harbors some apprehensions about China. The 
first 
apprehension is that China's might and its rise as a political 
force may damage India's national security. Retired Indian 
General Sharma said that despite the steady increase in 
diplomatic and cultural exchanges between India and China, one 
certainly could not belittle the "latent threat" from China. 
India still feels that a nuclear-armed China poses a serious 
challenge to its security. Actually, China's national strategy 
rests on the five principles of peaceful co-existence that China 
and India jointly espouse, and on the development of friendly 
relations with all nations. India is a developing country, and 
it is also a neighbor. More than that, it is a nation with whom 
China emphasizes the development of friendly relations. Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping said long ago: "A Chinese threat to India does not 
exist, nor does an Indian threat to China exist. We hope the we 
will develop, and we hope that you will develop too." Both 
China's and India's increase in strength will make a greater 
contribution to Asia and world peace and stability. China is a 
nuclear nation, but when China exploded its first atom bomb, it 
clearly promised never to be first to use nuclear weapons, and 
never to use or threaten use of nuclear weapons against a 
non-nuclear nation and non-nuclear territory. China lives up to 
its promises to the letter, and it has always striven to for a 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons in order to prevent 
nuclear proliferation. 
  Another Indian apprehension about China is the fear that 
development of relations between China an Pakistan may impair 
India-China relations. The truth is that because of the long, 
effective cooperation between China and Pakistan on political, 
economic, and international issues, friendly relations have 
steadily developed between the two nations. China has great 
regard for Pakistan as a friend deserving of trust, while, at 
the same time, China also highly regards its relationship with 
India. China hopes that Sino-Indian, Sino-Pakistani, and 
Indian-Pakistani relations will develop simultaneously in a 
benign cycle. China earnestly hopes that India and Pakistan will 
negotiate and parlay to reach a satisfactory solution to the 
problems existing in their bilateral relations, will change the 
low-intensity warfare that exists in the Kashmir region, and 
will gradually ease tensions. Not only is this in the interests 
of both India and Pakistan, but also in the interest of peace 
and stability in Asia. 
  At the same time, some problems may impair India-China 
relations. Examples include China's concern about the activities 
to split up the motherland that some Tibetans conduct in India. 
China endorses the enduring and consistent position that the 
Indian government has announced, namely that Tibet is an 
autonomous region of China, and that it will not permit the 
Dalai Lama clique to conduct activities in India in opposition 
to the Chinese rule. In reality, however, there are some 
people in Indian society who support actions by the Dalai Lama 
clique to split the motherland. They seek to make Tibet a buffer 
zone between India and China. This can only serve to arouse 
vigilance on the part of China. 
  To summarize the foregoing, despite the existence of some 
problems between India and China, both sides must further 
increase understanding and confidence, and satisfactorily handle 
and solve them. However, a further expansion of economic, trade, 
scientific and technical, and cultural relations, a great easing 
of the confrontation in the military area, further abatement in 
the border situation, and increased international cooperation 
between India and China may be foreseen. Greater cooperation 
between India and China is consistent with the post-Cold War 
historical tide, and it is consistent with the common interests 
of the people of both nations. Both India and China are large 
countries whose total population is close to 2.2 billion. They 
deserve to play a greater role on the world stage. Prospects are 
extremely broad for an increase in mutual cooperation between 
the two countries in building their own country and establishing 
a new international order. 

