BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release issued by the UK Department of the </F>
Environment: "Review of Radioactive Waste Management Policy 
Announced"] 
  [Text] Environment Secretary John Gummer today announced a 
review of radioactive waste management policy to be undertaken 
at the same time as the nuclear review. 
  In answer to a written parliamentary question from Mrs. 
Angela Knight MP (Erewash), Mr. Gummer said: 
  "In parallel with the "Nuclear Review," details of which 
were 
announced today by my honourable friend, the minister for 
energy, my department will be heading a separate but 
complementary review of radioactive waste management policy. 
  "The Radioactive Waste Management Review will examine 
current 
policy in the light of changes which have taken place since the 
department published its "National Strategy" in 1984. It will 
range wider than the nuclear industry, covering radioactive 
waste management as a whole. 
  "It will not address the suitability of specific sites, this 
being a matter for the planning and regulatory process, or the 
merits of the operation of existing nuclear power stations or 
those in the pipeline. 
  "The department proposes to publish its preliminary 
conclusions later in the summer, as a basis for consultation. 
  "Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution will also be 
issuing 
for consultation a revision of the Department's 1984 publication 
"Disposal Facilities on Land for Low and Intermediate Level 
Radioactive Wastes: Principles for the Protection of the Human 
Environment." 
  "In parallel with this latter exercise, the Radioactive 
Waste 
Management Advisory Committee [RWMAC], together with the 
Advisory Committee on Safety at Nuclear Installations [ACSNI], 
will be asked to consider the approach to site selection for 
disposal facilities and the criteria for ensuring the protection 
of human health. Further details will be announced later." 
<H5>  Notes to Editors </H5>
  "Radioactive Waste Management: the National Strategy" was 
published by the Department of the Environment in July 1984. It 
set out the government's long-term strategy for the management 
of radioactive wastes, taking account of the latest developments 
at that time. 
  "Disposal Facilities on Land for Low and Intermediate Level 
Radioactive Wastes: Principles for the Protection of the Human 
Environment" was published jointly, in December 1984, by the 
Department of the Environment, Scottish Office, Welsh Office, 
Department of the Environment for Norther Ireland and the 
Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food. It set out the 
principles which the departments proposed to apply in 
considering whether they should give a general authorisation for 
any proposed disposal facility for low and intermediate-level 
radioactive wastes. 
  The RWMAC is an independent body of expects, drawn from a 
wide range of backgrounds, including the nuclear, academic, 
medical and research disciplines. It was established in 1978, in 
response to a recommendation in the Commission on Environmental 
Pollution's sixth report, "Nuclear Power and the Environment," 
and is a source of independent advice to the secretaries of 
state for the environment, Scotland and Wales on matters of 
civil radioactive waste management. 
  The ACSNI was set up in 1977 to advise the HSC [Health and 
Safety Commission] and, where appropriate, secretaries of state 
on major issues affecting the safety of nuclear installations. 
  It is made up of an independent chairman and 12 members 
appointed by the HSC, plus a number of members nominated by the 
Confederation of British Industries and the Trade Union Council. 
ACSNI is assisted by assessors from the nuclear industry, the 
NII [Nuclear Installations Inspectorate] and observers from 
government departments as appropriate. 
  Press Enquiries: 071-276-0929; (Out of Hours: 071-873-1966); 
Public Enquiries: 0710276-0900 

