BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, president of the </F>
Republic of Kalmykia, by Sergey Kostornoy; date and place not 
given: "Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, President of the Republic of 
Kalmykia: `Russia Must Be One Country for All'"] 
  [Text] Until quite recently, few people had heard of this 
man. He is a graduate of the Moscow State Institute of 
International Relations and an entrepreneur. Now Kirsan 
Ilyumzhinov is one of the most respected politicians in Russia. 
He is spoken of as a man capable of getting really big things 
done. This is indeed so. This successful businessman began by 
suddenly declaring his desire to become president of Kalmykia. 
Then, after achieving power given to him by the overwhelming 
majority of the people, he disbanded the Kalmyk Soviet of 
People's Deputies on 30 April last year, the first time that 
such a thing had been done in Russia. But on 4 October last 
year, when Soviet power was coming under fire before the eyes of 
the whole stunned world, he stood up between the sides, well 
aware that at that moment the sights of the snipers' rifles were 
trained on him. 
  Now he has accomplished a new feat. For the sake of the 
unification of Russia Ilyumzhinov proposed on 11 March at an 
enlarged session of the Republic of Kalmykia parliament that the 
Republic's own sovereignty and Constitution be abolished. 
  [Kostornoy] Kirsan Nikolayevich! On 5 April the 
Constitutional Assembly of the Republic of Kalmykia -- Khalmg 
Tangch -- repealed its own Constitution and adopted the Steppe 
Code [Stepnoye Ulozheniye] (the Fundamental Law). In the 
opposition's opinion, this is essentially a "surrender" of 
sovereignty. Is that so? And anyway, why was it necessary to 
take this step? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] As you know, on 12 December last year the new 
Constitution of Russia was adopted. In the situation that has 
since developed, the national Republics cannot fully exercise 
their sovereignty. To preserve and ensure the development of 
Kalmykia it is necessary to combine the economic and other 
interests of our Republic with the regions of Russia. But that 
needed a corresponding legal basis, including a constitutional 
basis. However, the old Constitution, adopted on 30 May 1978, 
was clearly formal in character and could not promote 
integration ties. 
  That is one aspect. Meanwhile, there are now two options for 
the development of the autonomous republics. The Chechen option 
presupposes complete independence from Russia, the Tatar option 
presupposes a transition from it to contractual relations. 
Which path is the right one? I believe that in Russia there 
must be one constitution for all and one president for all. In 
1640 the Great Steppe Code was adopted. We used that as a model 
for our own national "rules of life," which we adopted recently. 
They are quite sufficient to enable the Kalmyk people to feel 
that they are free and equal to all the other peoples living on 
Russian territory. We also abolished dual citizenship. We are 
all citizens of Russia. The third decision that we made was that 
the president of Kalmykia belongs to the one vertical power 
structure of the Russian Federation. 
  [Kostornoy] What has been the reaction to your initiatives, 
to put it mildly? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] Well! It was like a bombshell. Initially 
people in Kalmykia, the regions, and the center could not 
understand what was happening. There was even a bewildered 
speech by the Russian President's press secretary. I believe 
that this confirms that I had no prior accord with B.N. Yeltsin 
and the leadership of other republics. Even my aides did not 
know what I was preparing to say. 
  [Kostornoy] Your opponents claim that now, with the 
adoption of the Steppe Code, the president has been given sole 
power in the Republic. Is that true? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] Of course not. Let us consider Article 26 of 
the Steppe Code, for example, where it is clearly written that 
the People's Hural (the parliament) can express no-confidence in 
the president and put the question of his removal to a 
nationwide vote. Now for my opponents. I have had opponents 
and probably will in the future. On the one hand there are 
those who have been stripped of leading posts, on the other 
there are those whom I prevented from obtaining such posts. I 
anticipated in advance the whole scenario of the events that 
have unfolded. The nationalists "surfaced" and began shouting 
from the rooftops that Ilyumzhinov is "surrendering" Kalmykia 
for Russia's benefit. But what about the ordinary people far 
removed from politics? They supported me. Do you know why? 
Because during my year as president they have known the real 
fruits of the implementation of the economic reforms. 
  [Kostornoy] The president is first and foremost a 
politician. Do you have your own preference for any particular 
party or movement? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] No. During the election campaign last year I 
had to answer this question. I said then and I say it again 
now: "I am a capitalist and I see my main task as making 
Kalmykia a rich and prosperous republic." I think that this 
will soon become a reality. It is a very good thing that I am 
free to make decisions independently without regard for any 
political forces. I value people for their professional 
qualities and devotion to the Republic's interests, not for 
their party beliefs. Thus my policy is a commonsense policy. 
  I am convinced that since the whole engine of the economy of 
such a vast power as Russia has been geared toward the market 
and the whole social tenor of life is being redirected 
accordingly, we can travel this road only if we are firmly 
united. It will not work if we are divided. The market cannot 
exist with customs barriers and other obstacles. It needs a 
single economic area, which in turn is impossible without accord. 
  [Kostornoy] How do you think your feat, accomplished for the 
sake of unifying Russia, will be perceived in the Kremlin? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] With understanding, I hope. After all, look 
at what is going on in our internal political life now. The 
regions are berating the center for its weakness and inability 
to cope with the economic crisis and constantly ask for money 
while threatening secession. Meanwhile, the center criticizes 
them for tearing the nation's wealth to shreds and consuming it. 
A nervous and prolonged period of wait-and-see has ensued; 
cyclists call this situation a "sur-place," I think. You will 
agree that things could not go on like this for long. The 
development of the economy needs strict centralization, but just 
try and give orders to any of the autonomous formations today. 
Immediately the nationalists begin screaming: "The hand of the 
Kremlin is stifling freedom!" The only solution -- the process 
of unification must start from the bottom. We have launched the 
new amalgamation of the Russian lands for the sake of Russia's 
might and prosperity. Who will support us? 
  [Kostornoy] Well, in my view a significant example has been 
set.... 
  [Ilyumzhinov] Yes, we took this step, but this does not mean 
all the republics can or must follow us immediately. This needs 
the corresponding sociopolitical situation, a united team, and a 
leader who is confident that people will follow him and who is 
ready for action. I do not want to boast, but I am confident 
that my fellow countrymen trust me. That was shown by the 
presidential elections, for example, when 70 percent of the 
people voted for me, and by my election to the Federation 
Council, when 80 percent were on my side. I am confident of 
support now, too. 
  [Kostornoy] That is indeed so. I have met with various 
people and I asked about their lives and feelings. To my 
pleasant surprise I discovered a phenomenon that is quite rare 
nowadays: They are infected with a positive energy and a desire 
to work. I could feel people's respect for and trust in you. 
Is that not because they know that Ilyumzhinov is occupying the 
president's chair not for his own benefit or to satisfy his own 
pride? Of course, you have enough money and glory already. So 
why do you, one of the richest men in Russia and a prince, want 
such an arduous and thankless job? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] You must understand that in every man's life 
there comes a time when he wants not just to go about his own 
business but wants to help other people achieve happiness or, at 
least, prosperity. Some go in for philanthropy.... but I felt 
within myself the strength to be useful to my Kalmykia. 
  [Kostornoy] A businessman, as a rule, is someone far 
removed from politics, where intrigue is sometimes one of the 
instruments for achieving one's goal and where you have to 
sacrifice short-term interests for the sake of far-reaching 
aspirations. How do you feel in your new capacity? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] If I placed politics above all else nothing 
would happen and the reforms would not work. It is well known 
that politics is the concentrated expression of economics, but 
we have no economy here yet. What kind of economy was it if all 
it amounted to was that the leaders of Kalmykia would go to 
Moscow, extract some money there, come back, and hand it out. 
Now we are working hard to create a system of economic 
relations in which bad work would be unprofitable not only for 
the republic but for each individual who works badly. The 
Republic must become like one enormous firm where everything is 
on view and where everyone is appreciated for his or her 
intelligence and ability to earn money. Just today I met with 
some farmers and sovkhoz directors and set them all a specific 
task -- to make money. My problem is to create the conditions 
for them to do that. All the other leaders of the Republics 
should do that, too. It is a very specific task and superficial 
bureaucratic innovations are no substitute for it. 
  [Kostornoy] Does that mean that the bureaucracy in Kalmykia 
is still strong? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] Not any more. Out of 40 ministries and 
departments only four have "survived." By reducing the number 
of officials we are easing the pressure on the budget and 
reducing the possibility of any plots or disturbances occurring. 
No one is likely to take offense if he is given a chance to 
really earn quite a lot of money not just for his republic, but 
for himself, too. Those people who do not want to do that or do 
not know how to get things done but can only offer everyone 
advice -- they are simply blabbermouths and should not be 
annoyed with anyone if they are sacked. There are no more "jobs 
for the boys" in Kalmykia. 
  [Kostornoy] And now for a predictable question from a 
journalist on a newspaper with an agrarian brief. Agriculture 
is the basis of the Republic's economy. What is happening to it 
now? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] I think you know the way it was before. The 
Republic produced food and exported it to sustain the center and 
the major industrially developed regions. That is to say, it 
served in point of fact as a raw materials appendage to them. 
We are now setting up our own enterprises to process 
agricultural produce. In two to three weeks we will be starting 
up a tannery -- the largest in the North Caucasus. We are 
constructing a wool-processing enterprise. We are opening 
sausage shops, bakeries, an oil-extraction plant.... We are 
seeking thereby to develop small- and medium-sized businesses in 
order to get the largest possible number of people engaged in 
profit-making work. 
  [Kostornoy] Do you have to use your personal capital for the 
common good? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] I left business behind 18 months ago now, but 
regarding the use of private capital, yes, initially it was 
necessary. The Republic, after all, did not at that time have 
its own budget money. For example, I handed over all my 
personal vehicles, computers, and other equipment to the 
Republic. I built an Orthodox church in the village of 
Priyutnyy out of my own resources. When Russian Patriarch 
Aleksiy II learned of this, he said: "It is a good sign if the 
Buddhist Ilyumzhinov has built an Orthodox church." I have now 
donated 100 million for the construction of a Buddhist temple. 
I have reached agreement with the pope on building a Uniate 
church in Kalmykia. 
  [Kostornoy] Why does the Buddhist Ilyumzhinov actually spend 
pretty large sums out of his own savings on constructing the 
churches of other religious faiths? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] The point is I am convinced that there is just 
one God for everyone. And I now want to build a common 
monastery where Buddhist monks, Catholic priests, and Orthodox 
monks can live together. You can see, I have also assembled in 
my office a collections of the most diverse icons and images: 
There is the prophet 'Ali, the Virgin Mary, the crucifixion of 
Christ, and the Buddha, and there is an icon that I was sent 
recently by the Bulgarian clairvoyant, Vanga. 
  [Kostornoy] Incidentally, there is quite a lot of talk about 
the fact that this unique woman is possessed of special love for 
and trust in you alone out of the many thousands who have 
visited her. Is that so? 
  [Ilyumzhinov] It is difficult for me to say to what extent 
all that you say is true, but it is true that Vanga allowed me 
to be photographed and have a video shot with her, although no 
one else has been allowed that. I visit grandmother Vanga 
virtually every month, she often phones me and takes an interest 
in my life. We enjoy a disinterested, human friendship. She is 
a remarkable woman. I find it no wonder that the French Academy 
of Sciences should issue her with the certificate "Phenomenon of 
Mankind No. 1." We have bestowed the title of honorary citizen 
of Kalmykia on her for the great services she has rendered the 
republic. 
  In one of my recent conversations with Vanga she told me 
that 
in the near future she sees Russia as a mighty state and the 
whole of Kalmykia as a flourishing garden. 
  [Kostornoy] May God allow that prophecy to come to pass. 

