Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report by Gennadiy Zyuganov at the CPRF Central Executive </F>
Committee Plenum, 15 March 1994," under the general heading: 
"What Is To Be Done Next?"] 
  [Text] We must devote today's plenum to a serious 
discussion of our party's situation, its internal state, and its 
place in the present-day political arena in the ranks of the 
united opposition. We are to discuss the theses for the 
formulation of the CPRF [Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation] Program "From Crisis to Stable Development," the 
resolution "On State Patriotism," and the CPRF's attitude to 
religion. 
<H5>  A Hundred Days After the Elections </H5>
  Recently, and especially in the past six months, the 
opposition, and the Communists as its largest and best-organized 
detachment, have undergone severe trials. The CPRF has emerged 
from these trials, on the whole, in a well-organized manner, 
having retained the capacity to conduct broad, Russia-wide 
political actions such as the 12 December elections, and 
enriched by experience of parliamentary work that is new to it. 
But are there grounds for complacency? No, there are not. 
  The truth must be faced: The opposition is operating under 
extremely difficult conditions. Virtually all its energy is 
going on mere survival. We did not allow ourselves to be routed 
in the coup d'etat, but we were unable to rebuff the coup, and 
are now having to "play" by rules imposed from outside. The 
opposition has failed either to prevent or substantially to 
delay the development of the socioeconomic situation according 
to the most negative scenario. 
  Time is passing, and the systemic crisis is deepening. 
Damaging distortions in the economy, social relations, 
politics, and the moral and spiritual sphere have reached a 
stage where they could become irreversible. The country is in 
effect consuming and using up the last material and human 
reserves which it could have used to overcome its catastrophic 
condition. 
  Urgent countermeasures are needed. After the December 
elections many organizations, especially at primary and rayon 
level, came up against the question: "What is to be done 
next?", and they do not always find an answer. The consequence 
is that organizations become inward-looking, the old squabbles 
and splits are renewed, and numbers are falling. 
  The party's central organs bear their share of 
responsibility 
for this. In the past months we have devoted the greater part 
of our efforts to setting our parliamentary activity in motion. 
  In principle the Central Executive Committee Presidium is 
aware that mastering the methods of parliamentary struggle is an 
important landmark in the formation of a fully functional 
political party, but that this is not the full extent of party 
tasks. The faction should put all its potential at the service 
of the party, rather than the party serving as an appendage to 
the faction. 
  The growing pains we are experiencing today indicate that 
the 
process of the CPRF's formation as a political party with a wide 
arsenal of forms and methods of organizing the working people to 
fight for their vital interests is only just beginning and is 
far from complete. A difficult path has to be traveled, and in 
the context of an acute shortage of time. 
  Our positions and influence on the masses are significantly 
weakened by the fact that the party does not yet have a detailed 
theoretical program for the long term. The Program Statement 
adopted by the Second Congress, the Central Executive Committee 
Presidium letter to Communists last summer, and a number of 
press statements by leadership members have been important 
stages in this work. 
<H5>  Let Us Define Together the Model of Socialism </H5>
  The theses for the formulation of the party program are 
offered for the attention of the plenum participants today. 
Their very title indicates that work on the main party document 
must continue. A number of problems remain open, and these 
cannot be "closed" simply by repeating the tried and tested 
tenets of Marxist-Leninist doctrine (as has been done in the 
programs of certain left-wing parties). These include, first 
and foremost, questions of the nature of the emerging technical 
and economic structure on the basis of which socialism is to 
gain its second wind; the fundamentally new situation developing 
in the "man-society-nature" system, etc. It is also necessary 
thoroughly to analyze the causes of the crisis in the model of 
socialism that developed in the USSR. In short, a new 
contribution to the theory of socialism is required. 
Incidentally, communists abroad are also waiting for us to do 
this. 
  Clearly, in such a case it is better to think everything 
through yet again than to arrive at overhasty decisions. The 
following procedure for further work on the program is therefore 
proposed. After today's exchange of opinions, further work on 
the theses will continue, with wide discussion of them being 
organized in the country's party organizations. They will be 
discussed again at the conference in April and adopted as a 
partywide document. The final version of the program will be 
drawn up on the basis of these theses and adopted at the third 
party congress in the fall of this year. 
  We must act considerably more promptly in formulating 
another 
document which we urgently need. I am referring to the action 
program defining the party's strategy and tactics in the 
conditions of deepening crisis over the next 18 months to two 
years. This program could be adopted as early as the April 
conference. 
  I wish to stress that it is not a question of a 
"conventional" anticrisis program of the kind that opposition 
parties and movements have already put forward plenty of. 
Suffice it to recall our own theses for a preelection platform, 
as well as the platform specifically drawn up for the December 
elections. Here we listed, in the conventional manner, the 
measures that we would adopt if we were in power. Necessary as 
programs of this kind are, their Achilles heel was that they 
remained only promises for the future or -- at best -- menacing 
demands on the authorities. We remember well what the 
authorities did when they heard our demands. 
  Therefore, without departing in any way from the substance 
of 
those demands, we should formulate our tasks not as a ruling 
force, but specifically as an opposition force, and construct a 
program of concrete action not simply on the basis of 
considerations of the need for this or that measure, but on the 
basis of the party's actual position and its present forces and 
potential, with a view first and foremost to extending that 
potential and strengthening the party's influence on social 
processes. 
  Allow me to set forth the basic ideas which, in our view, 
could form the basis of the program for the CPRF's next actions 
and its strategy and tactics for the period ahead. 
<H5>  Immediate Actions and the Most Important Demands </H5>
  Being in opposition to the political and socioeconomic 
course 
of the president and his government and assessing that course as 
antipopular and ruinous to the state, the CPRF believes that its 
priority task is to promote the quest for and creation of the 
political conditions for a peaceful solution to the crisis. The 
irresponsible actions of executive structures, headed by the 
president, have already in effect plunged the country into a 
slow-moving civil war which threatens at any moment to develop 
into a full-scale one. But that way lies the abyss. 
  Since, literally in the last few days, talk of accord and 
reconciliation has suddenly become universal, a kind of fashion, 
it is necessary to explain what we see as the essence of civil 
peace and the conditions for its restoration. 
  First, civil peace does not mean universal brotherhood or 
the 
elimination of all possible disagreements. It is a means of 
resolving them nonviolently. The struggle between different 
social trends is inevitable, but it must not lead to the ruin of 
the state, its economy, and its social and spiritual sphere. In 
order to prevent this, a broad social and political coalition 
must be formed on the basis of recognition of national and state 
interests and the values of popular accord, a movement capable, 
by virtue of its weight and influence, of neutralizing and 
isolating -- politically, economically, and morally -- the 
"civil war party," which represents criminal, comprador, 
corrupt, and lumpen elements. 
  With goodwill and elementary social responsibility, the 
political spectrum of such a coalition could prove very broad: 
from communists and socialists, through national patriots and 
centrists, to democrats -- without quotation marks. 
  Second, we must stress that the movement to restore civil 
peace is not confined to verbal nods in the right direction, but 
must be backed up by concrete steps. Here the amnesty declared 
by the Duma and the freeing of political prisoners is only the 
first step. Having voted in the Duma for the Memorandum on 
Accord, the Communist faction has also formulated further 
conditions necessary for national reconciliation: 
  1. A change of socioeconomic course and the formulation of a 
national-state doctrine, taking into account all the 1,000 years 
of experience of Russian statehood. We declare frankly that 
Russia will not overcome the crisis without socialist 
development. 
  2. The formation of a government of national confidence, 
based on a parliamentary majority and monitored by and 
accountable to the Duma. This presupposes the departure of 
detested figures such as Chubays, Kozyrev, and others. 
  3. An end to the humiliation of the Army and organs of state 
security and the militia, and the prevention of their use as a 
gendarmerie and an instrument of internal political struggle. 
Conversion. 
  4. The renunciation of ideological vengeance and of the 
abasement of science, culture, and traditional religions. Two 
laws. 
  5. The immediate restoration of debts to peasants, wages to 
the workers, medicines and support to old people, and free 
education to children and students. The agrarian sector of the 
economy must take priority. The citizens of the country must 
get the minimum consumer basket. 
  6. Emergency measures to combat corruption, organized crime, 
and banditry. Assured security for everyone. 
  7. A guarantee of the objective exposition of the positions 
of all political forces in the state mass media and the 
preservation of a nationwide information area. 
  8. The restoration of a renewed union state on a voluntary 
basis on the initiative of the Russian Federation -- a 
legislative initiative. 
  Thus, civil peace is not a single act of signing some kind 
of 
pompous declaration. It is a complex, comprehensive process, 
and at the present stage its interests should determine our 
attitude toward all sociopolitical realities: the president and 
his administration, the government, the various draft laws and 
social initiatives, political parties, strikes, and other mass 
protests. 
<H5>  Widening of the Social Base, Formation of a Coalition </H5>
  The strategic gask at the present stage is the widening of 
the social base of the opposition and the formation, on this 
basis, of a coalition of people's patriotic forces which would 
assume government of the state through election victory. It is 
not ruled out that early elections will be necessary. In any 
case, the early presidential elections which the striking miners 
are demanding today could -- provided Yeltsin and the other 
organizers of the coup d'etat do not take part -- be the best 
way out of the situation of confrontation. The amnesty was, 
after all, adopted so as to ensure the most painless opportunity 
for the departure of all those politicians who have -- 
deliberately or otherwise -- dragged the country into chaos and 
fratricide. But there is no great hope that the "civil war 
party" will correctly assess the magnanimity of the State Duma. 
  The implementation of the above plan will largely be 
determined by the social and psychological characteristics of 
the present moment. 
  Today society is in a phase of low social activeness. The 
number and scale of mass movements of various kinds are 
declining and there is clear evidence of people having had 
enough of politics and retreating into private life. At the 
moment it is rather difficult to get people together to support 
even the most just of causes. Similar periods have always been 
favorable times for all kinds of backstage intrigues and deals 
at the highest level, for palace coups. 
  On the other hand there is mounting disillusionment with the 
course and faith is disappearing in the latest "bright future," 
a capitalist one this time. There is a gradual shift to the 
left under way in public mood but so far it is still a passive 
shift, expressed mainly in the form of voting for left-wing 
forces. 
  But the general deterioration in the masses' economic 
situation and the continuation of inflation combined with the 
decline in production and the transformation of concealed 
unemployment into open unemployment are making strikes and other 
active social protest actions inevitable. But here there is a 
great likelihood that these actions will remain mainly 
spontaneous, uncoordinated, and ineffectual. 
  That is why there will be an even greater increase in hopes 
of the arrival of a "strong individual," a kind of "social 
messiah," and a naive faith in simple and extremely rapid 
solutions for all problems. Favorable ground is being formed 
for new illusions, demagoguery, and populism. 
  In these extremely contradictory conditions the party's main 
line of conduct is calmly, without getting involved in 
adventures and without succumbing to likely acts of provocation, 
in collaboration with all patriotic forces to expand its 
influence on all social processes and in all strata of society 
and to prepare for the inevitable new social upsurge 
ideologically and organizationally in order to be able to direct 
it into not a spontaneous and destructive channel but a creative 
one. 
  Are we ready to resolve these tasks? We have a certain 
amount of work in hand. Today the CPRF is perhaps the only 
party with a "full profile" organizational structure and quite 
good prospects of creating a similar network of deputies' 
factions and groups. 
<H5>  Turning the Party to Face Society </H5>
  But the effectiveness of party structures so far remains 
low. 
As I have already said, the organizations are inward-looking and 
often have no ties even with each other or with higher ranking 
committees. Organizational work is now a weak spot in party 
organs of all levels, including central organs. And let us be 
frank: The age and social composition of our primary 
organizations so far fails to meet the requirements of the time. 
This is in no wise a rebuke, merely a statement of fact. We 
must realize that vast social and demographic strata -- 
primarily the working class and young people -- are outside the 
sphere of steady party influence, and that processes in the 
labor collectives, that is precisely where the most complex knot 
of present-day problems has been tied, are proceeding without 
our influence. 
  Closed party groups and closed party measures often become 
the place where like-minded people in their narrow circle 
unburden their hearts, cursing the existing regime, and are 
essentially a means of psychological defusing, not psychological 
mobilization. And several levels above that are street meetings, 
also a virtually unchanging cast of players, and also 
increasingly reduced to the role of a psychological 
safety-valve. The task is to turn the party to face society. 
To stop stewing in our own juice and to reach a new level of 
political activeness as close as possible to daily life, to the 
needs and concerns of people with no interest in politics and no 
faith in any parties. Only in this way can we expand the 
party's sphere of influence and the basis of its social support. 
  What can the primary territorial and professional party 
organizations do here? A number of tasks are perfectly obvious 
and lie on the surface. They must be resolved constantly. 
  The dissemination of the opposition press. And not among our 
"own" people but among the "others." It is enough for a 
territorial group to set up a permanent newspaper kiosk in a 
prominent place and to ensure the delivery of the press and in 
their concern for its content, updating, and restoration the 
group will instantly forget the meaning of the words "we don't 
know what to do with ourselves." 
  The defense of rights. And not "in general" but specific 
legal and moral aid for specific citizens in defending their 
rights as consumers, apartment tenants, pensioners, and so 
forth. In our organizations there are people who have the 
necessary education, experience of life, and free time for this 
and who still have the strength to take on this burden. 
  Elections. To ensure that this event does not take us 
unawares each time it is obviously necessary to create 
permanently operating election committees. Their functions 
should include the selection and preparation of potential 
candidates for elected posts in the administrations and 
representative organs of all levels; the compilation of detailed 
socioeconomic and political "portraits" of the relevant 
territories and the elaboration and constant updating of 
election programs on their basis; and the training of a staff of 
activists so that from the moment they start to collect 
signatures through to voting day each person knows "his move." 
  In brief, without fearing accusations of "opportunism and 
reformism" (which -- let there be no doubt of it! -- will ensue 
immediately) we must openly and honestly adopt the so-called 
"theory of small deeds." Let us remember Lenin: "If something 
kills us, it will be the revolutionary phrase." 
  Of course these deeds are by no means small. Our 
organizations may not have the strength even to fulfill the 
above-mentioned tasks. But in reality the party's current daily 
tasks are even broader. The party cannot exist and develop 
fully unless Communists take a personal part in the activity of 
all existing social organizations and structures and pursue 
their line through these organizations and structures. 
  Among these organizations the most important for us are the 
labor collective councils (where they still exist), the trade 
unions, and the strike committees. And in general the extension 
of the communist party's influence to the labor collectives is 
the number one tasks. Other parties are also setting themselves 
this task. 
  So far the CPRF has paid utterly inadequate attention to 
this 
question. We see our immediate task here in setting up 
relations with trade unions at all level while at the same time 
helping to establish independent trade unions of a left-wing, 
socialist orientation. 
  We would be making out that what we want is reality if we 
were to start to claim that in its present state the party can 
embark on the solution of urgent problems, relying mainly on the 
initiative, experience, and cadres of local organizations. No, 
here, as before, leadership and control from above are needed, 
serious methodological and material aid are needed. The Central 
Executive Committee and its commissions and expert consultative 
groups must immediately gather, generalize, and analyze 
available experience and on this basis prepare standard 
methodological recommendations for the main avenues of work. 
Special cadres training will also be needed. It is also clear 
that it is already impossible to organize and coordinate the 
party's activity even at rayon level on a voluntary basis. It 
is essential to form an institute of full-time party organizers, 
using for this the material potential of CPRF factions and 
groups in representative organs. 
  These factions themselves, primarily in the State Duma, must 
become a serious school for mastering the science of state 
administration and the attentive study of the situation and 
legislative activity. It is simply frivolous to speak of coming 
to power without this basic preparation. 
<H5>  Following Traditions, Looking into the Future </H5>
  Now about one more field of activity which is obviously in 
need of considerable consolidation. That is information, 
agitation, and propaganda. To this day the party does not have 
its own press organ. There are several reasons for this and 
primarily, of course, financial difficulties. Perhaps there is 
a need to announce a special collection of funds for a party 
newspaper (which, of course, does not do away with the 
Communists' statutory duty to pay their membership dues 
regularly). But it is not only a matter of finance. Even our 
supplement in SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA is published only rarely and 
does not fully perform the role either of a collective agitator 
or of a collective organizer. I am obliged to admit that no one 
in the Central Executive Committee and its apparatus is 
specially concerned with this matter or rendering assistance to 
the SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA editorial office. I think there is no 
need to explain the harm the entire party is suffering as a 
result. Right now a number of options are being worked out for 
rectifying the situation and the problem must be resolved 
without fail in time for the conference. 
  Our ideological and agitation and propaganda work must be 
subordinated to the task of forming in the public consciousness 
an image of the CPRF as the party of Soviet state patriotism and 
social justice. The CPRF preserves the historical continuity of 
the communist and workers movement and loyalty to its best 
traditions and at the same time looks into the future. Our 
slogan is not "back to socialism" but "forward to socialism." 
  Today, when an increasing number of people are becoming 
convinced of the monstrous historical error that was committed 
by the division of the Soviet Union, it is important to stress 
in particular the direct connection between the implementation 
of the socialist idea and the idea of restoring the union state 
and the Soviet form of the power of the people on a new basis. 
This year several jubilees are being celebrated recalling the 
great importance of the unity of the fraternal peoples. It is 
the 340th anniversary of the Pereyaslavskaya rada [meeting of 
Ukrainian people which decided to reunite with Russia] and the 
reunification of Ukraine with Russia; the 80th anniversary of 
the start of World War I; the 50th anniversary of the day of the 
complete liberation of USSR territory from the German fascist 
invaders. And, of course, the greatest jubilee of all -- the 
50th anniversary of victory -- is approaching. We will 
celebrate the birth centenary of G.K. Zhukov, the greatest 
military leader of all time and all peoples. We must celebrate 
all these dates fittingly, together with all Soviet people, 
together with the Communists of Ukraine, Belorussia [Belarus], 
and other republics. 
  Comrades! The depth and complexity of the range of 
problems I have outlined forces us to raise again and again the 
question of the unity of actions of the left-wing and patriotic 
forces and of the communist movement in particular. 
  It is known that in the majority of regions Communists 
belonging to different parties operate as virtually a single 
organization. In this connection numerous demands are being made 
on the central organs for the speediest unification. There is a 
widespread opinion that this is being prevented only by the 
leaders' personal ambitions. Of course there is that. But we 
cannot fail to see that we are also divided by substantial 
policy and tactical differences. 
  On the basis of experience since August we have reached the 
following conclusion. Under present conditions the real unity 
of the communist movement can be ensured not through the formal 
unification of leading organs and leaders of different parties 
and groupings, not through the eclectic mutual amendment of 
their theoretical platforms, but through an exclusively correct 
program of specific practical actions stemming from the 
objective conditions of the current moment. We believe that the 
CPRF's decision to go to the December elections and the package 
of election documents adopted at the time was such a program, 
which united Communists "from below" while many members of the 
left-wing parties were sometimes working actively counter to 
direct bans from their central organs. 
  Our task must continue to be not to suit all tastes but to 
formulate correctly the Communists' current and strategic tasks 
and to organize their solution. We must complete this work at 
the party conference in April and today we must discuss how best 
to prepare for the conference. 

