Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by staff reporter Chen Chien-ping (7115 </F>
1696 1627): "Why Did China Incur Trade Deficit Last Year?"; 
part 1 of 2] 
  [Text] Over several years in the past, China continued to 
maintain a surplus in its foreign trade, but it incurred a 
foreign trade deficit of $12.18 billion in 1993 as its imports 
increased faster than exports. This was the main characteristic 
of China's foreign trade in 1993. The State Council department 
concerned predicted, according to its comprehensive analysis of 
the macroeconomic environment at home and abroad, that China's 
foreign trade in 1994 would continue to incur a deficit, with 
exports increasing at a higher rate while imports will remain at 
the same level. 
  According to customs statistics, in 1993, the total volume 
of 
imports and exports was $195.72 billion, an increase of 8 
percent, which was lower than the 1992 growth rate of 18.3 
percent; the volume of imports was $103.95 billion, an increase 
of 29 percent, which exceeded the 1992 growth rate by 2.9 
percentage points. The relevant department of the State Council 
held that the situation in import and export trade was directly 
related to international and domestic economic circumstances. 
The slowdown of export increases was mainly attributed to four 
factors: First, the export of resource-intensive commodities 
decreased, the costs of exported manufactured goods became 
higher, and prices of some export commodities in the 
international market fell. For example, the prices of crude oil 
products, steel products, and cement declined by 13.1 percent to 
63.9 percent. In addition, the worldwide economic recession 
also brought the prices of such basic products as aquatic 
products, corn, sugar, silk, and plastic net exported by our 
country to lower and lower levels. Although export quantities 
of such products increased, less foreign exchange was earned. 
  Second, a large quantity of export commodities was sold in 
the domestic market. Some products could not be sold in the 
international market because of their poor quality, but they 
could be sold in the domestic market at rather high prices. So 
such products were not exported but sold domestically instead. 
This strained the supply of export commodities, and many foreign 
trade companies could not fulfill their annual business targets. 
  Third, enterprises engaged in export business were short of 
working funds. In the second half of 1992 and in the first half 
of 1993, as the economy was developing rapidly, banks shifted 
more funds to real estate and stocks, and this affected the 
supply of loans for increasing exports. State tax and foreign 
exchange refunds to encourage exports often could not be paid to 
export enterprises on time, and this dampened the enterprises' 
enthusiasm and aggravated the fund shortage for exports. 
  Fourth, exchange rates fluctuated violently in foreign 
exchange transfer centers, which damaged the foundation for 
export cost accounting and also enabled foreign importers to 
force down prices. This thus made it hard to increase exports. 
  The relevant department of the State Council held that in 
addition to the above-mentioned four factors, exporters in 
various localities also lowered prices in order to win in 
business competition or failed to deliver goods on time due to 
the strained transport conditions. The international 
protectionist trend and antidumping taxes were also factors 
slowing down increases in our country's exports. 
  As for the reasons for the rapid increase in imports, the 
department summarized them into three points: 
  First, rapid development of the national economy and 
adjustment of the economic structure sharply increased demand 
for industrial raw materials, machinery, equipment, 
transportation and communications facilities, and also drove up 
the prices of these goods by a big margin. Domestic funds were 
rapidly used to purchase such products, which resulted in an 
increasing amount of funds for imported goods. 
  Second, the number of enterprises with foreign investment 
substantially increased. The quantity of imported equipment and 
materials, as foreign investments, also increased sharply. By 
the end of 1993, there were nearly 140,000 foreign-funded 
enterprises in three categories, and such enterprises increased 
by more than 60,000 in one year. They imported products and 
materials worth $16.63 billion, an increase of 107.4 percent 
over the previous year. The net increase amounted to $8.61 
billion, which accounted for 70.7 percent of China's foreign 
trade deficit. 
  Third, lowered import tariffs also stimulated the increase 
in 
imports. In order to expand opening up and make the domestic 
market converge with the international market, the state lowered 
import tariffs several times, and also gave tax reductions and 
exemptions to a substantial quantity of imported goods. All 
this provided favorable conditions for increasing imports. 
  The relevant department of the State Council held that 
macro-control measures adopted in the second half of 1993 and 
major reform measures to be adopted this year are all conducive 
to settlement of deep-level problems in the foreign trade 
structure that were laid bare by the high-speed development of 
the national economy. Therefore, foreign trade conditions in 
1994 will develop in the orientation of being favorable to 
increasing exports. 

