Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report on interviews with He Guanghui, deputy director of </F>
the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy; Financial 
Minister Liu Zhongli; Zhou Zhengqing, deputy president of the 
People's Bank of China; Wu Yi, minister of Foreign Trade and 
Economic Cooperation; Chen Jinhua, deputy director of the State 
Planning Commission; and Wang Zhongyu, minister of the State 
Commission for Economy and Trade, by an unidentified LIAOWANG 
reporter "at the turn of the year"; place not given: "Plan for 
Building the Market Economic Structure" --first four paragraphs 
are LIAOWANG introduction] 
  [Text] The reform of China's economic structure, which 
started in 1978, has braved the wind and rain and unswervingly 
forged ahead for 15 years toward its market-oriented goal. Now 
we have entered the crucial period of changing from smashing the 
old system to the building of a new one. 
  When such a crucial reform will soon spread nationwide, the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, which 
is a great milestone, has outlined the framework, fighting 
objective, and overall blueprint of a new system for the people 
of the whole country and has laid down the program for action to 
advance. The recent national economic work conference has also 
made specific arrangements for this year's reform tasks. 
  What action should be taken in the year designed to lay the 
foundation for constructing the building of the socialist market 
economy? 
  At the turn of the year, a LIAOWANG reporter interviewed He 
Guanghui, deputy director of the State Commission for 
Restructuring the Economy, in charge of the country's economic 
work; Financial Minister Liu Zhongli; Zhou Zhengqing, deputy 
president of the People's Bank of China; Wu Yi, minister of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation; Chen Jinhua, deputy 
director of the State Planning Commission; and Wang Zhongyu, 
minister of the State Commission for Economy and Trade, and 
asked the leaders of the six ministries to tell our readers 
about the plan for constructing the building of the market 
economic structure in 1994. 
<H5>  How To Reconstruct the Structure for State Enterprises </H5>
  The establishment of a modern enterprise system is an 
essential link of economic structural reform as a whole. It 
also constitutes the main part of this year's reform of state 
enterprises. 
  The seven options for a system change. 
  How should a system change be effected in state enterprises? 
He Guanghui pointed out the following ways: 
  --Gradually introduce a reorganization of the company system 
first in the properly managed enterprises. A small number of 
large, efficient, profitable enterprises, which meet the 
industrial policies, can be directly reorganized into a state 
holding or shareholding company. Most of the competitive 
enterprises which conform to the industrial policies can be 
reorganized into limited liability companies funded by the state 
and other corporations. Enterprises of special trades can be 
reorganized into limited liability companies funded exclusively 
by the state. 
  --Enterprises with the proper conditions may establish 
shareholding limited companies or limited liability companies in 
cooperation with foreign firms. Foreign firms may make direct 
investment or become shareholders. The newly established joint 
enterprises should be operated in light of the new system. 
  --Further expand mergers and combinations between 
enterprises. In light of the varying conditions of enterprises, 
the means of offering capital, mergers, and partial takeovers 
may be adopted. If both parties are state enterprises, they may 
amalgamate without compensating each other, based on 
voluntariness and with the approval of the competent 
departments. Whatever form is applied, it is necessary to 
appropriately handle debts and settle down the staff members of 
the predecessor. 
  --State enterprises which have superior land resources, but 
which cannot be located in the urban areas, may become new 
enterprises with a new mechanism by undergoing removal 
transformation and shifting to the production of other products. 
  --Small state enterprises may undergo reform which 
integrates 
leasing and selling with contracted operations or practice the 
shareholding cooperation system. In selling, it is necessary to 
introduce the competition mechanism, and adopt the method of 
public bidding and auctions. Regarding those without proper 
conditions, they can only be sold on the basis of an agreement 
and the prices must be determined through a certain procedure. 
Those that can be sold once and for all can be leased first and 
sold later. In other words, the state can first collect the 
working capital, receive charges for the use of fixed assets, 
and then sell the fixed assets when the conditions are ripe. 
  --State enterprises which have been poorly managed for a 
long 
time, whose products are unsalable, whose assets cannot offset 
the debts, and which cannot be reorganized through other forms, 
should go bankrupt. 
  --The system of companies assuming sole responsibility must 
be practiced in all new construction projects. Regarding all 
production and operation projects, it is necessary to first set 
up a company and then start construction. Projects which are 
under construction should also set up, as quickly as possible, 
companies in which the relations of property rights and 
responsibilities are clear and where government administration 
is separated from enterprise management. 
  He Guanghui pointed out that the collective enterprises in 
urban areas, township enterprises, nongovernmental scientific 
and technological enterprises, and other types of enterprises 
are facing a major topic: They should make explorations through 
various forms to gradually reorganize themselves to a 
shareholding company or a joint-stock cooperation enterprise. 
We should also encourage private enterprises to reorganize 
themselves into standard companies and rationalize their 
behavior. 
<H5>  The Pressing Task at the Moment Is To Do Basic Work Well </H5>
  He Guanghui said that the pressing task at the moment is to 
do the following basic work: Increase the decisionmaking power 
of enterprises, accelerate the pace of state enterprises 
changing their operational mechanism and transforming their 
organizational structure, deepen the labor, personnel, and 
distribution reform within enterprises, earnestly implement the 
"Rules for Enterprise Financial Affairs" and "Regulations for 
Enterprise Accounting," and speed up the transition to a 
scientific enterprise financial and accounting system which 
conforms to international standards. It is necessary to 
reappraise the stocks and assets of enterprises, define property 
rights, screen creditors' rights and debts, evaluate assets, and 
verify the property of enterprises. 
  State enterprises are now bearing a heavy historical burden. 
In order to smoothly effect a change in the system of state 
enterprises, He Guanghui pointed out: First, it is necessary to 
reasonably alleviate the debt burden of enterprises. Regarding 
the debts caused by "the change from allocation to loans," the 
form of "changing loans to investment" can be adopted to turn 
part of it into state capital. We should also study effective 
methods for resolving other forms of debts. Second, it is 
necessary to resolve the problem of insufficient accumulation of 
social insurance for old workers. In the course of property 
rights reforms, which include auctions, mergers, and joint stock 
reform, a certain proportion should be withdrawn from state 
assets to contribute to the social insurance fund. Third, it is 
necessary to gradually separate the nonproductive undertakings 
from enterprises and resolve the problem of "social 
responsibility" of enterprises. Fourth, it is necessary to 
gradually resolve the overstaffed problem of old enterprises. 
Policies and measures should be worked out to encourage some 
staff and workers to seek employment in township enterprises, 
three kinds of foreign-funded enterprises, and private 
enterprises. Some others should be encouraged to become 
self-employed workers. 
<H5>  Prevent the Phenomenon of Losing Shape </H5>
  In the change of system effected among state enterprises, He 
Guanghui especially emphasized, it is necessary to prevent and 
take note of the practice of merely changing the factory plate, 
but not the mechanism. He said that the newly established 
shareholding limited companies and limited liability companies 
should set up and perfect their internal organizations, exercise 
scientific and efficient management, and make efforts to effect 
a change in operational mechanisms strictly in accordance with 
laws and regulations. While using foreign capital to transform 
old enterprises, it is necessary to note two points: First, 
changing plates but not the system, or becoming a joint venture 
in name but with no foreign investment at all; and second, while 
the workshops, departments, or units intend to develop joint 
ventures with foreign partners, it is necessary to handle well 
the relations between the part and the whole and prevent the 
practice of offering good workshops, departments, and projects 
to form joint ventures, while leaving the poorly managed ones to 
the state. 
  Compared with past reforms, Liu Zhongli said, the current 
financial reform is focused on changing the mechanism and 
creating basic conditions for establishing a socialist market 
economic system, while making no major readjustment of the 
existing distribution structure. 
<H5>  The Contents and Principles of Financial and Taxation Reform </H5>
  Introduce the reform of a separate tax system. First, the 
scope of expenses at all levels should be reasonably determined 
in light of the division of authority between the central and 
local governments. Second, central and local revenue should be 
divided in light of the tax categories and the proportion of 
central revenue should gradually increase in accordance with the 
principle which integrates the authority controlling enterprises 
and undertakings with financial power. Third, central financial 
bodies will implement the system of tax return and transfer 
payments to the localities. Fourth, two sets of taxation 
organs, the State Taxation Bureau and local taxation bureaus, 
will be set up to coordinate the implementation of the separate 
tax system. To guarantee the formation of the new mechanism, 
Liu Zhongli stressed, the provincial authorities, in light of 
the principles and requirements of the new central and 
provincial financial systems, should formulate specific measures 
for the cities and counties to implement the separate tax 
system. The basic framework of reform must not be distorted. 
  In accordance with the principle of "unifying the tax laws, 
levying taxes in a fair manner, simplifying the tax system, and 
rationally separating powers, it is necessary to introduce 
reform of the taxation system. First, an exchange tax system 
based on increment taxes, with consumption and business taxes as 
a supplement, should be established. Increment taxes should be 
levied in the links of commodity production, wholesale, retail 
sales, and imports. The method of levying increment taxes 
should be improved, and the system of tax deduction and tax 
indication in invoices should be implemented. Based on the 
general readjustment carried out by applying increment taxes, a 
further consumption tax will be levied on some special consumer 
goods, which are to undergo special readjustment. Business 
taxes will continue to be applicable to the trades of the 
tertiary industry, except commerce, which have not yet 
implemented the increment tax system. 
  Second, unify the income tax of domestic enterprises, 
change the past practice of levying taxes in light of the 
ownership of enterprises, and impose a unified income tax of 33 
percent. In light of the actual situation, a preferential tax 
rate may be imposed for a period of time on a small number of 
enterprises whose profits are relatively low. Meanwhile, the 
state enterprise regulatory tax will be revoked. Third, 
establish a unified personal income tax system. 
  We should reform the profit distribution system for state 
enterprises, lower the income tax of state enterprises to 33 
percent along with reform of the tax system, remove the energy 
and communications key construction fund and budgetary 
regulatory fund levied on enterprises, and gradually establish 
the distribution system of sharing dividends according to 
investment returns, sharing interests according to the amount of 
capital, or delivery of profits after paying taxes. In light of 
the relevant stipulations of the "Rules for Financial Affairs of 
Enterprises" and "Rules for Enterprise Accounting," the 
interests for the new and old fixed assets loans of enterprises 
will be included in the cost while the principle will be paid by 
enterprises with their retained capital. 
<H5>  The Great Significance of Doing Financial Reform Well </H5>
  In light of the unified arrangements of the central 
authorities, reform of the tax system, the separate tax system, 
and reform of the profit distribution system of state 
enterprises constitute a crucial part of China's economic 
structural reform following the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee. A central leading comrade recently 
pointed out that the current financial reform is an important 
measure related to the long-term stability of the state, future 
economic development, and economic structural reform as a whole. 
It will also be the central link of the next year's five major 
reforms. 
  Liu Zhongli said there are reasons for the central leader to 
talk about financial reform from such a high plane. As the 
financial reform involves the economic interests and behavior of 
various quarters, doing a good job in this regard will help 
handle the relations of interests between various fields, create 
spacious conditions for economic reform, and promote the overall 
situation of reform. From a long-term point of view, if the 
financial reform succeeds, it will create basic conditions for 
initially establishing a socialist market economic system by the 
turn of the century, straighten out the relations of 
distribution, stop the drain on revenue, and establish a 
standard financial operational mechanism. From a short-term 
point of view, because of the big action taken in the current 
reform, there will be great changes in the taxation structure, 
organizations for levying taxes, and the method of revenue 
collection. A job well done in organization and convergence 
will directly affect the financial situation of 1994 and have a 
bearing on the economic development and successes of major 
reforms in the future. 
<H5>  Ensuring Implementation to the Letter </H5>
  Liu Zhongli pointed out that the design of the financial 
reform scheme follows the basic requirements of financial 
management for a socialist market economic system, refers to the 
successful methods and experience of the countries which 
practice a market economy, and fully takes into account China's 
reality and the transition from the old to a new system. 
Besides having a standard model as an objective, it has also 
formulated the specific steps for implementation. As the reform 
scheme is determined, Liu stressed, it must be implemented to 
the letter. First, no petty tricks should be allowed in the 
base figure. Second, in the course of implementing the reform 
measures, the basic framework of the reforms must not be 
distorted and the formation of the financial operation mechanism 
must be ensured. Third, the overall situation must be taken 
into account on the question of tax return. Fourth, it is 
necessary to establish taxation organs as early as possible, 
perfect the treasury system, and ensure the smooth introduction 
of various reform measures and attainment of desired-for results. 
<H3>  Establish a Powerful System of the Central Bank Exercising 
Regulation and Control </H3>
  In the final analysis, a market economy is a monetary 
economy. At the stage of market competition, a commodity 
producer must rapidly organize production and meet the changing 
needs of the market in light of the signal of market changes. 
Without the support of flexible funds, he can only sigh 
helplessly. 
  In light of the objective of establishing a socialist market 
economic system, Zhou Zhengqing, vice president of the People's 
Bank of China, told this reporter that this year's financial 
reform should be spread from the following. 
<H5>  Genuinely Turn the People's Bank of China into a Central Bank </H5>
  The primary task of deepening financial reform is to change 
the functions of the People's Bank and turn it genuinely into a 
central bank. In the course of establishing a socialist market 
economic system, the People's Bank, as a genuine central bank, 
has the following functions: Lead and manage the country's 
banking, scientifically formulate and implement the monetary 
policies and preserve the basic stability of the currency, 
exercise strict supervision over banking organizations, and 
maintain the safety and effective operation of the banking 
system. 
  On the division of responsibilities between the general 
headquarters of the People's Bank and its branches at all levels 
after changing its functions, Zhou Zhengqing said that the basic 
guidelines are: The headquarters will exercise the powers of 
currency issue, the volume of basic currency handled, and 
regulation of the credit scope and interest rates. The 
functions of the branches under the provincial level include 
banking supervision and management, investigation and 
statistical analyses, regulation of money supply, management of 
the treasury, cash allocation, foreign exchange management, and 
interbanking settlement. 
  In the process of changing the functions of the People's 
Bank, Zhou Zhengqing said, the following points must be 
emphasized: First, the monetary policies should be unified 
nationwide and the powers to formulate monetary policies lie in 
the headquarters. Second, it is necessary to strengthen 
supervision over the banking organizations. All countries pay 
great attention to banking supervision, which is an important 
and specific work. The supervision over banking in China is 
mainly undertaken by the People's Bank. Third, the branches at 
all levels should make good investigations and statistical 
analyses and lay a scientific basis for formulating and 
implementing monetary policies. Fourth, all the branches should 
effect a change from the stress laid on sharing the capital and 
scale in the past to exercising supervision over banking and 
conducting investigation and study. 
  Under a market economic system, Zhou Zhengqing pointed out, 
we should understand this: The contribution made by the 
branches of the central bank to the local economy lies in 
enforcing supervision according law, maintaining the banking 
order and environment of a locality, ensuring that the financial 
organizations of the locality operate steadily and effectively 
with less risks, and that they are competitive so that the 
savings depositors and investors will rest assured. In this 
way, they can attract more capital to the locality. 
<H5>  Reform of the Credit and Capital Management System </H5>
  To deepen reform of the banking system, the People's Bank 
should gradually apply the savings guarantee funds, the central 
bank's loan interest rate, and other open market operation means 
to regulate currency supply and the total amount of social 
credit in order to maintain stability of the currency. At the 
same time, it is necessary to strengthen control, regulation, 
and management of the commercial banks and to establish a 
mechanism to guard against and confine the risks in capital 
lending. 
  In light of this requirement, Zhou Zhengqing said, reform of 
the credit management system will proceed from the following 
this year: First, on the premise of keeping the total amount 
under control, explore the operational objective of applying the 
medium of currency supply, total credit, interbank lending 
interest rates, and bank guarantee fund rates. Second, 
gradually change the traditional means of the central bank 
handling the basic currency through the commercial banks, 
promote discounts and other businesses including treasury bonds 
and foreign exchange, and increase the proportion of basic 
currency handled through the channels of open market operation 
and discount. Third, exercise separate management for the 
commercial banks and policy-related capital and businesses, cut 
off the direct links between the central bank's basic currency 
supply and policy-related loans, exercise assets and liabilities 
ratio and risk management for the renminbi and foreign exchange 
credit of the commercial banks, exercise assets and liabilities 
ratio management with limited loans over those which cannot 
temporarily maintain a balance of assets and liabilities, 
strengthen the self-binding mechanism of banking organizations, 
and gradually perfect the microscopic basis of indirect 
regulation and control. 
  Regarding reform of the credit management system, Zhou 
Zhengqing insisted that the primary task is to strengthen 
control over the total amount. At the same time, it is 
necessary to encourage commercial banks to strengthen management 
over credit funds, improve the quality of credit funds, reduce 
and avoid the occurrence of risk assets, confine the 
expansionist behavior of banks through establishing a restraint 
mechanism, and offer a fine banking environment for the 
sustained, rapid, and healthy [chi xu kuai su jian kang 2170 
4958 1816 6643 0256 1660] growth of the national economy. 
<H5>  Establish and Apply Open Market Operation </H5>
  It was the U.S. Federal Reserve which first used the central 
bank to regulate and control the basic currency and regulate the 
supply of currency in the open market through the trading of 
government securities or other bills in the early 1950's. 
China's open market business started in 1993. It was the 
specific contents of the reform of the monetary policies of the 
central bank and an exploratory work which required a process of 
gradual development and perfection. The open market businesses 
offered by the central bank are aimed at regulating and 
controlling the supply of currency and total amount of social 
credit. The purchase of government treasury bonds should be 
based on the independent policy decisions of the Central Bank 
rather than offering capital accommodation channels for the 
government or seeking profits. In the years ahead, the central 
bank will make its own decision on specific operation and 
regulation and control over the basic currency through open 
market business, discount, credit loans, and foreign exchange 
trading. 
  Zhou Zhengqing pointed out that the policy decisions on 
applying open market business to handle the basic currency 
should be made by the central bank, which will determine the 
amount, means, and prices of the trading, bring it into line 
with a balance of credit, and make overall planning. At 
present, we are not yet sure what impact will the open market 
operation produce on credit, interest rates, and the financial 
market. Therefore, it is necessary to boldly conduct 
experiments, promptly sum up experience, and advance amid 
explorations. 
<H5>  Genuinely Turn the State Special Bank Into a Commercial Bank </H5>
  Genuinely turning the state special bank into a commercial 
bank constitutes an essential part of the financial reform and 
the crux of the deepening of financial reform. Zhou Zhengqing 
explained the steps of the reform: A policy bank should be set 
up first, which will separate the policy-related businesses from 
the special bank. Then the special banks will be reformed in 
light of the general principles of the commercial banks so that 
they can gradually become genuine commercial banks. 
  --Set up a policy bank, resolve the problem of China's 
special bank assuming dual responsibilities, and let the policy 
bank and commercial bank attend to their own duties. The work 
of forming the State Development Bank and the Import and Export 
Bank is now under way. Preparations for establishing the 
Chinese Agricultural Development Bank have also started. 
Following the establishment of the policy bank, its businesses 
will be guided and supervised by the People's Bank. The policy 
bank cannot be regarded as the second finance and it cannot 
unrestrictedly expand the scope and amount of policy-related 
loans. 
  --The fundamental characteristics of the state commercial 
bank are independent operation, assuming sole responsibility for 
profit and loss, undertaking risks, and self-restraint. It must 
implement the principles and policies of the party and state. 
The commercial bank cannot do whatever it likes because of the 
transformation and it should not regard speculation in shares 
and real estate as its indispensable business. As a matter of 
fact, all countries have restrictions on the scope of business 
of their commercial banks. Viewed from the reality of China's 
banking development, it is necessary to exercise separate 
operation and management over banking, securities, trust and 
investment, and insurance. The commercial bank should not be 
allowed to invest in industries or engage in stock and real 
estate speculation. 
  --Introduce a competitive mechanism. All the banks, 
Chinese-funded and foreign-funded ones, and the financial 
organizations should abide by financial laws and regulations, 
carry out competition within the scope of their businesses, and 
continuously improve their services, efficiency, and asset 
quality. 
  --When policy-related businesses are separated, it does not 
mean that the special bank has automatically become a commercial 
bank. There is a process for the transformation of a special 
bank to a state commercial bank, which depends on external 
environment, particularly the gradual establishment of a modern 
enterprise system, as well as perfection of the internal 
operation mechanism such as operation principles and internal 
management system and method. All this should be standardized 
and improved in light of the general principles of the 
commercial bank and the banking laws and regulations. 
  --China's current commercial banks, such the Communications 
Bank, China Trust Industrial Bank, Chinese Merchants Bank, and 
Shenzhen Development Bank were all established by following the 
model of a commercial bank. These banks have obtained some 
experience in recent years. 
  --In light of China's reality, we should vigorously and 
steadily develop a cooperative bank system, which includes urban 
cooperative banks and rural cooperative banks, which will mainly 
serve the medium and small-sized enterprises, the vast rural 
areas, and regional economic development. We will try out the 
establishment of the urban cooperative banks and rural 
cooperative banks based on the urban and rural credit 
cooperatives. 
  The upholding of the principle of legislation first and 
construction second is the reliable guarantee for the smooth 
success of the financial reform as well as an essential 
characteristic of the reform. Zhou Zhengqing said that the 
drafting of the "Law of the People's Bank of China," "PRC Bank 
Law," "Insurance Law," "Bills Law," and the rules, regulations, 
and methods corresponding with the reform is now under progress. 
We should ensure the healthy growth of the financial reform 
through perfecting legislation. 
<H3>  Establish an Operational Mechanism Suited to the General 
Rules of the International Economy </H3>
  As economic contacts between all countries are further 
strengthened, China's foreign trade and economic work is facing 
opportunities as well as challenges. How should we gain the 
initiative? Wu Yi, minister of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Cooperation, said that the key lies in seizing the opportunity, 
duly readjusting the policies, and further deepening reform. 
The focus should be: 
<H3>  Further Improve the Macroeconomic Regulation and Control 
Mechanism for Imports and Exports </H3>
  The State Council has called on us to apply economic means 
to 
regulate foreign trade and exercise guiding planned management 
over total volume of exports, foreign exchange earned from 
exports, and foreign exchange used in imports. The Ministry of 
Foreign Economic Trade and Cooperation [MOFTEC] should consult 
relevant departments on further improving the export tax 
reimbursement system. Commencing this year, there will be a 
gradual transition to the central finance refunding duties while 
the localities and enterprises strictly following the 
regulations, improving the management system, and ensuring 
prompt and full refund of duties. At the same time, it is 
necessary to adopt effective measures to sternly attack the 
practices of swindling the state out of tax reimbursements. The 
credit policy of encouraging export should be earnestly 
implemented. Commencing this year, the state will abolish all 
financial subsidies for imports and comprehensively introduce an 
agency system. 
<H3>  Further Lift the Restrictions on Importing and Exporting 
Commodities in an Orderly Way </H3>
  Abolish mandatory planning and lift the restrictions on most 
commodities, except a small number of very important import and 
export commodities, which are of vital importance to the 
national economy and people's livelihood, and which are 
monopolized in the international market, or which occupy a 
leading status in the international market. All this should be 
operated under unified management. The methods of bidding, 
auction, or standardized distribution will be implemented for 
the import and export commodity quotas. The bidding system also 
applies to the government commodity loans. Enterprises taking 
part in the bidding should undergo strict qualification 
examination. At the same time, it is necessary to delegate the 
powers of foreign economic operation to productive enterprises, 
scientific and technological units, and some commercial and 
material supply enterprises which have conditions, and create 
favorable conditions for them to enter the international market 
and directly participate in international competition. 
<H3>  Reorganize State Foreign Trade Enterprises in Light of the 
Modern Enterprise System </H3>
  The key to changing the operational mechanism of foreign 
trade enterprises lies in changing the ideological concepts and 
effecting a change from the executor of the state plan to export 
commodity producers; from monopolized operation and relying on 
preference given by the state policies to vigorously plunging 
into the market and seeking development in the course of 
competition on equal footing; integrating trade with industry, 
agriculture, technology, and commerce; introducing an agent 
system; taking the road of industrialization and 
internationalization and forming groups; and encouraging foreign 
economic and trade enterprises with conditions to gradually 
advance in the direction of forming comprehensive consortia. 
Meanwhile, the large productive enterprise groups and 
foreign-funded enterprises should gradually become industry- 
agriculture-technology-trade transnational companies. It is 
necessary to establish and improve a strict system of personal 
responsibility, financial accounting and supervisory mechanism, 
and ideological and political work guarantee system and 
genuinely establish a self-restraint mechanism which carries out 
independent operation, assumes sole responsibility for profits 
and losses, and seeks further development. 
<H5>  Maintain Unification of Foreign Economic and Trade Policies </H5>
  It is the objective demand of a national unified big market, 
as well as one of the standards of international trade, to 
implement a unified foreign trade system and policies 
nationwide. We must ensure unity of China's foreign economy and 
trade system, exercise unified management over foreign economy 
and trade, and undertake the international commitments in a 
unified way so as to establish and maintain the state's image. 
In light of international standards and China's commitments, 
only the openly promulgated laws, regulations, and policies will 
be implemented. 
<H3>  Strengthen and Improve Macroeconomic Coordination and 
Management </H3>
  Lifting restrictions on operation does not mean letting 
things drift and independent operation does not mean free 
operation without any restraints. In cooperation with the 
customs, commercial inspection, and industrial and commercial 
management departments, we should comprehensively tackle the 
operation order. It is necessary to formulate a set of feasible 
methods for strengthening overall management and focus attention 
on the major commodities and markets. In this regard, the role 
of the import and export chambers must be strengthened. 
<H3>  Turn State Planning From Direct to Indirect Regulation and 
Control </H3>
  In the world today there is no market economy which is not 
intervened and controlled by the government. Some countries 
have been more successful than us in certain fields. While 
summing up the experience of Southeast Asian countries where the 
economy developed at a fast pace, experts of the world bank drew 
three points, of which the second one was macroeconomic 
stability. Our practice has also proved that without forceful 
and effective macroeconomic control and regulation, a stable 
economic environment will be out of the question and there can 
be no sustained, rapid, and healthy growth of the economy. To 
catch up with the economically developed nations within a short 
period and establish a socialist market economic system, Chen 
Jinhua said, China must make efforts in two aspects: Give full 
play to the role of the market mechanism and strengthen and 
improve macroeconomic control and regulation. Regarding state 
planning, it refers to: 
<H5>  The Core Is To Change the Functions of Planning </H5>
  Regarding state planning, which is an essential means of 
macroeconomic control and regulation, what are its nature, 
functions, scope, and role under the conditions of a socialist 
market economy? 
  Chen Jinhua stressed the necessity of rationally determining 
the strategy for national economic and social development, 
macroeconomic regulation and control targets, and industrial 
policies; doing a good job of economic forecasting; and working 
out plans for major economic structure, distribution of 
productive forces, improvement of land resources, and major 
construction. While planning work, it is necessary to lay 
stress on macroeconomy, strategy, and policies, with the focus 
on mid and long-term planning, and to comprehensively apply the 
macroeconomic policies and economic levers of the 
municipalities. This is also the direction and tasks of 
expediting the reform of the planning system and changing the 
functions of planning. 
  In light of this requirement, Chen Jinhua said, the first 
task of strengthening and improving macroeconomic regulation and 
control this year is to ensure the attainment of the objective 
and tasks of macroeconomic regulation and control set in state 
planning. All localities and departments should accept the 
guidance of the state's macroeconomic regulation and control and 
maintain its authority. Second, the stress of macroeconomic 
regulation and control should be put on maintaining a balance of 
the economy and optimizing the economic structure. It is 
necessary to fully tap the potentials of resources, attain high 
economic growth through planning, strictly control excessive 
growth in investment in fixed assets and the excessive growth of 
consumption, effectively check soaring prices, and bring 
inflation under control. Third, in light of industrial 
policies, it is necessary to rationally readjust the production 
setup, investment setup, and international industrial structure; 
upgrade products; and promote trade between regions and the 
coordinated development of the tertiary, primary, and secondary 
industries. Fourth, closely monitor and forecast economic 
trends, strengthen supervision over economic operations, make 
advanced studies of the problems which might occur in economic 
life, and make counterproposals. Fifth, give full play to the 
functions of planning in coordinating macroeconomic policies. 
The planning departments should take the initiative to contact, 
consult, and cooperate with the financial, taxation, banking, 
foreign exchange management, labor and wages, and other 
departments specifically responsible for economic work, and go 
all out to increase the unity, promptness, scientific nature, 
and effectiveness of the state's macroeconomic regulation and 
control. 
<H5>  Establish an Investment Risk Responsibility Mechanism </H5>
  On maintaining sustained and rapid growth, Chen Jinhua said, 
the scope of investment arranged for this year is large enough. 
But it still cannot meet the investment of various fields. He 
said the solution is to further readjust the investment setup in 
light of the requirements of industrial policies, strictly 
within the scope of control over the total investment, and 
further strengthen key construction projects. It means 
increasing investment in the infrastructure, basic industries, 
and mainstay industries, particularly the exploitation of 
resources in the central and western regions and other projects 
badly needed by the state. It is also necessary to strictly 
control the general and technically backward processing 
industries and avoid the practices of blind construction and 
production of inferior projects. 
  First, Chen Jinhua clearly pointed out, this year's 
investment will be focused on the projects nearing completion 
and those under construction, particularly a number of major 
projects which have a bearing on the overall situation. The 
projects include the Beijing-Kowloon Railway, Lanzhou-Urumqi 
Railway, and Nanning-Kunming Railway; the Qinhuangdao, Dalian, 
and Shanghai port projects; the Beijing-Shenyang-Harbin, 
Beijing-Wuhan-Guangzhou, and Xining- Lanzhou-Urumqi optical 
fiber lines; the large coal mines in Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, and 
Shaanxi; the 9.42 million kw large power project in Baoding; the 
third steelworks of the Wuhan Iron and Steel Corporation; the 
Dashan iron mine in Shandong; the Daxing copper mine; the 
Jinzhou nonferrous metal company; the 300,000 tonne ethylene 
projects in Maomin and Jilin, and other important raw material 
projects. It is necessary to step up construction of the first 
and second automobile factories, the 908 electronic project, and 
applied satellites and continue to pay attention to the 
preparatory work of the Three Gorges project and the third phase 
of the Baoshan Iron and Steel Complex. 
  According to Chen Jinhua, Premier Li Peng pointed out at an 
economic work conference that the following three principles 
should be upheld in the newly developed projects in the future: 
First, no investment without capital should be allowed. New 
construction projects may apply for loans from the banks only 
when they have a certain proportion of capital. Second, banks 
should exercise supervision and not allow misappropriation of 
funds to make investment. Third, new projects must have enough 
working capital and construction of these projects must not be 
allowed without working capital. These principles must be 
earnestly implemented in this year's plan and the purpose of 
doing so is to vigorously increase the efficiency of investment. 
  To maintain a reasonable scope of investment, optimize the 
investment setup, and increase the efficiency of investment, 
Chen Jinhua said the fundamental thing is to reform the 
irrational investment system and establish a risk responsibility 
system for corporate investment and bank credit. Chen said that 
different capital accommodation means should be adopted in 
different fields of investment so that enterprises can gradually 
become the principal part of investment. It is necessary to 
rationally divide the scope and responsibility of the 
governments at various levels over infrastructure building and 
welfare undertakings, give full play to the role of the state 
development bank, fully arouse the enthusiasm of central and 
local enterprises, and adopt the means of joint investment or 
shareholding to guide localities and enterprises to pour funds 
into infrastructure building and basic industries. We should 
gradually develop an investment service system and perfect the 
investment information feedback system, establish and improve 
the application and registration system for the new construction 
projects, and strengthen macroeconomic guidance, regulation, and 
control over the total amount of investment as well as the 
investment setup. 
<H3>  The Objective and Tasks of Macroeconomic Regulation and 
Control </H3>
  Viewed from the situation of this year's reform and 
development, an important task for economic planning is to 
deepen enterprise reform, invigorate the large and medium-sized 
state enterprises, and create a favorable external environment. 
In other words, Chen Jinhua said, we should try to maintain an 
overall balance of social general demand and supply; provide 
enterprises with normal macroscopic links for production and 
operation; ensure the enterprises' decisionmaking rights of 
planning, investment, prices, wages, and import and exports; 
create the necessary conditions for enterprises to enter the 
market and carry out competition on equal footing; encourage 
enterprises to focus their attention on developing domestic and 
international markets; guide enterprises to readjust their 
product mix in light of market needs; and rationally apply the 
state's financial and material resources, which include central 
financial funds, bank credit, special construction funds, 
foreign loans, and state reserves to support the reform and 
development of large and medium-sized state enterprises. It is 
also necessary to alleviate the burden of enterprises by 
opposing and checking the indiscriminate mustering of funds and 
exaction of charges. 
  In overall economic balance, it is necessary to increase 
supply and narrow the gap between supply and demand. In the 
"bottleneck" industries and enterprises, such as railways and 
communications, which have tempered the rapid economic growth, 
it is particularly necessary to tap the potentials through 
technical transformation of the existing enterprises, strengthen 
their management, and create conditions for rapid economic 
growth. 
  To attain the objective of macroeconomic regulation and 
control in 1994, Chen Jinhua insisted on the importance of 
grasping the following points: Vigorously promote the 
sustained, rapid, and healthy growth of the national economy; 
concentrate forces to push forward the major reforms in various 
fields; put the focus of accelerated growth on optimizing the 
economic setup and increasing efficiency; and strive to bring 
about a coordinated economic and social development. 
<H5>  Take Comprehensive Coordination As One's Tasks </H5>
  The practice of reform over the years has proved that 
creating a spacious environment is the prerequisite for 
accelerating reform and development. In 1994, when both reform 
and development must be accelerated, what should be the focus of 
work for the State Economic and Trade Commission, which is 
responsible for comprehensively coordinating economic operation? 
To apply various means to comprehensively coordinate the 
economic operation, Wang Zhongyu said we should focus on 
prevention and prompt macro and microscopic regulation and 
control so as to avoid accumulation of problems and passivity. 
It is necessary to keep abreast of the economic development 
trend, regularly monitor, forecast, predict, and analyze the new 
problems cropping up in economic operation, propose reform 
measures and countermeasures, and offer grounds for the CPC 
Central Committee and State Council to scientifically make 
decisions. In light of this requirement, we should do the 
following well: 
<H3>  Put Reform and Coordination of State Enterprises in First 
Place </H3>
  The only way to invigorate state enterprises is through 
deepened reform. Centered on reform of state enterprises, Wang 
Zhongyu said the economic and trade commissions at all levels 
should do the following work well: 
  First, vigorously establish a modern enterprise system. In 
light of the requirements of the State Council, they should join 
the relevant departments in seriously organizing 100 large and 
medium-sized enterprises to undergo the experiment of the modern 
enterprise system. After selecting the enterprises to undergo 
the experiment, specific measures and practical operation should 
be worked out as soon as possible. 
  Second, continue to implement the "Regulations for 
Enterprises to Effect a Change of Operational Mechanism," step 
up formulation of rules to coordinate the "Regulations," 
strengthen supervision over implementation of the "Regulations," 
and ensure that the decisionmaking powers and responsibilities 
of enterprises are delegated. They should earnestly implement 
the "Regulations for Exercising Supervision over State Assets," 
which is to be promulgated soon, work out specific measures for 
implementation, do well the experiments of assets operation 
responsibility system and assigning members of the supervisory 
board, vigorously explore rational means and ways for operation 
and management of state assets, and preserve and increase the 
value of state assets. 
  Third, accelerate the pace of structural readjustment of 
enterprise organizations and improve the enterprise internal 
mechanism. In light of the "Bankruptcy Law," enterprises which 
have suffered losses for years, which are incapable of turning 
their deficits into profits, and which cannot repay the debts 
with their assets, should go bankrupt. Only the best should be 
allowed to survive. In accordance with the requirements of a 
modern enterprise system, they should develop a number of large 
enterprise groups transcending regions and trades, based on the 
predominance of public ownership and which combine their 
property rights. At the same time, they should effect a 
transition from enterprise contract responsibility system to 
income tax system and speed up the reform of enterprise labor, 
personnel, distribution, and social insurance systems. 
  Fourth, strengthen enterprise operation and management in 
light of market economic needs. The loose and poor management 
within a considerable number of enterprises merit attention. It 
is necessary to focus attention on basic, quality, cost, and 
safety management; establish and improve the enterprise 
management system; and increase market adaptability and 
competitiveness. A drive of "changing mechanism, grasping 
internal management, and increasing efficiency" should be 
launched this year. 
  Fifth, adopt feasible measures to alleviate the unreasonable 
debt burden of enterprises. For example, the part of allocation 
can be changed to loans and the balance be turned to state 
capital for the enterprises which meet the state's industrial 
policies and which badly need support. Regarding enterprises 
which have a future but whose current economic efficiency is 
poor and are incapable of repaying the due loans, they may 
postpone the payment, with the approval of the banks. 
Enterprises with a bad debt must undergo strict auditing. With 
the approval of the banks, the bad debt may be canceled from the 
bad debt guarantee funds. Specific proposals should be made by 
relevant departments through the experiments. 
  Sixth, complement enterprise work funds through various 
channels. The large and medium-sized state enterprises should 
complement their working capital through various channels. 
Regarding enterprises which have not delivered after-tax 
profits recently, it is necessary to draw 50 percent from their 
profit retention to supplement the production and operation 
funds. Preferential treatment in credit should be given to the 
efficient large and medium-sized state enterprises. Without 
sufficient working capital, construction of the new projects 
involving investment in fixed assets must not be approved. 
  Seventh, implement the "ten thousand, thousand, hundred, 
and ten" plan for changing operational mechanisms. It is 
necessary to delegate the 14 kinds of decisionmaking powers to 
the 10,000 large and medium-sized state enterprises and complete 
the work of reappraising the stocks and assets of enterprises. 
Through assigning supervisory board members, it is necessary to 
exercise supervision of the state assets of 1,000 backbone 
enterprises which are of vital importance to the national 
economy and people's livelihood. Select 100 different types of 
large and medium-sized state enterprises to implement the 
"Regulations" and undergo the experiment of a modern enterprise 
system. Conduct the experiment of alleviating the unreasonable 
burden of enterprises and increasing the proportion of 
enterprise working capital in 10 cities or regions and propose 
specific solutions to the matter step-by-step. 
<H5>  Accelerate the Pace of Enterprise Technological Progress </H5>
  Wang Zhongyu said that the requirements of this year's 
technological development and technical transformation are: A 
high starting point, giving prominence to structural 
optimization and energy conservation, and advancing toward the 
goal of rationalization of technical equipment, sophisticated 
techniques, and a higher grade for new products. Focused on 
this objective, it is necessary to give prominence to key points 
in this year's technical transformation plan, select a number of 
key projects to undergo technical transformation, upgrade the 
key enterprises and trades, and give further play to the 
advantages of the regions. In light of the requirements of 
industrial and structural readjustment, we should continue to 
increase capital investment in transportation and 
communications, energy industry, raw materials industry, and 
technical transformation of old industrial bases. 
  We should further import advanced technology and apply the 
technological achievements in productive forces. In the next 
two years, assistance should be given to 100 large enterprise 
(holdings) to establish technological centers, carry out 100 
state-level major technological development and industrial 
experimental projects, organize 100 major technological 
popularization demonstration centers, and develop 10 high-tech 
industrialization research projects. It is necessary to 
vigorously develop new products, promote lateral development of 
industrial research, and encourage the use of high-tech to 
transform the traditional industries. In light of the 
possibility and their needs, enterprises should establish and 
improve various forms of technological development 
organizations. We should offer technological information to 
enterprises and nurture the technological market. 
<H5>  Establish and Improve the Market System </H5>
  Establishing and improving the market system is not only the 
foundation for the attainment of macroeconomic regulation and 
control but also the prerequisite for enterprises to head for 
the market and optimize the distribution of resources. 
  Wang Zhongyu pointed out: The economic and trade commissions 
which regard coordination as their task should, first, take 
active part in the formulation of the scheme for building the 
market for essential production factors and do well 
comprehensive coordination work for developing intermediary 
service organizations and giving full play to their role of 
service, contacts, notary, and supervision. Second, study and 
work out policy measures for promoting the development of 
various commodity markets, give priority to the establishment 
and improvement of the market for big batch of farm and sideline 
produce and means of production, and boost the development of 
various commodity markets. Third, take the readjustment of the 
product mix as the focus of industrial and communications 
production, vigorously study and develop two kinds of markets, 
namely, the international market and the rural market, and 
develop the urban market. In short, we should cater to the 
market and organize production in light of market needs. 
Enterprises should be encouraged to earn more foreign exchange 
through exports. 
<H5>  Strengthen Economic Management in Light of Law </H5>
  In a sense, a market economy is a legal economy. Hence, it 
is necessary to attach great importance to and strengthen 
economic legislation work. Focused on enterprise reform and 
market building, Wang Zhongyu said, we should study and step up 
formulation of economic regulations for standardizing the 
market, regulating the relations of market transactions, 
maintaining market order, strengthening macroeconomic regulation 
and control, and improving the economic environment so as to 
ensure the organic combination and simultaneous development of 
economic legislation, structural reform, and economic growth. 
It is necessary to vigorously explore effective means of 
applying legal means to comprehensively coordinate economic 
operation in the new situation. 

