Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By BAN YUE TAN reporter Wang Yuexin (3769 1878 2946): </F>
"State Councillor Chen Junsheng Discusses the Issue of Peasants' 
Income"; first paragraph is BAN YUE TAN introduction] 
  [Text] Editor's note: It appears that drastic increases in 
grain and edible-oil prices since last November have 
overshadowed the issue of peasants' income. As a matter of 
fact, because the state's economic control and regulatory 
measures yield the desired results, the excessively high grain 
and edible-oil prices are bound to drop, and increasing 
peasants' income will remain a pressing task. Therefore, 
Comrade Chen Junsheng's following interview with the staff 
reporter given at the beginning of the new year merits the keen 
attention of all. 
  [Wang Yuexin] In recent years, we have reaped an all-round 
bumper harvest in agriculture. Despite the increased output, 
the incomes of peasants in some rural areas have not increased. 
What do you think are the major causes of this? 
  [Chen Junsheng] Last year the situation in agriculture and 
rural areas across the country was pretty good. However, 
despite the relatively good situation in agriculture as a whole, 
there is a potential problem -- that is, the slow increase of 
peasants' income. The per capita net income of peasants in 1993 
is expected to reach 860 yuan, up 76 yuan from, or 15 percent 
more than, 1992. After subtracting for inflation, the increase 
is only about 2 percent, or 3.9 percent less than the margin of 
increase in the preceding year. This problem is more serious in 
major grain-producing regions. The more a region produces 
grain, the slower its peasants' incomes increase. In some 
regions, increased output even does not bring about an increase 
in their peasants' incomes. The main cause of the decreased 
incomes of peasants lies in the widening price disparity between 
manufactured and farm products. In recent years, the prices of 
agricultural means of production have increased at a much faster 
rate than those of farm products. At the end of 1993, price 
increases for agricultural means of production stood at 13.5 
percent, and for peasants' means of subsistence, at over 10 
percent. The relatively low efficiency of agricultural 
production and the decreased incomes of peasants have 
significantly dampened their enthusiasm for production, have 
impeded the growth of the rural economy, and have hindered the 
solution of other problems concerning agriculture, rural areas, 
and peasants. 
  [Wang] What are the major effects on the rural economy 
caused by the slow or negative growth of peasants' income? 
  [Chen] Due to their low income, peasants have invested less 
and less money in production. Between 1989 and 1992, peasants' 
spending on purchasing means of production increased, after 
subtracting for inflation, by a mere 1.5 percent annually. Last 
year's input for purchasing means of production, after 
subtracting for inflation, is expected to drop by 5 percent, and 
the input into production as a whole is expected to drop by 2.9 
percent. As a result, agriculture is devoid of the strength for 
long-term development. 
  Due to low incomes, it is difficult to promote public 
welfare 
projects in rural areas. At present, some local governments and 
departments are trying to carry out a number of public welfare 
projects through raising funds from peasants. This is a good 
idea. However, while an identical amount of funds that has been 
raised is not considered a burden in regions where peasants 
enjoy a higher level of income and are financially better off, 
it is considered a very heavy burden in regions where peasants 
have less income and are vulnerable to financial straits. 
Because the income of the majority of peasants remains rather 
low and cannot be increased, or has even decreased, it is very 
difficult to change the outlook for the countryside. 
  Due to their low income, peasants' purchasing power is weak. 
Between 1989 and 1992, the total volume of retail sales in rural 
areas increased only 1 percent annually, after subtracting for 
inflation. Peasants' consumption expenditure in 1993 is 
expected to decrease compared to the preceding year, thus 
widening the gap between urban and rural residents' incomes and 
between urban and rural markets. A comparison of statistics 
between 1988 and 1992 shows that the ratio between urban and 
rural residents' incomes has increased from 2.05:1 to 2.33:1, 
whereas the ratio of the total volume of retail sales between 
urban and rural areas has decreased from 1:1.39 to 1:1.096. 
Since the beginning of last year, the disparity between urban 
and rural markets has continued to widen. Market stagnation in 
rural areas has hampered the expansion of industrial goods 
markets and has directly affected the growth of state funds' 
accumulation and the development of the national economy. 
  [Wang] In your opinion, what approaches or measures should 
be taken to solve problems in regard to the peasants' income? 
  [Chen] To quickly raise the peasants' income, we must 
proceed from the overall situation of economic development, 
conscientiously implement the guidelines of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee and the Central 
Conference on Rural Work, and effectively implement the 
following tasks: 
  1. We must increase the purchasing prices of agricultural 
products. The purchasing prices of agricultural products should 
be appropriately increased this year to make up for the 
additional expenses on the part of peasants caused by rising 
production costs, and to help appropriately increase their 
income. 
  2. We must increase the input in agriculture. This means 
increasing investments in agriculture, which has so far 
accounted for only a rather small proportion of investment in 
the entire economy. We should make increases in three 
proportions: in credit volume, in the total investment in 
capital construction, and in financial input. These are the 
essential requirements for stabilizing agriculture, the 
foundation of our economy. 
  3. Active efforts should be made to readjust agricultural 
production and the product structure. An impasse facing China's 
agriculture is that it is impossible to completely reverse the 
trend of dwindling arable lands; it is also impossible to 
reverse the trend of a growing population and market demands. 
These two irreversibles require that we steadily increase the 
total grain output while implementing a readjustment of 
agricultural production and the product structure. We must 
invigorate agriculture by applying scientific and technological 
advances and by promoting education. We should popularize and 
make full use of the latest scientific and technological 
advances and quickly turn them into productive forces. We 
should develop new varieties of grain and cotton crops, improve 
product quality, and improve economic efficiency in line with 
market demands. Vigorous efforts should be made to increase the 
peasants' income by developing processing, transportation, and 
marketing of agricultural products in rural areas; by promoting 
coordinated development of the primary, secondary, and tertiary 
sectors in the rural economy; and by bringing about multiple 
increases in the value of agricultural products. 
  4. We must invigorate circulation of agricultural products 
and enliven rural markets. 
  5. We must develop village and township enterprises. The 
general requirements in this regard are: In developing village 
and township enterprises, we should truly shift the emphasis 
onto relying on the development of science and technology and on 
the improvement of quality of the laborers; we should refrain 
from launching new projects or seeking unrealistic growth rates, 
devote major efforts to implementing technological upgrading and 
readjusting the products structure, implement strict scientific 
administration, and improve economic returns in real earnest. 
Village and township enterprises in eastern regions shall 
transform themselves to become more efficient and export 
oriented; shall readjust their industrial structure and product 
mix; and shall make improvements in terms of overall levels, 
quality, scale, and economic returns. Areas in central and 
western China should accelerate the development of village and 
township enterprises. Efforts should be made to organize the 
implementation of the "East-West Cooperation and Development 
Project" so that localities can supplement each other's 
advantages and promote common development. We should build 
small industrial zones to push forward the development of small 
towns and service trades in the countryside. 
  6. We must transfer surplus labor force in rural areas in a 
step by step manner. One reason for the slow growth in the 
peasants' income is underemployment. Presently there are 170 
million surplus laborers in rural areas. This surplus labor 
force poses a major challenge for rural areas. Realistically 
speaking, it is possible to transfer a portion of the surplus 
labor force to industry or other non-agricultural sectors every 
year. On average, 10 million laborers were transferred out of 
the agricultural sector yearly from 1985 to 1988. The figure in 
1992 was 11 million, and the 1993 figure is expected to be even 
higher. 
  7. We must continue the efforts to reduce the multitudinous 
fees imposed on peasants. To effectively reduce the peasants' 
burden, last year the CPC Central Committee and State Council 
formulated a policy and issued documents, which are fully 
supported by the people. Reducing the peasants' burden is a 
policy measure designed to protect the peasants' enthusiasm for 
production; it also serves as an effective way to raise the 
peasants' income. In conscientiously implementing the central 
authorities' policy on easing the peasants' burden, government 
and relevant departments at all levels have, since last year, 
done a great deal of painstaking and meticulous work, thereby 
effectively putting a stop to illegal collection of fees, fines, 
and other charges in the countryside and drastically reducing 
the reasonable burden imposed on the peasants. In view of the 
actual conditions, potential factors for increasing the 
peasants' burden have yet to be removed once and for all, and 
there is the possibility of a resurgence; therefore, we must not 
lower our guard. 
  8. It is necessary to ensure a good job in assisting the 
poor. Presently some 80 million people in rural areas still do 
not have enough to eat and wear. Without solving the problem of 
food and clothing for this segment of the population, it will be 
difficult to realize prosperity in the entire country. To solve 
the problem, the State Council has decided to draw up and 
implement a "seven-year cardinal program to help the 80 million 
poor." Under the program, in the seven years beginning in 1994 
until the end of this century, the state will concentrate 
primary resources on helping this segment of the population find 
enough to eat and wear, thus becoming better off. 
Aid-to-the-poor work in the next phase should be carried out in 
close conjunction with the formulation and implementation of the 
"seven-year program." First, it is necessary to earnestly 
review aid to the poor, and to study and work out new methods 
and measures for helping the poor under the new situation. 
Second, it is necessary to perfect various policy measures and 
increase the input in assisting the poor. Third, it is 
necessary to concentrate funds and materials for helping the 
poor by rationalizing the geographical distribution of 
aid-to-the-poor funds to gradually concentrate the central 
government's funds in the poorest central and western regions. 
  [Wang] You have just mentioned an increase in the purchase 
price of farm products as deemed necessary this year. What are 
the principles for deciding the increase margin? 
  [Chen] The increase in the purchase price of farm products 
will be based mainly on four principles: 1) The increase can 
offset the increased cost in grain and cotton production caused 
by price increases in agricultural production means and all 
other commodities. 2) It can somehow increase the peasants' 
incomes. 3) It can maintain a rational disparity between grain 
and cotton prices. 4) It is compatible with the general price 
index of retail sales. A grain risk fund shall be established 
at both central and local levels to facilitate the smooth 
implementation of price increase proposals. Through increasing 
the purchase price, we shall gradually reduce the price gap 
between manufactured and farm products, and shall help some 
grain- and cotton-producing provinces (regions) solve once and 
for all the problems of more output and more deficits. By 
giving subsidies, we shall also help remote and poor regions 
overcome hardships caused by long-distance transportation of 
increase-priced grain and cotton. 
  [Wang] Could you discuss more specifically the measures for 
invigorating the circulation of farm products and rural markets 
which provide the important means for increasing the peasants' 
incomes? 
  [Chen] First, we should link production markets with 
information and contracts. So far, prices have been 
decontrolled for the overwhelming majority of farm products 
except for cotton, silkworm cocoons, and a few others. 
Presently the main problem is the dislocation between the 
production of individual farm households and market demands. 
Many peasants are ill-informed about markets and cannot cope 
with market demands. They do not know what should be produced 
and can be sold at good prices. Therefore, it is essential to 
provide information service to peasants, to increase the effort 
to construct supply and demand information networks for farm 
products, to supply timely forecasts and announcements on supply 
and demand of farm products, to provide timely purchasing and 
marketing information, and to guide peasants to do a good job in 
production and operation. 
  Second, we should actively guide and organize peasants to 
orient their production to market demands by building a bridge 
linking producers with consumers. In recent years, we have seen 
the emergence of various forms of integrated management of 
trade, industry, and agriculture; of close combination of 
production and processing with marketing; of companies embracing 
farm households; and of trade associations. These 
organizations, which have effectively guided peasants to 
markets, should be supported actively. We should break the 
restrictions of the ownership system and administration division 
in integrating agriculture, industry, commerce, technology, and 
trade, gearing their production to domestic and international 
markets as well as enabling them to become unified entities 
sharing common risks and interests through socialized service 
and profit guidance. 
  Third, we should develop a market system of agricultural 
products and establish a regular order of market operations. To 
facilitate the development of a market system, the state has 
decontrolled the prices of most agricultural products and 
adopted a new policy which allows agricultural products to be 
traded through multiple channels, with their prices established 
by the market. However, some localities are still barring 
outside products with numerous barriers and blocks. This has 
hampered the free flow of goods and the formation of a large, 
unified nationwide market, making it hard to accelerate the 
development of production. A market is a system; we should 
develop a primary market for producers as well as a retail 
market in marketing areas. Most important of all is to build 
all sorts of wholesale markets and to cultivate and develop a 
market system for agricultural products under a unified plan, 
with an emphasis on the wholesale market. 
  [Wang] We have gained some experience in transferring 
surplus rural work forces. Is there more we can do in this 
regard? 
  [Chen] Transferring surplus rural work forces requires a 
multi-pronged approach: First, we should vigorously develop 
village and township enterprises. This is the principal way for 
placing the surplus work force. Nationwide, some 112 million 
people are employed at village and township enterprises, of 
which 9.72 million were employed in 1992. The figure for 1993 
is estimated at around 7 million. Our plan is that 50 million 
more people will be shifted out of the agricultural sector by 
the end of the century. Second, we should fully utilize and 
develop agricultural resources, expand the space for 
agricultural development, and create more agricultural jobs. 
Third, we should work hard to create conditions -- and work out 
well-coordinated plans -- for agricultural workers to work in 
cities and towns. Fourth, we should develop small towns in a 
well-planned manner, vigorously promote the secondary and 
tertiary sectors of the economy, increase training in useful 
skills among the peasants to increase their employability, and 
gradually shift the surplus rural work force to non-agricultural 
sectors. 

