Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] On 19 March two Thai-language Bangkok 
dailies, KRUNGTHEP THURAKIT and SIAM RAT publish editorials on 
the accidental discovery by police on 17 March of a bomb left in 
a truck in front of a Bangkok police station. 
  The 800-word editorial on page 2 of KRUNGTHEP THURAKIT 
entitled "Do Not Launch Terrorist Acts in Thailand" says there 
has been great astonishment about the attempted terrorism, 
believed to be aimed at the Israeli Embassy in Bangkok. The 
editorial says: "It took the police six days before knowing what 
was inside the truck -- not until the owner of the truck claimed 
the vehicle. After the search, it was learned that the sabotage 
attempt was planned by professional international terrorists." 
  The editorial takes the police to task for not examining the 
truck immediately after towing it to the police station. It 
also criticizes the National Intelligence Agency for poor 
performance: "It seems that the Special Branch Police knew 
nothing about the international terrorists being here and ready 
to carry out sabotage. The agency should, from now on, try to 
concentrate on its responsibility for national security instead 
of spying on opposition or non-governmental sectors in favor of 
certain politicians." 
  In conclusion, the editorial appeals to international 
terrorists to not use Thailand as a base for their activities. 
It says: "The Thai Government has never treated any of the 
quarreling parties with discrimination. Why do they have to 
involve Thailand by using the country as a base for their 
activities? They should go elsewhere if they want to carry out 
acts to avenge their enemies, but not in Thailand. Should 
anything serious happen, Thailand may have to ban suspicious 
people from entering the country, no matter which side they 
belong to." 
  The 800-word editorial on page 4 of SIAM RAT entitled "Here 
Comes the Real One" says that the government, people, and 
particularly the media must be awakened to the fact that 
international terrorism has arrived in Thailand. After 
reviewing background material on racial and religious conflicts 
worldwide, the editorial notes that as developed countries have 
improved their control and prevention structures, countries like 
Thailand which have inadequate intelligence and 
counter-terrorism apparatuses will be used by international 
terrorists as bases for their activities. 
  "Thailand has been a haven for illegal associations, mafia 
gangs, and terrorist rackets at the international level. 
Regardless if we admit it or not, this is a fact. We have 
always heard about police arrests of international drug 
trafficking rings, international sex trade rackets, 
international gangs forging all kinds of documents, from 
passports to credit cards, and illegal rackets smuggling 
refugees to third countries, especially to the United States. 
There are several such illegal rackets operating in Thailand, 
where police made the arrests," the editorial says. 
  "Real terrorism has begun. We must take heed and stop 
playing games. It is time for us to work together in order to 
improve law and order in our society for the sake of national 
security." 

