CSO 

<F P=106> [Government work report given by Ren Qixing, Vice Chairman </F>
of the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Regional People's Government] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
<H5>  I. Review of Work in 1993 </H5>
  The past year was one in which the people in our autonomous 
region triumphantly advanced along the path of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. Under the leadership of 
the party Central Committee, the State Council and the 
autonomous regional CPC committee, the governments at all levels 
united with and relied on the people of all nationalities in the 
whole region, rallied around the task of developing socialist 
market economy and promoting the program of socialist 
modernization in an overall manner and conscientiously 
implemented the guideline laid down by the 14th National CPC 
Congress and Comrade Deng Xiaoping. They firmly carried out the 
measures worked out by the central authorities in strengthening 
macro-control and regulation, further liberated our thought, 
boldly carried out practice and basically fulfilled the goal set 
by the First Session of the Seventh Autonomous Regional People's 
Congress for 1993. A gratifying situation prevailed in the our 
region, whereby the economy flourished, the reform program was 
deepened, people of all nationalities were united as one, and 
great social progress was made. 
  -- Sustained economic growth was attained, and new 
progress were made in developing industrial and agricultural 
production and increasing local government revenues. The 
gross national product (GNP) in Ningxia for 1993 totalled 9.65 
billion yuan, an increase of 10 percent, of which the primary 
industry grew 5.5 percent, the secondary industry 12.9 percent 
and the tertiary industry 9.5 percent. The per capita gross 
domestic product (GDP) was 1,965 yuan, up 320 yuan over 1992. 
Steady progress was made in rural economy. The total grain 
output reached 2.03 billion kg, marking an increase of 9.3 
percent and hitting a record high. Commendable growth was 
registered in the production of oil-bearing crops, vegetables, 
fruits, meat, poultry, eggs, milk and aquatic products. The 
township enterprises made rapid progress with their total 
business volume rising to 3.05 billion yuan, up 42.8 percent. 
Industrial production expanded rapidly. In despite of serious 
limitations in fields such as railway transportation, the total 
industrial output value in Ningxia exceeded 10 billion yuan and 
reached 12.08 billion yuan. This registered an increase of 13.9 
percent if the factor of inflation was taken into consideration. 
The amount of taxes and profits turned over to the state by 
Industrial enterprises with independent accounting systems in 
the autonomous region amounted to 980 million yuan, an increase 
of 54.7 percent. The rate of production and marketing reached 
97.6 percent, and the overall index of economic efficiency rose 
10 percent over 1992. The local revenues rose to 1.08 billion 
yuan, up 20.3 percent. The banks at all levels had vigorously 
rectified the financial order, and actively supported local 
economic construction. By the end of 1993, the total amount of 
loans reached 12.08 billion yuan, up 22 percent over 1992. 
  -- Investment in fixed assets on the increase, and 
major construction and technical innovations strengthened. 
  The total investments in fixed assets in the autonomous 
region valued at 5.16 billion yuan, up 35.5 percent, hitting a 
record high in history since the beginning of the reform and 
opening up program. New strides were made in developing major 
construction projects. The northern end of the Baoji-Zhongwei 
Railway under construction had passed Guyuan. It was expected to 
open to traffic ahead of time. The double-track Zhongwei-Gantang 
Railway was completed as scheduled, and more than 80 percent of 
the Da-Gu [1129 0657] Railway leading to the Lingwu Mining 
District were completed. The construction of the Yin-Gu [6892 
0657] Highway and the Yinchuan Bridge across the Yellow River 
was close to completion. Major progress was made in rebuilding 
the Yin-Ping [6892 1627] Highway and the Shi-Ying [4258 3602] 
Highway. The first-stage engineering project for the Rujigou 
coal transportation highway which was China's first one in 
Ningxia built with loans had been completed. Great strides were 
made in developing the earlier stage of the Hedong Airport 
project in Yinchuan, and preparations were made to start 
construction work in the near future. The numbers one to eight 
pumping stations for the Yanhuanding pumping engineering project 
and the main water channels were basically completed, and some 
of the pumping stations had already gone into operation. Rapid 
progress was made in posts and telecommunications. The number of 
new telephone exchanges reached 32,000, and telephones were 
installed in 2 percent of the families in the autonomous region, 
which was close to the average national level. Investments for 
industrial renovations rose to 1.12 billion yuan, an increase of 
40.2 percent. A number of key technical transformation projects 
such as the Yinchuan Chemical Fertilizer Plant, the Ningxia Iron 
Alloy Plant and the Ningxia Coking Plant were successfully 
completed. In 1993, 15 local key technical renovation projects 
and 67 new products passed screening and testing by the relevant 
authorities. 
  -- New strides were made for various reform programs 
and Ningxia opened wider to the outside world. New progress 
was made in building socialist market economy in all aspects. 
The "Regulations on Changing the Way State-Owned Industrial 
Enterprises Operate" was further implemented. The reform of the 
system on enterprises' property rights had begun. Ningxia had 
approved 64 shareholding enterprises to open their doors for 
business, and helped the first company to float its stock on the 
market. A total of 259 township enterprises promoted the 
shareholding system; 50 percent of the state-owned commercial 
enterprises instituted the system of letting civilians run state 
enterprises; and 60 percent of the basic-level supply and 
marketing cooperatives were also run by civilians. Prices for 
grain, cooking oil, cement and rolled steel were decontrolled, 
and those of railway transportation, coal, electricity and 
finished oil products were adjusted. New strides were made in 
reforming the wage system and the system of social security, and 
new achievements scored in foreign trade and economic relations. 
The total value of exports was US$110 million, of which exports 
from the local economic sector amounted to US$74.71 million, an 
increase of 11.6 percent. Varieties of export products were more 
than 40 types, and more foreign funds were put to use in the 
autonomous regions. In 1993, foreign investments totalling 
US$36.66 million were in actual use, up 2.6 times. The 
autonomous region had approved 181 new Chinese-foreign joint 
ventures, cooperative and foreign-funded enterprises with the 
total number of such enterprises reaching 286. Funds from 
foreign investors totaled US$11.9 million, an increase of 2.4 
times. 
  -- Progress made by all types of social undertakings 
and socialist culture and ethics advanced. We continued to 
implement the strategy of "rejuvenating Ningxia by relying on 
science and technology," and made our work in science and 
technology cater to the needs of the market and to economic 
construction. In 1993, achievements were scored in the field of 
science and technology, and new progress was made in the 
popularization and application of technologies. The strategic 
role of education was given full play. Fairly significant 
developments were made in basic education and other fields of 
education. Remarkable results were attained in preventing 
students from dropping out, soliciting donations for education 
and solving the problem of owing teachers back pays. There were 
achievements in the development of the "231 project," stage by 
stage. Less than 15 percent of the young people in the 
autonomous regions were illiterate, and the quality of the rural 
laborers was improved. New progress was made in culture, arts, 
the press and publishing, radio, film, television, public 
health, sports, social, and scientific research. A batch of 
excellent creative works which reflected the features of our age 
and our national characteristics were published. Mass cultural 
and sports activities were extensively carried out, enriching 
the people's cultural life. Conditions for urban and rural 
medical care, as well as public health, were much improved, and 
standards in the prevention and treatment of diseases had been 
constantly improved. Facilities for civil administration and 
public welfare services were further upgraded. New developments 
were made in helping the disabled. Good results were attained in 
controlling the population and carrying out the work of planned 
parenthood. The child birth rate and the natural rate of growth 
were 19.43 percent and 14.07 percent respectively, 0.68 percent 
lower than both figures in 1992. Work on environmental 
protection, planning for urban and rural construction, 
prevention of natural disasters, and damage reduction from such 
disasters were further strengthened. 
  We persistently developed the "two types of civilizations"; 
studied hard Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theories on building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, and further popularized 
the reform and opening-up policy. We had vigorously promoted 
education on patriotism, collectivism and socialism and on 
professional and social ethics; and extensively developed 
activities to have model communities and units established by 
the army, the police and the people, so as to achieve cultural 
progress. As a result, the people had greatly enhanced their 
sense on cultural progress. We had earnestly implemented the 
"Law on National Regional Autonomy" and the party's policy on 
nationalities. Various activities to strengthen unity among all 
nationalities were vigorously carried out, and a group of 
advanced collectives and individuals emerged. Under the correct 
leadership of the central authorities, the local party 
committees, governments and armed police units in various 
localities had joined their efforts in properly handling the 
case of fighting in Xiji, safeguarded the legal system, abd 
protected the people's interests. We had persistently maintained 
all facets of public security; and waged a firm struggle to 
severely strike at all criminal offenders, guard against theft, 
wipe out pornography, "eliminate the six evil." We had insured 
social stability, and scored achievements in fighting 
corruptions. 
  -- Rural and urban markets flourished, people's 
livelihood continued to improve. The value of retail sales 
in the autonomous region reached 4.3 billion yuan, an increase 
of 15.4 percent. There was an abundant supply of goods on the 
market. Commodity circulation channels were expanded, and 
various ownership systems vied with each other for development. 
The annual per capita income for urban residents used as living 
expenses was 1,907 yuan, up 304 yuan over 1992. The per capita 
net income of a peasant was 667 yuan, an increase of 48 yuan 
over 1992. The savings deposits of urban and rural residents 
totaled 6.14 billion yuan, up 22 percent over the previous year. 
We had quickened the pace in developing urban and rural 
construction and expanded public utility facilities. The living 
conditions of urban and rural residents were further improved, 
and more jobs were available on the market. Some 26,600 people 
were offered jobs in urban areas. The rate of unemployment was 
somewhat lowered. 
  Fellow deputies! Ningxia's achievements in carrying out the 
reform program, opening to the outside world and promoting 
economic and social development in the past year were attained 
by working hard to overcome all kinds of contradictions and 
difficulties. The people of all nationalities on all fronts and 
in all fields in Ningxia had made strenuous efforts and 
courageously fought many battles in order to achieve all this. 
It was not an easy task. Here, on behalf of the autonomous 
regional people's government, I wish to express my sincere 
appreciation to the large number of workers in all fields, 
peasants and intellectuals, to the deputies of the autonomous 
regional people's congress and regional CPPCC members and 
various democratic parties who helped and supervised the 
government in doing its work, to the mass organizations and 
people of all walks of life, to the various units of the central 
authorities stationed in Ningxia that supported us in carrying 
out reform and promoting the economic development, to the 
officers and men of the PLA and armed police units stationed in 
the autonomous region, and to those comrades and friends who 
supported Ningxia in rejuvenating and developing itself. 
  In the course of carrying out reform and promoting 
developments, we must soberly realize the existing 
contradictions and difficulties and understand that there are 
still some problems in doing our work in Ningxia. There remain 
some "bottlenecks" effects that are hampering our economic 
development such as shortage in railway transportation, 
insufficient funds, relatively weak foundation in agriculture 
and lack of vitality. The management of some enterprises is poor 
and they are suffering serious economic losses. Some local 
expenditures are increasing in each passing day. The commodity 
price is rising on a large scale. The government is still 
exploring ways to regulate the economy under the conditions of 
market economy. There are problems in the deeper levels that we 
have to solve in our economic life and operational mechanism. 
There are signs of corruption, bureaucracy and formalism among 
some government functionaries. Some unhealthy practices in 
certain professions are damaging the image of the party and the 
government, and undermining their close relations with the 
people. In doing our work in the future, we must pay full 
attention to these problems, and rely on all the people and all 
sectors of the society to give us full support to solve them as 
soon as possible. 
<H5>  II. Develop the National Economy in a Sustained, Rapid and </H5>
Healthy Manner 
  The central authorities emphatically pointed out that to 
seize the opportunities, deepen reform, open wider to the 
outside world, promote developments and maintain stability is 
the major task of the whole party and the whole nation in doing 
their work. This is also the basic principle in carrying out our 
work well in Ningxia. During the new year, the governments at 
various levels must attach great importance to and correctly 
handle the relations between reform, development and stability. 
The reform is the motivating force, development is the target, 
and stability is the prerequisite. Without a stable social 
environment, nothing can be achieved. In minority areas, we must 
fully understand and earnestly implement the party's policy on 
nationalities and religion, and unite with people of all 
nationalities. This is something of great significance in 
achieving stability. Meanwhile, we must also realize that reform 
and development are the foundation for achieving stability. If 
we do not exert strenuous efforts in carrying out reform, and 
quicken our pace in promoting developments, it will be hard to 
move forward in economic construction and maintain stability 
over a protracted period of time. Right now, we must pay 
attention to tackling some hot issues which affect stability. We 
must strive to make reform, development and stability coordinate 
and promote each other, and simultaneously promote material 
civilization and spiritual civilization. 
  On the basis of the aforementioned basic principle, our 
guideline in carrying out government work in Ningxia for 1994 is 
to use Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory in building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics as a guidance; firmly implement the 
spirit of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th National CPC 
Congress and the Second Session of the Eighth National People's 
Congress; further emancipate our minds; carry out the reform 
program in an overall manner; open wider to the outside world; 
work hard to readjust the structure; raise economic efficiency; 
firmly establish the basic framework in building the socialist 
market economy; promote the regional economy in a sustained, 
rapid and healthy way; and maintain social stability while 
making overall progress. 
  The main targets for promoting Ningxia's economic and social 
development in 1994 are as follows: 
  -- The GDP in Ningxia should reach 11.4 billion yuan in 
1994, 
an increase of 9 percent over 1993, of which the primary 
industry should grow 4 percent (6 percent in the total 
agricultural output value); the secondary industry 9 percent (10 
percent in the total industrial output value); and the tertiary 
industry 13 percent. 
  -- The local investments in fixed assets should reach 4.44 
billion yuan, up 9.4 percent, of which investments from local 
state-run units on capital construction should amount to 1.38 
billion yuan and investments for technical renovations 750 
million yuan. 
  -- The local revenues after the implementation of the system 
of dividing taxes should reach 602 million yuan, an increase of 
9.8 percent when calculation is made in terms of comparable 
items. 
  -- The total value of imports and exports should reach 
US$175 
million and we should strive to achieve the goal of US$190 
million, and expect to introduce US$35.5 million foreign capital 
into the autonomous region. 
  -- The value of retail sales in Ningxia should reach 4.9 
billion yuan, up 14 percent. 
  -- The general level of retail sales in Ningxia should be 
controlled around 10 percent. 
  -- The proportion of births to population should be kept 
below 19.41 per thousand and the natural rate of population 
growth 14.48 per thousand. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  IV. Further Improve Government Work </H5>
  This year, the governments at various levels will face an 
extremely arduous task in reforming and developing themselves. 
Only by accelerating the change of the operating mechanism of 
state enterprises, keeping government employees honest and 
industrious, and helping them improve their work style and raise 
their work efficiency, will it be possible for them to keep pace 
with the new situation and carry out their tasks on a solid 
bases. 
  -- Accelerate the change of government functions 
To reform the structure of government institutions and change 
their functions is a necessary requirement in building socialist 
market economy and accelerating economic development. Right now, 
our major problems are overstaffing, lax discipline and low work 
efficiency. The governments at various levels must change their 
functions by separating the functions of government from those 
of enterprises and closely following the principle of achieving 
simplification, uniformity and efficiency, reduce the 
bureaucracy, strictly enforce party discipline and increase work 
efficiency. We must make use of the reform program to gradually 
separate the functions of the government from those of the state 
property owners in carrying out social and economic control; 
separate the functions of the government from those of the 
enterprises in handling administrative work; and establish a 
flexible and highly efficient administrative system which meets 
the requirements in building socialist market economy. We must 
be determined to eliminate some special economic departments and 
organizations with overlapping functions, reduce a number of 
temporary, ad hoc establishments, and strengthen those 
departments charged with macro-economic control and supervision 
as well as those responsible for the management of social 
affairs. 
  The reform of government institutions in the autonomous 
region will start this year in an overall manner. The autonomous 
region will carry out this structural reform alternately with 
various prefectures, cities, counties, and townships. Such 
reform will be basically completed during the first half of the 
next year, while the reform at the autonomous regional level 
should be basically completed within this year. The reform of 
the institutions at the prefectural level must be accompanied by 
a redrawing of administrative areas and the improvement of the 
administrative system. The reform at the county level must be 
accompanied by the strengthening of the grassroots political 
power and the expansion of the network of collectivized services 
in rural areas. In carrying out structural reform, we must help 
various departments clearly define their functions and sizes, 
introduce the responsibility system for departments at various 
level and their employees, and combine the streamlining of 
government institutions with rationizing the composition of 
their staff and improving the quality of staff members. We must 
make proper job arrangements for the displaced staff members, 
and implement the system of civil service after the completion 
of the structural reform. 
  Firmly change the work style. In order to 
smoothly fulfill this year's task, the governments and 
departments at various levels must firmly improve their work 
style, raise their professional standards and quality and 
increase their work efficiency. All government employees must 
always keep in mind their aim to wholeheartedly serve the 
people, diligently carry out their duties and perform actual 
deeds for the masses. They must exert strenuous efforts in 
improving services, raising efficiency and carrying out their 
work on a solid ground; and ensure that the various policies of 
the party and the state are resolutely implemented. The leading 
cadres at various levels must vigorously conduct investigation 
and study, maintain close touch with reality, go deep into the 
basic-level units, regard the major issues and difficult 
problems that need to be settled as the main topics in 
conducting their investigation and research, and work out 
realistic countermeasures and solutions. It is necessary to 
establish a system for making democratic and scientific policy 
decisions, respect the pioneering spirit of the masses, and do a 
good job in guiding, protecting and fully displaying the 
enthusiasm of the large number of cadres and masses. We must 
persistently seek truth from facts, conscientiously overcome 
bureaucracy and formalism, listen attentively to the views of 
the masses, concern ourselves with the hardship the masses, and 
extricate ourselves from our social appointments and paper work. 
We must talk less but do more; pay attention to major issues; 
handle more difficult tasks; perform more actual deeds; and 
carry out our work in a down-to-earth manner. We must 
persistently uphold the system of showing results attained by 
government institutions, strengthen administrative discipline 
and ensure the implementation of administrative decrees. 
  Continue to penetratingly develop the struggle against 
corruption. To keep government employees at all levels 
honest and industrious is a necessary requirement and important 
guarantee to building socialist market economy and promoting 
economic development. We must not slacken our efforts even 
slightly. We should earnestly implement the decision of the 
central authorities in waging the anti-corruption struggle. 
Leading cadres, particularly cadres at and above the county and 
department levels, must take the lead in performing their duties 
honestly, and become models in observing law and discipline, and 
work selflessly for public interests. We must resolutely punish 
the handful of government employees who have degenerated. In 
handling major and important cases involving leading cadres, we 
must do away with all interferences and prosecute the offenders 
according to law. We must continue to handle special 
prosecutions and combat unhealthy trends. We should further 
strengthen the system of keeping the government clean and 
honest, improve supervision by public opinion, by the society 
and by the supervisory organs. We must strive to use legal and 
administrative means to prevent corruption practices from 
emerging and spreading. Government employees at all levels must 
remain clean and honest and exercise self-discipline, and 
dedicate themselves to serving the people. We must promote 
frugality and practice economy, and wage arduous struggles to 
oppose extravagance. [passage omitted] 

