BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih at the al-Shuhada' </F>
Mosque in Sanaa--live] 
  [Text] Brother citizens, sons of our great Yemeni people, I 
congratulate you in my own name and on behalf of the brothers in 
the political leadership, represented by the Presidential 
Council, the House of Representatives, and the Council of 
Ministers, on the blessed 'Id al-Adha, and the fourth 
anniversary of Yemeni unity, which was declared on 22 May 1990. 
  I send our heartfelt congratulations from al-Shuhada' Mosque 
in the capital Sanaa to all the sons of our people and to the 
valiant personnel of the Armed Forces and the security forces 
while we are receiving two 'ids. The third 'id is the day of 
victory being achieved while martyrs fall on all military fronts 
and along all axes in a triumph for the will of our great Yemeni 
people against the forces of apostasy and secession. 
  At a late hour last night, we received the news, which we do 
not find strange, that the traitor, rebel, and deviant 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid has declared secession. He declared this in his 
own name, and forged facts by saying this was also in the name 
of the parliamentary bloc of the Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP], 
the Democratic Republic of Yemen. He returned to the hateful 
past before 22 May 1990. He claimed he was for unity, and that 
the YSP is a unionist party, and that it will continue to be a 
unionist party. We know full well that they have nothing to do 
with unity. They sought unity unwillingly after the collapse of 
the socialist bloc, and after realizing that the sons of the 
eastern and southern governorates were suffering as a result of 
tyrannical totalitarian rule for 25 years, deteriorating 
conditions, the continuous power struggle, and the massacres 
that took place. I can recall that in 1981, when I went to 
Aden, when I also visited the Hadhramaut Governorate, fighting 
was at its peak in all the Republic's governorates, particularly 
in the central areas. I left here, Sanaa, for Aden, to ask the 
then leadership to restore Yemeni unity. At that time, 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid was in Hadhramaut. He was dismissed from the YSP 
leadership, its political bureau, the central committee, and the 
Yemeni people's presidium, as a result of his violation of the 
[word indistinct] law. We held talks in Hadhramaut, in the 
Saywun District. He said: Why have you come, brother 
president? I told him we came to request the restoration of 
Yemen's unity. He was the same man who came to receive us. He 
said: We cannot accept unity. You are a regime. We are 
another regime. You are a state. We are another state. We 
said we are one people who have the same language and who 
embrace the same Islamic religion. There are no sects or 
minorities in our Yemeni society. This is something I know about 
that retarded secessionist 'Ali Salim al-Bid. 
  When unity came and the Yemeni Republic was proclaimed and 
its flag was hoisted all over Yemen, and they were about to fall 
after the Socialist bloc collapsed, we signed the unity 
agreement and shared power with them. They took fifty percent 
of all basic components of power. We said this was the price of 
unity. We really shared power with them. The homeland started 
to suffer from this clique during the presence of the Socialist 
party in power. The party did not come to unity of its own 
volition. We are very well aware how they came to unity. 
  From the day it took power in the capital, Sanaa, this party 
began to weave one plot after another in the capital. It did 
not come to participate in and uphold its national 
responsibilities to build the state of law and order. It began 
its new plot by instigating parochialism, sectarianism, 
tribalism, and racism among the sons of Yemen, having stifled 
the voices of the good men, the strugglers and the 
revolutionaries in the southern and eastern governorates, and 
after bloody liquidations throughout the rule of that Socialist 
Party. It wiped out scientists, shaykhs, social figures, 
political and cultural figures. We know this very well. Our 
people are well-aware who the Socialist Party destroyed. There 
were mass graveyards. 
  The party arrived in the north, but our brothers in the 
north 
did not know the extent of the deception and treachery of the 
renegade leadership of the Socialist Party. They said they 
wanted to establish the state of law and order, that they had a 
civilized plan. The civilized plan began by sabotaging the 
national economy, plundering the nation's wealth on all levels, 
and destroying establishments with the hammer of Engineer Haydar 
al-'Attas, chairman of the Council of Ministers in the Yemeni 
Republic. This economic and financial destruction began. They 
used people's wealth and property for their own purposes. The 
people were witnessing and hearing. The people thought that, 
well, they may be indigent, let them take some money and be 
satisfied, and then begin construction. But they intended to 
destroy the national economy and spread corruption and anarchy 
in all state organizations. They disturbed security and 
displayed armed presence which disturbed every citizens. They 
said that they wanted a state of law and order. 
  You are aware that the highest-level leaderships have only 2 
to 3 guards, perhaps up to ten. Being exponents of a civilized 
plan, they wanted to end the armed manifestations. But, you 
always found that each member of the party leadership -- at 
least 15 individuals -- had from 100 to 150 armed men and from 
one to four vehicles, with armed men opening the doors of their 
vehicles, disturbing citizens, and driving with unbelievable 
speed in the streets. This is the civilized plan under the 
Socialist Party leadership. 
  How did the crisis begin and why? While we were performing 
'Id al-Adha prayers in al-Jabbanah on this day last year, the 
so-called al-Bid arrived. He was in an abnormal situation. 
Why? Because he did not attend or participate, along with the 
chairman of the presidential council, in the new government's 
swearing-in ceremony, the coalition government of the General 
People's Congress, the Reform Grouping, and the Socialist Party 
the previous evening. The people wondered why al-Bid had begun 
to fabricate the crisis. He said nobody invited him to the oath 
ceremony. The Constitution of the Republic of Yemen says the 
government shall take the constitutional oath in front of the 
chairman of the presidential council. During that period, he 
was not treated like the second-in-command or a presidential 
council member; we actually treated him as another undeclared 
president. Plotting began then. He began his suspect contacts 
to fragment and destroy the homeland.. 
  They destroyed the southern part of the homeland and the 
eastern governorates, as part of a scheme to destroy all the 
gains we managed to achieve in the northern governorates, by 
inciting all sectarian and regional feelings whenever possible. 
This was best proven by the weapons and hardware the security 
organizations seized in various parts of the Republic, including 
Sanaa. Weapons were stockpiled in more than 20 ladies' beauty 
salons, with the aim of destroying the capital. These included 
RPG's, mines, TNT bombs, and rockets. This is the cultural 
project of the Socialist Party leadership. The Socialist Party 
continued this policy and escalated the crisis day after day. 
  The dialogue committee was formed. We gave him more than 75 
percent of this committee's political speech for his cultural 
project. This document was signed in Amman as requested by the 
Socialist Party. I spoke to many brother politicians following 
'Ali Salim al-Bid's return to Aden. I told them this is an 
undeclared secession. Al-Bid's return to Aden was part of an 
undeclared secession plan. 
  Many politicians from the various political organizations 
and 
parties and a large number of Yemeni Socialist Party members 
said this party was established and brought up to be unionist 
and can never be secessionist; it is a unionist party. We told 
them undeclared secession is being practiced on the ground. 
Actually, he practiced and escalated one crisis after another. 
He sought not only to fragment the country into two parts, but 
to fragment Yemen into several countries. 'Ali Salim al-Bid's 
speeches returned through the news media to address the Yemeni 
people. This is 'Ali Salim al-Bid. 
  Late last night, he declared the name of the Democratic 
Republic of Yemen. Who gave him this right? What is its 
legality? This decision has no legality at all. This is an 
invalid decision made by a sick person suffering from 
schizophrenia. This decision is null and void. It was based 
mostly on the claim that most of the members of the 
parliamentary bloc of the southeastern governorates are in the 
capital, Sanaa. We, as well as our Armed Forces and Yemeni 
people, will never accept this secessionist decision and we will 
offer sons, our brothers, friends, and comrades-in-arms as 
martyrs, not for the sake of triumphing over the Socialist 
Party, but for the sake of triumphing for the will of this 
nation and preserving Yemeni unity. Politically, we will offer 
all we can on both the national and international levels to 
avert the continuation of war. 
  However, we announced a cease-fire at midnight to give the 
misguided ones of the Socialist Party leadership the opportunity 
to join constitutional legitimacy. 
  On this religious occasion and the national occasion we 
will celebrate tomorrow, that is, the fourth anniversary of the 
establishment of the Republic of Yemen, I repeat today that this 
anniversary and this unity will continue, God willing, 
regardless of price and circumstances. Our future policy will 
focus on removing the traces of financial and administrative 
abuse, corruption, and what we inherited from the behavior of 
the secessionist YSP leadership. We will rebuild and 
restructure the state on modern and developed bases. We will 
move in the direction of comprehensive development and toward 
the completion of the basic development structures and expansion 
of public services. Development has been frozen since the 
advent of Haydar al-'Attas and his assumption of the post of 
prime minister. He did nothing but loot the state budget. 
Every minister and official among them came only to loot all 
that existed in ministries and institutions. They did so 
deliberately in order to destroy institutions and the state's 
pillars. They wanted to destroy everything accomplished in the 
north so the situation would be similar to what they had done in 
the southern and eastern governorates. 
  The southern and eastern governorates were looking forward 
with hope and confidence to the Republic of Yemen, the state of 
unity, to security and stability, and to fulfilling the needs of 
their regions. However, the YSP leadership deliberately froze 
everything so the citizen or [word indistinct] can rise. This 
was done deliberately by the YSP leadership. 
  'Ali Salim withdrew. If he were a brave leader he would be 
in the beloved capital, Aden, and hold out before fighters. He, 
however, withdrew like a coward to Hadhramaut. He thinks he is 
the guardian of the southern and eastern governorates. I know 
what he means by his withdrawal to Hadhramaut. He does not want 
the south, but wants to establish the great Hadhramaut state. 
He thinks he is the guardian of Hadhramaut. Hadhramaut is more 
unionist than the sons of the capital, Sanaa. Hadhramaut is 
unionist down to the bone. Hadhramaut will not accept the 
trusteeship of the YSP and 'Ali Salim al-Bid. 
  The southern and eastern governorates are not with the YSP 
leadership. They, however, used to be under the iron fist of 
the YSP, which it practiced through strong administration and 
army and security forces, and not through good manners, 
integrity, and sacrifices for this nation. All it is offering 
them is devastation and destruction. By this announcement, the 
YSP thinks it will get their support. It will only get a loud 
cry from all unionists in the Yemeni homeland and unionists in 
the Arab and Islamic world that this is treason. What al-Bid 
did yesterday evening was greater than any other treason. 
  The Middle East Broadcasting Center [MBC] radio broadcast 
the news report before it was declared by 'Ali Salim al-Bid, as 
if it took the news report from 'Ali Salim al-Bid's pocket. It 
is an agreed upon and prearranged issue. The MBC radio carried 
the report before 'Ali Salim al-Bid said he would announce 
secession. He believes secession is legitimate and that it will 
be implemented. We will continue with our decision. We will 
not disavow it, that is, the 72-hour cease-fire. After 72 
hours, if al-Bid does not surrender and hand himself over to the 
nearest police station to face a just trial, fighting and 
shelling will continue against the secessionist elements 
supporting al-Bid and his gang, but not against the masses of 
our people in the eastern and southern governorates, for these 
are our sons, brothers, and children. We have no differences 
with any citizen. The existing war is not a war between north 
and south, but a war between the Yemeni Arab and Muslim people 
and an apostate, deviationist clique in the YSP leadership. 
  We would like to correct some concepts by some brothers in 
the Arab homeland. Regrettably, some biased news media describe 
the fighting raging as a war between the north and the south. 
It is a war between the one, united Yemeni people and a gang in 
the YSP leadership. The war will continue until victory, God 
willing, and until our Yemeni homeland is purged of this wicked 
gang. 
  'Ali Salim al-Bid and some YSP leaders believe the bloodshed 
is for secession. No, this blood is shed for the sake of 
entrenching and strengthening unity. Blood is not being shed to 
split Yemen, but to safeguard unity and to deepen its roots. 
  Dear free citizens, inside and outside the homeland: We must 
stand as one rank to support the heroic fighters and mujahidin 
on all axes, who are fighting on a 1,100-km long front, and who 
sacrifice their lives for the sake of security, stability, and 
prosperity, not for the sake of a party or parties, one person, 
or individual, or sides. At the same time, the misguided ones 
do not know who they are sacrificing their lives for. They are 
sacrificing their lives for the sake of a small gang in the YSP. 
  We are cerebrating the fourth anniversary of Yemeni unity. 
Our political program will be completely different from the 
previous program in which we were partners with the YSP, and 
through which we used to flatter some YSP leaders. We will 
restore tranquility to Yemeni society, entrench stability and 
security, achieve comprehensive and integrated development, and 
promote our country's relations with our neighbors, with the 
Arab world, and with the foreign world, within the framework of 
mutual interest and noninterference in our internal affairs and 
our political decision. This is because the YSP, since it was 
established, has been accustomed to being in someone else's 
arms. Some of the the YSP leaders were in the arms of British 
intelligence. They were raised on this. They were established 
by British intelligence. After Britain left south Yemen, the 
south of the homeland, the YSP moved into the arms of Soviet 
intelligence. Now, it is looking for another intelligence 
agency because it cannot live outside the arms of intelligence. 
It has no national decision at all. This is the YSP, the 
advocate of the civilized project, particularly the advocate of 
the state of law and order. 
  Congratulations to the masses of our people on these two 
occasions; the religious occasion, and the unity day occasion. 
Heartfelt congratulations to you and to the heroic mujahidin 
fighters on every mountain and plain. 
  To the heroes of the Armed Forces and Security, I say be 
confident that unity will survive. I wish you success and 
congratulate you on two national occasions, the national day and 
the 'Id al-Adha. 
  May God's peace and blessing be upon you. 

