Scientific-Technical   Program `Safety of Facilities, Population, 
and the Environment During Chemical Weapon Disposal' 

<F P=102> 937M0175 Moscow ROSSIYSKIY KHIMICHESKIY ZHURNAL (ZHURNAL 
ROSSIYSKOGO KHIMICHESKOGO OBSHCHESTVA IM. D. I. MENDELEYEV) in </F>

Russian Vol. 37 No. 1, Jan-Feb 93 pp 127-132--FOR OFFICIAL USE 
ONLY 
<F P=103> 937M0175 </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYSKIY KHIMICHESKIY ZHURNAL (ZHURNAL 
ROSSIYSKOGO KHIMICHESKOGO OBSHCHESTVA IM. D. I. MENDELEYEV) </F>

<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by AENR Academician I. B. Yevstafyev, Candidate of </F>
Technical Sciences S. G. Grigoryev, Doctor of Technical Sciences 
N. I. Burdakov, and Candidate of Technical Sciences A. V. 
Nikulin; UDC 331.821] 
  [Text] A large part of discussions on the problem of 
chemical weapons (CW) disposal is associated with safe 
completion of this process. Only a well thought out system for 
CW disposal (CWD) safety assurance can serve as a real guarantee 
of achieving the required safety. The creation of such a system 
should have precedence in the set of scientific-technical and 
organizational-practical measures, which, as available foreign 
and domestic experience has shown, are effectively represented 
in the form of a corresponding scientific-technical program 
(STP). 
  The urgency of this type of STP in modern conditions is 
extremely high. It is known that total expenditures on safety 
assurance programs today reach 20% of the total amounts 
allocated to scientific objectives. In the last two decades, 
expenditures on STPs associated with protecting the environment 
from contamination by harmful emissions and waste from the 
chemical industry have noticeably increased. Already at the end 
of the 1970's, the share of expenditures on these objectives at 
15 large companies in the USA was an average 14% of total 
expenditures on scientific work.[1] 
  Therefore, the significant stocks of CW, their extreme 
potential danger to man and the environment, along with the 
current social tension, predetermine the need to create the STP 
``Safety of Facilities, Population, and the Environment During 
Chemical Weapon Disposal.'' The goal of the program is to 
develop scientific methodological principles, continuous 
apparatus, a set of standardizing legal documents, and a system 
of technical means to assure safety in the arrangement, 
construction, and operation of technological systems and 
facilities associated with CW disposal. 
Basis of the STP Content and Structure 
  In creating the STP, it is important to consider features of 
its future implementation. Among these, the following are 
primary: 
  1. Achievement of extremely high indicators of effectiveness 
in the safety assurance of CWD processes with regard to the 
extreme danger of disposal facilities. 
  2. Careful coordination of the STP with founding laws and 
scientific-technical documents in specific and related fields. 
  3. Intent public attention to the problem of disposal and a 
high probability that the public will influence the course of 
implementing specific organizational and scientific-technical 
decisions in a significant way. 
  4. A requirement for achieving close international 
cooperation in solving many CWD problems in view of the global 
nature of the central problem. 
  Analysis of the enumerated principles of CWD processes, as 
well as accumulated experience, allows one to identify a number 
of methodological principles whose subsequent observance serves 
as a definite guarantee against mistakes in developing 
scientific-technical politics in the field of safety assurance 
in CWD processes. Principles of systematization, unity, 
necessary and sufficient fulfillment of safety requirements, the 
concentration of efforts in main directions, the ability to 
implement, and adaptability are primary among these. 
  The indicated principles impose specific requirements on the 
formed STP: 

  -  the systematization principle requires one to consider the 
program as a system of measures closely associated with State 
documents and programs and, primarily, the project ``State 
Program for Chemical Weapon Disposal,'' the State STP ``Safety 
of the Population and National Economic Facilities, Based on the 
Risk of Occurrence of Natural or Industrial Disasters,'' 
approved in December 1990, the sector program for chemical 
industry safety, and other departmental and regional programs in 
which problems of industrial and ecological safety are resolved; 
  -  the unity principle indicates that the STP should be 
indivisible (or undergo minor changes) for various scenarios of 
the development of a situation with CW disposal; 
  -  the principle of necessary and sufficient fulfillment of 
safety 
assurance requirements requires that individual efforts and 
resources correspond to the character and complexity of arising 
scientific-technical problems; subsequent implementation of this 
principle allows one to eliminate conflict between individual 
problems of safety assurance and means for solving them; 
  -  the principle of concentrating efforts in main directions is 
associated with searching the aggregate of problems, which are 
varied in character and nonhomogeneous in significance, for 
those whose solution will allow one to emerge on an acceptable 
level of CWD safety in given time frames and with apportioned 
allocations; 
  -  the principle of the ability to implement indicates the 
feasibility of creating the necessary CWD safety assurance 
methods, based on existing industrial and information 
technologies; 
  -  the adaptability principle proposes that the STP structure 
and 
content should allow one to conduct scientific 
research-experimental design work (NIOKR) on individual problems 
within sufficiently wide ranges of change in the content of CWD 
facilities and technologies, climatic and meteorological 
conditions for facility operation, and requirements of State, 
regional, and departmental standarizing legal documents. 

    The observance of these principles for forming an STP in and 
of itself is not a guarantee that they will be successfully 
fulfilled. Here, a well thought out strategy for implementing 
the program is also important. In connection with this, its form 
should take into account the sequence for solving problems 
within the framework of major scientific directions and be 
specified by direction, including a list of NIOKR, time frames 
for conducting it, and primary organization-implementers. 
  In order to understand how the principles incorporated into 
the STP can be realized, it is advisable to begin with examining 
the CWD process itself, a typical simplified diagram of which is 
shown in the figure. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UST-005L-03A>      Sequence for implementing primary levels of the CWD process. </FIG>


  In the general case, the CWD process goes through sequential 
stages of storage, preparation for transport, transport to the 
disposal facility, and immediate disposal. Analysis of the 
listed stages indicates that in each of them, three primary 
groups of facilities emerge that are subject to mandatory 
inspection within the framework of safety assurance problems and 
problems associated with general scientific approaches: 

  -  the set of technical methods and systems that allow one to 
assure practical realization of all components of the CWD 
process; 
  -  attendants of the CWD system facilities as well as the 
population living in facility site regions; 
  -  environmental facilities. 

    The accepted concept of safety assurance for all listed 
groups of facilities [2] is based on the close interaction of 
systems for predicting danger, assuring technical safety, 
monitoring the environment, and responding immediately to 
possible emergency situations. In such a manner, the basic 
content of the STP, as well as its form and course of 
implementation should correlate with the real CWD mechanism and 
safety concepts for a given process. 
  In order to provide a basis for an efficient STP structure, 
it is expedient to examine it as a system of preliminarily 
applied solutions in the field of safety. In this case, each 
scientific-technical problem must be expressed in the form of a 
set of partial problems and tasks that are connected to one 
another by determined relationships. The overall goal of the 
program is achieved by realizing the partial goals and solving 
the partial tasks. 
  It is clear that the STP structure, as with any other 
hierarchical system, can be given by indicating structural 
elements of the program and the connections between them. 
Therefore, it is desirable to use jointly applied procedures for 
breakdown and synthesis, particularly the ``goal tree'' method, 
whose basis consists of an heuristic procedure for breaking down 
general goals into individual components and giving the results 
in graph form.[3] 
  In order to fit the studied facility, it is advisable to use 
several criteria to perform the breakdown. Thus, the principle 
for dividing the CWD system into the previously indicated 
facility groups may be selected as the starting point for the 
first step of the breakdown: technical methods and systems, 
population, and the environment. In the second step of the 
breakdown, it is better to perform it by key elements of the 
safety assurance system--subsystems of risk analysis, technical 
safety assurance, monitoring, and emergency response.[2] 
  Finally, the third step of the breakdown is conducted by 
means and methods of solving arising scientific-technical 
problems, taking into account the aspects of CWD safety 
assurance selected in [4]. In this case, the extent of the 
breakdown is set effectively in compliance with conditions where 
the goal tree's lower apexes are connected to specializations of 
scientific collectives that are capable of independently solving 
individually costed scientific-technical tasks. 
  The construction of this type of graph is in the interests 
of 
the developing STP because it allows one not only to guarantee 
correlation and coordination of goals with respect to quality, 
but also to conduct a limited evaluation of their relative 
importance later, which is completely essential in determining 
time frames for solving specific problems with limited total 
resources and the impossibility of simultaneously realizing all 
directions of the STP. 
  Directions for STP development have been determined on the 
basis of analyzing requirements for the elemental content of a 
CWD safety assurance system (table 1). 


Table 1. Requirements for CWD Safety System Elements 

Risk Analysis          Technical Safety    Monitoring         Emergency 
                                                              Response 

Development of         Development of      Creation of an     Creation of an 
theories for           theoretical bases   organizing         organizing 
evaluating the         and validation of   concept for        concept for the 
danger of accidents    criteria for        technical          emergency 
at CWD facilities      safety assurance    monitoring of      response system 
                       of technologies     facilities         (ERS) 
                       and engineering 
                       systems 

Development of risk    Development of a    Development of     Development of 
analysis methods for   theory of the       models of the      methods for 
the various levels     failure of          dispersion of      localizing and 
of CWD                 technical           poison gases       eliminating 
                       equipment and       (PG) in the        accidents 
                       engineering         atmosphere and 
                       systems             hydrosphere 

Identification of      Evaluation of the   Development of     Creation of an 
potentially            reliability of      technical means    ERS at CWD 
dangerous operating    technical           for real-time      facilities 
conditions,            equipment           monitoring of 
processes, and                             facilities 
engineering systems 

Development of         Evaluation of the   Development of a   Development of a 
emergency situation    stability of        concept for        computer system 
scenarios              chemical            medical            for support of 
                       ammunition and      monitoring of      decisions made 
                       containers          personnel and      during emergency 
                                           the population     situations at 
                                                              CWD facilities 

Determination of the   Development of      Development of a 
probability that       units and systems   concept for 
emergency situations   of technical        ecological 
will arise             equipment that      monitoring 
                       will assure that 
                       the required 
                       level of risk is 
                       attained at 
                       various levels of 
                       CWD 

Evaluation of the      Creation of 
magnitudes of          safety assurance 
accident               systems for 
consequences for       storage and 
personnel, the         transport of 
population, and the    chemical 
environment            ammunition 

Development of risk 
management methods 
and recommendations 
for improving CWD 
safety 


  The content of primary divisions of the STP, obtained as a 
result of the described approach, taking into account the list 
of protected facilities (see figure), is shown in table 2. 


Table 2. Content of the STP ``Safety of Facilities, Population, and the 
Environment During Chemical Weapon Disposal'' 

Direction        Division         Project                 Expected Result 

1                2                3                       4 

Safety of        Risk analysis    Development of a        Theory for evaluating 
chemical         for CWD          concept for             the danger of 
engineering      facilities       evaluating the danger   accidents at CWD 
facilities                        of accidents at         facilities 
                                  facilities 

                                  Development of a risk   Risk analysis methods 
                                  analysis methodology    for all levels of CWD 


                                  Processing of           Construction of 
                                  preliminary data for    scenarios for 
                                  evaluating the danger   anticipated, 
                                  of accidents            projected, and 
                                                          hypothetical 
                                                          accidents 

                                                          Evaluation of the 
                                                          probability that 
                                                          emergency situations 
                                                          will arise at CWD 
                                                          facilities 

                                  Development of          Evaluation of 
                                  methods for             magnitudes of 
                                  evaluating the          accident consequences 
                                  magnitudes of           for personnel, the 
                                  accident consequences   population, and the 
                                                          environment 

                                  Development of risk     Recommendations for 
                                  management methods      risk management and 
                                                          improving safety at 
                                                          CWD facilities 

                 Technical        Development of          Theoretical bases for 
                 safety           criteria for safety     safety assurance of 
                 assurance at     assurance of            technologies and 
                 CWD facilities   technologies and        engineering systems 
                                  engineering systems 

                                                          Criteria for 
                                                          evaluating the safety 
                                                          of technologies and 
                                                          engineering systems 

                                  Creation of a theory    Methods and means for 
                                  for the failure of      assuring safety at 
                                  technical equipment     CWD facilities 
                                  and engineering 
                                  systems during the 
                                  CWD process 

                                  Analysis of the         Recommendations for 
                                  stability of chemical   improving the 
                                  ammunition to           stability of chemical 
                                  physical and thermal    ammunition and 
                                  stresses                transport-processing 
                                                          containers that are 
                                                          subjected to physical 
                                                          and thermal stresses 
                                                          during loading and 
                                                          unloading operations 

                                  Development of          Technical equipment 
                                  technical equipment     and instruments that 
                                  systems that will       will assure the 
                                  assure that the         necessary level of 
                                  required level of       CWD safety 
                                  risk is attained at 
                                  the various CWD 
                                  levels 

                                  Creation of safety      Recommendations for 
                                  assurance systems for   improving the safety 
                                  storage and transport   of CW transport 
                                  of chemical 
                                  ammunition 

                 Development of   Development of a        Theoretical bases for 
                 a system for     concept for             organizing technical 
                 monitoring CWD   monitoring CWD          monitoring 
                 facilities       facilities 

                                  Development of models   Mathematical models 
                                  of PG dispersion in     of PG dispersion in 
                                  the atmosphere,         the atmosphere, 
                                  hydrosphere, and        hydrosphere, and 
                                  lithosphere             lithosphere 

                                  Validation of methods   Methods for 
                                  for monitoring the      monitoring CWD 
                                  work zone of            facilities, taking 
                                  facilities              into account their 
                                                          various operating 
                                                          levels 

                                  Development of          Technical means for 
                                  technical means for a   monitoring CWD 
                                  CWD facility            facilities 
                                  monitoring system 

                                  Creation of a single    Center for monitoring 
                                  center for monitoring   a CWD facility 
                                  a CWD facility 

                 Development of   Development of the      Theoretical and 
                 ERS at CWD       ERS concept at CWD      practical bases for 
                 facilities       facilities              organizing ERS at CWD 
                                                          facilities 

                                  Validation of the ERS   Recommendations for 
                                  structure, content,     ERS content and 
                                  and equipment           technical equipment 

                                  Development of          Methods for 
                                  methods for             eliminating accidents 
                                  eliminating accidents   at CWD facilities 
                                  at CWD facilities 

                                  Development of          Organization of ERS 
                                  proposals for           at CWD facilities 
                                  creating ERS at CWD 
                                  facilities 

                                  Creation of a           Computer systems for 
                                  computer system for     support of decisions 
                                  support of decisions    made during emergency 
                                  made during emergency   situations at CWD 
                                  situations at CWD       facilities 
                                  facilities 

                                  Validation of schemes   Organization of a 
                                  for CWD facility ERS    system for 
                                  interaction with        information about and 
                                  Russian departments     preparedness for 
                                  of the System for       emergency situations 
                                  Prevention of and       in regions where CWD 
                                  Action During           facilities are 
                                  Emergency Situations    located (adaptation 
                                                          of the APELL 
                                                          international system 
                                                          for CWD facilities) 

Population       Safety           Validation of the       Norms for insuring 
safety           assurance of     social-psychological    the population 
                 the population   bases of safety 
                                  assurance 

                                                          Recommendations for 
                                                          developing a regional 
                                                          infrastructure 

                 Development of   Development of          Methods for 
                 a system for     medical criteria for    monitoring the 
                 monitoring the   safety                  population's health 
                 health status 

                                  Development of          Organization of 
                                  methods for medically   medical monitoring in 
                                  monitoring the          regions where CWD 
                                  population              facilities are 
                                                          located 

                 Development of   Development of          Standards and 
                 emergency        scientific bases for    indicators for 
                 response         protecting the          protecting the 
                 methods          population when         population during 
                                  emergency situations    emergency situations 
                                  arise at CWD            at CWD facilities 
                                  facilities 

Environmental    Ecological       Development of          Methods for 
Safety           safety           methods for             evaluating the 
                 assurance at     evaluating the          environmental status 
                 CWD facilities   environmental status    during the CWD 
                                  at CWD facilities       process 

                                  Development of a        Methodology for 
                                  methodology for         conducting ecological 
                                  conducting ecological   forecasting for 
                                  forecasting for         regions in which CWD 
                                  regions in which CWD    facilities are 
                                  facilities are          located 
                                  located 

                                  Development of safety   Safety assurance 
                                  assurance methods for   methods for plants 
                                  plants and animals 

                                                          Safety assurance 
                                                          methods for animals 

                 Development of   Development of          Methods for 
                 a system for     methods for             monitoring plants 
                 monitoring the   monitoring plants 
                 environment 
                 during CWD 

                                  Development of          Methods for 
                                  methods for             monitoring animals 
                                  monitoring animals 

International    Development of   Development of          Unified 
cooperation in   a CWD safety     unified international   interchangeable 
problems of      assurance        standards and           standards for CWD 
CWD safety       system           requirements for the    safety 
                                  technical and 
                                  ecological safety 
                                  assurance of CWD 

                                  Development of          Schemes for the 
                                  components of           interaction of 
                                  international           monitoring systems 
                                  monitoring and ERS      and ERS 
                                  systems 

                 Analysis of      Organization and        Participation in 
                 international    running of              international 
                 experience in    international           scientific 
                 CWD safety       scientific              conferences and 
                 assurance        conferences             seminars 

                                  Joint conducting of     Participation in the 
                                  scientific research     completion of 
                                  in the field of         scientific and expert 
                                  safety assurance        investigations 

                                  Development of          Setting up projects 
                                  international           for specific problems 
                                  programs on CWD         in the field of CWD 
                                  safety problems         safety assurance 

                                  Educating               Convening an 
                                  international experts   international panel 
                                  on CWD programs,        of experts on CWD 
                                  projects, and           programs, projects, 
                                  objectives              and objectives 

                                  Training cadres in      Programs for training 
                                  the field of CWD        cadres for CWD 
                                  safety                  systems 


  From table 2, it follows that as a result of implementing 
the 
proposed STP, the following will be developed: 

  -  safety standards in the form of requirements for the 
design, construction, and operation of CWD facilities, 
organization of the day-to-day activity of facility attendants, 
life of the population, preservation of the ecological 
background, and the set of technical means for assuring adopted 
safety standards; 
  -  a set of required technical methods that will allow one to 
implement the CWD safety system; 
  -  proposals for improving the adopted CWD safety system. 

    The next steps in setting up the STP will be to detail 
designated projects, to back specific NIOKR and facilities with 
financing, to select primary implementers, and to determine time 
frames for completing the work. 
  After the program has been set up, it is proposed to convene 
a panel of experts from Russian State institutions and to obtain 
its approval. Implementation of program tasks is planned for the 
period 1993-2000 with subsequent development until 2010. 
  The program calls for combined financing from various 
sources, depending on decided tasks, and it will be carried out 
from the following: 

  -  allocations from the national budget, divided among the 
development of priority directions of science and technology, 
the organization of technical and ecological monitoring and the 
development of corresponding technical methods, and to guarantee 
control over the state of the environment in regions where CWD 
facilities will be located; 
  -  resources allocated by international organizations for the 
implementation of programs in the field of international 
cooperation within the framework of acting national and 
international programs and international treaties for 
social-economic and legal regulation of population safety 
problems in regions where CWD facilities will be located. 

    Proposed expenditures for implementing scientific-technical 
measures in the program ``Safety of Facilities, Population, and 
the Environment During Chemical Weapon Disposal'' may comprise 
40-50 million rubles (in 1991 costs) or 8-10 million dollars. 
  The mechanism for imlementing the STP envisions the 
following: 

  -  utilization of obtained results as the basis 
for designing, constructing, and operating CWD facilities; 
  -  development of standardizing technical documentation that 
governs requirements for designing, constructing, operating, and 
dismantling CWD facilities, reducing their accident danger, 
protecting the environment, and protecting personnel and the 
population from the harmful effects of industrial disasters; 
  -  creation of scientific bases and develoment of safe 
technologies, technical systems, and equipment; 
  -  development of systems for monitoring the environment and for 
emergency response; 
  -  development of bases for legal, social, medical, and economic 
regulation of safety; 
  -  creation of bases for organizing international cooperation in 
the field of safety of technical systems, personnel, population, 
and the environment during CWD. 

    It should be noted that specific NIOKR within the framework 
of the proposed program already began in 1991. Toward this goal, 
basic research associated with developing proposals on 
organizing technical monitoring of mustard gas and lewisite 
storage facilities and on designing terminals for their removal 
from stationary tanks has begun at a number of STP divisions. 
Methods are being developed to evaluate the danger of accidents 
at CWD facilities, and preliminary data are being processed to 
evaluate the risk of poison gas (PG) storage facilities. Work is 
being conducted to evaluate the state of the environment in 
regions where PG storage facilities are located and the validity 
of ecological forecasting methods. Moreover, research on 
evaluating the health status of the population living near 
regions where PG is stored and the validity of medical methods 
for monitoring personnel and the population has begun. Great 
attention has been focused on conducting scientific research 
toward creating an emergency response system (ERS) for CWD 
assurance. In order to complete this work, leading scientific 
organizations (GRNIIOKhT, TsNIImash [Central Scientific Research 
Institute for Machine Building], Giprosintez [State Institute 
for the Design and Planning of Chemical Synthesis], NIIGTP, 
Institute of Toxicology, VNIIPO, etc.) and educational 
institutions (MGU [Moscow State University], SGU [Saratov Order 
Of the Red Banner of Labor State University imeni N. G. 
Chernyshevskiy or Smolensk State University], UdmGU [Udmurtia 
State University], IAE [Institute of Atomic Energy imeni I. V. 
Kurchatov], MIFI [Moscow Order of the Red Banner of Labor 
Engineering Physics Institute], etc.) have joined forces. 
  Specialists involved in developing the CWD safety system 
participated in international scientific conferences organized 
by UNEP that were devoted to discussing ecological safety 
problems and creation of the ERS. It has been planned to have 
foreign specialists participate in conducting scientific and 
expert investigations of the CWD safety problem. 
  The effect of introducing STP developments will be 
determined 
by the extent to which accidents are prevented, the reduction in 
economic losses, and the decrease in social and medical 
consequences of their liquidation. 
References 
  1. Cashman J.R. In Hazardous Material Emergencies, 
Response and Control. Lancaster (USA): Technomic Publishing 
Co., Inc., 1988 p 390. 
  2. Yevstafyev I. B., Grigoryev S. G. In Problemy 
bezopasnosti pri chrezvychaynykh situatsiyakh [Problems of 
Safety During Emergency Situations]. Moscow: VINITI No. 6, 1991 
pp 118-124. 
  3. Pospelov G. S., Ven V. L., Sokolov V. M., et al. 
Problemy programmno-tselevogo planirovaniya i 
upravleniya [Problems of System Programming Planning and 
Management]. Moscow: Nauka, 1981. 
  4. Chernoplekov A. N., Yevstafyev I. B., Grigoryev S. G. 
See [2], pp 103-117. 
  COPYRIGHT: Rossiyskiy khimicheskiy zhurnal (Zh. Ros. khim. 
o-va im. D. I. Mendeleyeva), 1993. 

