Foreign     Economic Review:  EASTERN EUROPE Vol. II, No. 54, 
December 29, 1993 

   Notice To Readers:  FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a subtitled series 
published by FBIS Europe/Lat in America Group.  The Survey series 
features brief summaries of foreign media reports on topical issues 
compiled from the most recent sources available to FBIS.  Any and 
all comment or analysis contained herein is attributable to the 
cited media source. 

   Europe Economic Review is a subseries of FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY 
published by the East and West Europe Divisions of Europe/Latin 
America Group with contributions from FBIS overseas bureaus.  Europe 
Economic Review is intended to supplement coverage of European 
economic issues by the FBIS Daily Reports for West and East Europe 
and other FBIS publications.  Foreign news, feature, and editorial 
reports selected for summary in this publication normally do not 
appear as full-text translations in other FBIS publications. 

   The contents of Europe Economic Review consist of abstracts of 
foreign media coverage of European economic developments under two 
main geographic headings: 

   -- Western Europe:  Drawing on West European, Canadian, and 
Turkish media, this section reports on national and regional 
economic issues, focusing on economic competitiveness, key 
industries, regional economic integration, internal economic 
policies and performance, and foreign trade and investment. 

   -- Eastern Europe:  Citing East European and, where appropriate, 
other foreign media sources, this section highlights East European 
efforts to rebuild national economies and achieve integration into 
the European Community and the global economy, focusing on policy 
debates and practical action geared toward the implementation of 
internal economic reforms and industrial restructuring and on 
developments in foreign trade, cooperation, and investment from 
national and regional perspectives. 

   Under these two main headings, summaries of foreign media reports 
on all categories of economic issues generally are grouped under 
subheadings by subject, country, or region. 

   FOREIGN MEDIA SURVEY is a U.S. Government publication.  Its 
contents in no way represent the policies, views, or attitudes of 
the U.S. Government. 

   POLAND 

   FIRST TEST OF STOCK EXCHANGE RULE ON NEW SHARE ISSUES:  The 
planned one-for-four rights issue by Poland's Export Development 
Bank (Bank Rozwoju Eksportu BRE) will be the first test of a new 
regulation covering new share issues on the Warsaw stock exchange. 
The stock exchange passed a new regulation covering preemptive 
rights on November 30, although it was only made available to 
investors on December 9, according to which the price adjustment 
between the existing shares and the new issue is to be made at the 
stock-market session immediately following the fixing date for the 
entitlement rights.  According to Ryszard Czerniawski, legal 
director of the Warsaw stock exchange, the new regulation will 
prevent existing shareholders from making excess profits out of 
their rights to the new issue.  BRE is planning to raise 500 billion 
zlotys (Z) ($25 million) through the issue of 500,000 new shares at 
a price of Z1 million per share, based on the shareholder register 
as at December 13.  Existing shareholders are to be offered one new 
share for every four held at that date. 

   The stock market is, however, unhappy at the new share issue 
planned by furniture-maker Swarzedz in the new year, under which 
existing shareholders will not be offered preemptive rights, but 
will be granted preference in the event of over-subscription.  "It 
cannot be ruled out that these plans are contrary to the existing 
law, but we will make our official position known after we have 
received a detailed explanation from the company," Czerniawski 
explained.  Meanwhile, the steady growth of interest in the stock 
exchange has put pressure on the cost-bases of Polish brokerage 
houses, and they, in turn, are responding by sharply increasing 
their charges for opening new brokerage accounts. 

   Under Poland's paperless trading system, investors must hold a 
brokerage account, while their investments are lodged with a central 
securities depository.  The cost of opening an account has until 
recently been minimal, with brokerage costs largely covered from 
transaction commissions, but brokers privately fear that the 
prospect of a "blitz" on their offices by smaller investors trying 
to dispose of their handfuls of shares from the Bank Slaski 
privatization will lead to a proliferation of costly, almost-dormant 
accounts.  The most extreme increase is planned by Bank Slaski 
itself, which is planning a five-fold hike in its account-opening 
charges from the present Z1O0,OOO zlotys ($5) to Z500,OOO. 

   The increasing interest in the stock market has also forced 
brokerages to limit the number of new accounts to be opened per day, 
because of excessive demand and a lack of qualified staff.  In one 
case, that of the Bank of Economic Initiatives (Bank Inicjatyw 
Gospodarczych BIG), the bank's brokerage arm has imposed a 
moratorium on new accounts until mid-December.  According to BIG, 
this is linked to the need to prepare the bank's computer system for 
the planned increase of market trading sessions in the new year. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1400 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   SILESIAN BANK DENIES MAKING EXCESS PROFITS FROM SHARE OFFER:  The 
Katowice-based Silesian Bank (Bank Slaski), faced with widespread 
allegations that it earned excess profits because of the massive 
over-subscription of the recent flotation of its shares, has issued 
a strongly-worded denial of the charges.  The BSK board denied press 
claims that the massive over-subscription in the share issue had 
given the bank an interest-free loan running into trillions of 
zlotys by virtue of the prepayments by would-be investors. 

   The BSK board notes that "it is not possible to invest a sum of 
Z5 trillion ($250 million -- the estimated amount received from 
applicants) on the Polish money markets for a period of three weeks, 
where the deposit must be made on a low-risk basis."  Furthermore, 
the board notes that the costs of handling the money received had 
been high, and that 23 percent of the sum received had been 
deposited with the National Bank of Poland as a non-interest-bearing 
reserve. 

   The BSK board insisted that "despite certain distortions," 
smaller shareholders will be the beneficiaries of the issue, and not 
"a small group of sharks," as the press has suggested.  It noted 
thatthe risks and consequences of over-subscription had been clearly 
spelled out in the issue prospectus, and that prospective investors 
had signed a declaration to that effect.  BSK had been aware of the 
likelihood of heavy over-subscription, and had itself taken no 
specific steps through advertising and promotion to inflate the 
demand for the shares.  Faced with the prospect of thousands of 
shareholders trying to unload a handful of shares each, the BSK 
board called for "appreciation of what this will entail for 
brokerage offices, confronted with 700-800,000 additional clients 
whose affairs will need to be sorted out in a matter of days, and 
for forbearance, if service does not meet with the expectations of 
clients." (Warsaw PAP in English 1154 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   KRUPP FOUNDATION ASSISTANCE TO POLAND:  Aleksander Luczak, Polish 
deputy prime minister and minister of education, and Berthold Beiz, 
chairman of the Krupp Foundation, have signed a document summing up 
12 years of scientific and technological cooperation.  During these 
years, the Foundation has earmarked 15 million German marks to 
support Polish research studies at the Zabrze Center for Coal 
Enrichment.  Fifty percent of the costs of setting up the center 
have been paid by Krupp.  The Foundation has also donated 4.7 
million marks to the Warsaw Child Health Center.  Its total aid 
granted to Polish institutions during the past 20 years reached 23.5 
million marks.  The Foundation has extended its aid to the library 
and printing house of the Jagiellonian University of Krakow, the 
Lublin Catholic University, the Academy of Catholic Theology, and 
many other institutions, as well as to a number of young artists. 
The German side finances scholarships for Poles studying at the 
Viadrin European University in Frankfurt an der Oder and supports 
the miners' occupational diseases research center in Lublin. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1546 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   LOT, KLM TO INCREASE WARSAW-AMSTERDAM FLIGHTS:  LOT Polish 
Airlines and the Dutch airline KLM plan to increase the weekly 
number of flights between Warsaw and Amsterdam from 7 to 14 in the 
near future, spokesman for the Polish airline Henryka Kopacz said on 
9 December.  Marzena Grabiszewska-Gryka, spokeswoman for the Polish 
Ministry of Transportation, said that the Polish and Dutch aviation 
authorities have concluded a round of talks on a new government 
aviation agreement.  Both sides agreed on the program of air 
connection for the current winter and the forthcoming summer season. 
The talks, now nearing their end, were started last year.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1914 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   EIB LOANS FOR RAILWAY MODERNIZATION, SMALL ENTERPRISES:  Poland 
has received two loans from the European Investment Bank (EIB) worth 
250 million ECU for the modernization of the Polish section of the 
Berlin-Warsaw route (200 million ECU) and a number of undertakings 
in small enterprises (50 million ECU), the EIB reported on 9 
December.  The total value of the modernization work, to last until 
1997, is estimated at 487 million ECU.  The undertaking is also 
financed by the European Commission through the PHARE (Economic 
Reconstruction Aid for Poland and Hungary) program, and a loan from 
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is also 
expected.  The 50 million ECU loan is to be appropriated for 
industry modernization, environment protection and energy 
conservation.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2138 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   WALESA, PAWLAK, RECEIVE AMOCO OFFICIAL:  On 9 December, President 
Lech Walesa received Patrick J. Early, vice-president of Amoco 
Corporation, and Amoco's representatives working in Poland to 
discuss the firm's plans to exploit natural gas and oil in Poland. 
President Walesa said that he hoped that Amoco would help Poland 
develop her economy.  The president stressed the role of the 
extraction and oil industries in making the Polish economy 
independent in terms of economy and policy.  He called on American 
firms for greater involvement in investing in our country. 

   Patrick J. Early was also received by Prime Minister Waldemar 
Pawlak to discuss the implementation of two contracts, signed by 
Amoco and the Polish Government.  The contracts, signed in 1992 and 
1993, gave the Chicago-based Amoco the right to prospect and exploit 
oil and natural gas as well as methane deposits in central and 
south-eastern parts of Poland and in upper Silesia.  Following these 
meetings, the American businessman told journalists that to 
implement the contracts, certain questions related to taxes and hard 
currency needed to be worked out but declined to specify them.  He 
only said that it is indispensable to adjust the Polish tax system 
to one that is binding in the world and expressed hope that his 
corporation will start operations in Poland soon.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 2209 GMT 9 Dec 93 ) 

   HEWLETT-PACKARD RECORDS 77-PERCENT INCREASE IN ORDERS:  Hewlett- 
Packard recorded in fiscal year 1993 a 77-percent growth of orders 
for computer-related equipment in Poland as compared to 1992, the 
company's sales and marketing manager for Central and Eastern Europe 
Owen Kemp said on 9 December.  Addressing the Hewlett-Packard annual 
news conference at the Bristol Hotel in Warsaw, Kemp said that the 
value of orders in 1993 totalled $45 million.   He explained the 
increased number of orders by the ever-growing demand from 
customers, mainly banks and governmental bodies, for reliable high- 
quality products like computers and peripherals. 

   Also during the conference, Piotr Smolski, who replaced Adam 
Kowalski as head of Hewlett-Packard Poland as of November 1, said 
that the Polish team of Hewlett-Packard, which presently consists of 
85 professionals, will be expanding.  He stressed that Hewlett- 
Packard will continue to train computer specialists and expand 
professional service throughout Poland in the coming year.  The 
Hewlett-Packard company of Palo Alto, California, is one of the 
world's leading manufacturers of computer and peripheral products, 
networking products, measurement systems and electronic components. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2327 GMT 9 Dec 93 AU) 

   RELEASE OF MEAT RESERVES EASES SITUATION ON MARKET:  The decision 
of the Agricultural Market Agency to release its meat reserves has 
eased the situation on the market and has proved that meat shortages 
are not as acute as was previously forecast.  The agency has offered 
12.5 thousand tons of meat, of which only 6 tons has been bought so 
far by meat-processing plants, a director in the Agricultural Market 
Agency said on 9 December.   Also on 9 December, the "Pek-Pol" meat- 
processing and distribution company announced it had decided to 
lower retail prices for some meat products sold by its chain of 
shops throughout the country.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1103 GMT 10 
Dec 93 AU) 

   FIRST FOREIGN BROKERAGE OPENS IN WARSAW:  Creditanstalt 
Securities Inc. will be the first foreign brokerage to offer its 
services in Warsaw.  The head of the office, Wolfgang Bauer, told 
reporters in Warsaw that its services will be available only to 
institutional investors, and the minimum investment was set at Z50O 
million zlotys (about $25,000).  The chairman of the Warsaw Stock 
Exchange, Wieslaw Rozlucki, said that the Creditanstalt group, the 
owner of the brokerage, was instrumental in drawing the bulk of 
foreign investors now present at the Warsaw exchange.  Foreign 
investors hold some 20 to 25 percent of shares traded at the 
exchange and account for some 10 percent of turnover, Rozlucki said. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1524 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   DEBATE ON OIL INDUSTRY RESTRUCTURING:  Experts from seven Polish 
refineries, the CPN gasoline distributor, the Progress and Business 
Foundation, and the European Union met in Warsaw on 10 December to 
discuss the transformation of the Polish oil sector.  Maciej 
Zebrowski of the Progress and Business Foundation, which is working 
on the restructuring project, said that it was based on the 
principle of "a gradual liberalization of the fuel market" in 
Poland.  He warned against early deregulation of petrol prices in 
view of the absence of mechanisms protecting consumers.  Experts of 
the European Union advocated the privatization of one of the 
refineries, as well as the CPN oil trader and distributor.  Other 
refineries should also be privatized in stages, they said.  (Warsaw 
PAP in English 1526 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   MOSTOSTAL EXPORT BUYS 80 PERCENT OF ZAMET SHARES:  Mostostal 
Export Inc. has bought 80 percent of the shares in the Zamet SA 
mechanical plant in Tarnowskie Gory (Katowice Province) for Z17.6 
billion (some $900,000).  The remaining shares will be sold to the 
Zamet employees at preferential prices, the Privatization Ministry 
announced on 10 December.  The investor is obliged to increase the 
capital of the plant by Z32 billion within one month of signing the 
agreement.  Mostostal will also invest 50 billion zlotys within the 
next three years.  Under the agreement the present level of 
employment is to be maintained for 24 months.  Zamet manufactures 
machines and equipment for the mining and steel industries and, due 
to the recession in mining, is in a bad financial condition.  The 
company hopes that after the transaction with Mostostal it will get 
new export orders.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2002 GMT 1O Dec 93 AU) 

   BOROWSKI CALLS FOR STUDY OF LONDON CLUB PROPOSAL:  It is too 
early to assess the proposal of the London Club of commercial banks 
concerning the reduction of the Polish debt, according to a 10 
December statement by Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister 
Marek Browski.  REUTER reported that the London Club put forward new 
proposals concerning the reduction of the Polish debt, which amounts 
to $12.3 billion.  Quoting bank sources, REUTER said that the banks 
proposed to change the debt into a long-term discount bond and 
offered a debt redemption of one-third.  We have to consider the 
banks' proposal, Borowski said, recognizing that it is too early to 
make any assessments.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2146 GMT 1O Dec 93 AU) 

   INCREASED SALES OF FRENCH FOOD PRODUCTS:  Some Warsaw shops have 
been offering French cheese, processed vegetables, spices, wines, 
and champagne during the French Food Week that started on 10 
December.  On show are primarily products of French firms affiliated 
by the club of exporters to countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
(PECO Club) and other firms well-known in Poland, including Danone. 
According to representatives of the Sopexa firm promoting French 
food abroad, the offer includes products that enrich the Poles' menu 
but are not competitive to Polish food.  Sales of French foodstuffs 
have risen by 45 percent in Poland over the past seven months. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2148 GMT 10 Dec 93 AU) 

   CENTRAL PLANNING OFFICE DRAFTS 1994-97 ECONOMIC PLAN:  The basic 
aim of the government will be to improve the material situation of 
society, reads the draft "Program of Socio-Economic Policy for 1994- 
97" prepared by the Central Office of Planning (CUP).  The document 
is to be presented to the government soon. 

   According to CUP, in 1997 consumption will increase by 14 
percent, unemployment will not exceed 13.5 percent, and investments 
in education and health care will not be lower than in 1989.  In the 
opinion of the planning office, this year's economic results "allow 
us to assume that the economy has overcome the recession," but the 
growth tendencies have not been steady enough yet.  The main threats 
to economic stability are posed by the bad state of public finances, 
the deficit in foreign trade and low-profit-making enterprises.  CUP 
intends to strengthen the purchasing power of the Polish zloty and 
reduce inflation, which is to drop from 27.2 percent this year to 14 
percent next year.  In order to improve the Polish banking system, 
CUP wants to prepare a separate program for bank mergers.  According 
to the project, out of 14 big banking institutions that exist now, 
only five to eight will remain till 1997. 

   The draft program of socio-economic policy also envisages a 6- 
percent rise in Polish exports in 1994.  To ensure this increase, 
CUP plans to implement a system of investment reliefs and improve 
credit systems, as well as set up a special institution insuring 
credits for exporters.  According to CUP, an important element of 
the trade policy would be to reenter the markets of Eastern Europe 
and to continue negotiations with Western Europe about opening their 
markets to Polish products.  Polish products should also be promoted 
in non-European markets in China, Japan, India or Latin America. 

   As for privatization, CUP envisages the privatization of some 
800-1,000 state-owned enterprises next year.  Also, the first phase 
of the mass privatization program -- the introduction of national 
investment funds, will be implemented in 1994.  The reprivatization 
law is to be ready by mid-1994.  CUP also wants to verify the 
privatization processes of the state-owned farms.  As concerns 
social policy, the government basic aims should include the 
improvement of social security and creating conditions conducive to 
offering equal opportunity to all citizens.  The program of 
reforming the social insurance system will be ready within half a 
year along with the reform of education.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
1858 GMT 11 Dec 93 AU) 

   OFFICIALS VIEW MINING SECT0R PROBLEMS:  The managing director of 
the State Coal Mining Agency, Andrzej Karbownik, said on 10 December 
that the "present program for preventing the collapse of mining is 
positive, but lacks funding."  He was speaking at the Mining 
Industry Discussion Forum in Katowice.  Industry Minister Marek Pol 
said that the decisions reached at the forum were to help formulate 
the final version of the government plan for restructuring industry. 
Janina Kraus, a parliamentary deputy for the Confederation for an 
Independent Poland (KPN), demanded that coal exports be increased to 
35-40 million tons a year.  She argued against allowing foreign 
capital to take over any Polish mines 

   Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) deputy Andrzej Szarawarski 
stressed that a clearly defined legal-financial system was necessary 
in Polish mining.  He thought mines should be allowed the autonomy 
to be able to join together in various ways, but on the basis of 
mutual interests, and not for administrative reasons.  Eugeniusz 
Ciszak from the Mining Chamber of Commerce said that "mining could 
not be seen as a few dozen mines but as a fuel-energy complex, 
grouping together over 200 mines and other workplaces connected with 
the mining industry."  He maintained that, for three years, plans to 
restructure mining had concentrated on extraction to the detriment 
of the auxiliary branches of the mining industry.  Deputy Industry 
Minister Eugeniusz Morawski added that "in Poland the cost of 
producing a unit of energy from coal is two and a half times cheaper 
than from oil or gas, forms of energy that are in short supply." 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1907 GMT 11 Dec 93 AU) 

   FSO, GENERAL MOTORS EUROPE FORM JOINT VENTURE:  The Warsaw FSO 
car plant, General Motors Europe, the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade, and the Finance Ministry signed a cooperation agreement in 
Warsaw on 13 December, including a contract providing for the 
establishment of a joint venture company between FSO and General 
Motors Europe and an investment accord between the Polish Government 
and General Motors Europe.  Under the agreement, up to 10,000 Opel 
Astra cars will be assembled in the FSO plant annually starting from 
autumn 1994.  The documents were signed by Minister of Industry and 
Trade Marek Pol, FSO General Director Andrzej Tyszkiewicz, head of 
General Motors Europe Luis R. Hughes, and head of 0pel AG David J. 
Herman.  General Motors Europe is to invest some 10 million German 
marks at the start but its investments will total 75 million marks a 
year after the production is launched.  Output capacity is then to 
reach 33,000 cars annually and employment level -- 1,000 workers. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1837 GMT 13 Dec 93 AU) 

   JAPAN HELPS FINANCE LABORATORY FOR POLISH SURVEYING CENTER:  A 
fully computerized and automated photo-reproduction laboratory was 
opened at the Center of Surveying and Cartographic Documentation 
inside the Ministry of Construction on 14 December to enable Polish 
surveyors to process aerial photographs of terrain.  The institution 
was set up with financial assistance from the Japanese Government. 
Construction Minister Barbara Blida told journalists that this was a 
laboratory that met the world's highest standards.  Japanese 
Ambassador Nagao Hyodo said that devices for drawing colored maps 
would be installed at the laboratory in the second stage to 
considerably increase the Center's potential.  An aerial photograph, 
used to draw a map, can also serve to grasp the ecological condition 
of a terrain and to detect unreported buildings when making their 
cadastral surveys.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1910 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   NEW COMPUTER SYSTEMS FOR FIAT AUTO POLAND:  Representatives of 
the Italian Fiat concern announced on 14 December that they intend 
to introduce new computer systems and new industrial technologies at 
the Fiat Auto Poland company in the years 1994-1995.  The 
announcement was made during a conference on the evolution of 
computer systems in the Polish car industry, which began in Szczyrk, 
Bielsko-Biala province.  According to Marco Merlini, chief expert 
responsible for the computer sector, the introduction of an 
integrated system, which is expected to rationalize the work of the 
administration and the accounts department, will start on January 1, 
1994.  Merlini also said that the installation of computer systems 
controlling production will begin in the middle of next year. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2159 GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   SCHNEIDER ELECTRONICS GROUP OPENS POLISH BRANCH:  The Schneider 
group, the world leader in electronics and automation, has opened a 
branch in Poland, a director of Schneider Poland Ltd. told a news 
conference in Warsaw on 14 December.  "The firm plans to control 25 
percent of the Polish electronic market," Antoni Wysocki, technical 
director of the newly opened branch, said.  This year, the firm's 
turnover in Poland has reached 3O million French francs.  The 
biggest Polish clients are the electric power stations in Belchatow 
and Kozienice and the Labedy ironworks.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2322 
GMT 14 Dec 93 AU) 

   NOVEMBER UNEMPLOYMENT FIGURES:  In November 1993, there were 
2,846,183 registered unemployed, up by 37,138 persons or 1.3 percent 
over the October figure.  In November, 15.5 percent of all persons 
of working age were unemployed, as compared to 15.3 percent in 
October, announced Deputy Labor Minister Jerzy Szreter at a 15 
December news conference at the ministry in Warsaw.  Forty-two 
provinces have experienced a growth in unemployment.  The greatest 
increases have occurred in the provinces of Szczecin, 4.5 percent, 
and Slupsk, 4 percent.  A decrease in unemployment was noted in 6 
provinces, the greatest being noted in the province of Opole at 2.2 
percent.  The highest rates of structural unemployment were noted in 
the provinces of Koszalin (28.4 percent) and Suwalki, while the 
lowest were to be found in the provinces of Krakow at 7 percent and 
Warsaw (7.7 percent).  Fifty-two percent of all unemployed were 
entitled to unemployment benefits.  Women made up 52.8 percent of 
the unemployed.  Szreter described the growth in the unemployment 
rate in November as a seasonal phenomenon, which the Labor Ministry 
was expecting.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1447 GMT 15 Dec 93 AU) 

   FOREIGN CREDITS GOING UNUSED:  Several billion dollars worth of 
credits offered to Poland by international financial institutions 
and foreign banks remain unused, according to Jerzy Hylewski, head 
of the Department of International Financial Institutions at the 
National Bank of Poland.  His statement was confirmed by Ian Hume, 
head of the World Bank mission in Poland.  Both bank officials were 
addressing a conference opened here devoted to the possibilities of 
obtaining foreign and polish credits by Polish businessmen.  The 150 
businessmen attending the conference are to try to learn how to 
effectively draw on available credit facilities.  (Warsaw PAP in 
English 1752 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   NESTLE TO ESTABLISH JOINT VENTURE WITH CHOCOLATE PLANT:  On 25 
November, representatives of the Swiss "Nestle" concern initialed an 
agreement with the provincial governor of Poznan and the "Goplana" 
confectionery plant to establish a joint venture with "Goplana" and 
privatize the Polish factory.  They also initialed the charter of 
the planned Polish-Swiss company "Goplana SA."  Under the agreement, 
6 percent of the stock in the new company will go to the employees, 
while 47 percent will be held by the Polish Treasury and "Nestle" 
each.  After the agreement has been approved by the minister of 
privatization, it will be ready for signing.  (Warsaw PAP in English 
1825 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   GERMANS ACQUIRE STAKE IN CONSTRUCTION FIRM:  The German 
construction firm "Bauunternehmung und Betonwerke Lorenz Kesting 
GmbH and Co. Kg." has bought 80 percent of the shares in the 
"Prefabet-Rakowice" limited liability company worth 2.4 million 
German marks (DM).  The remaining 20 percent of the shares are to be 
offered to the work force of "Prefabet-Rakowice" on a preferential 
basis.  The German side has committed itself to invest an additional 
DM3 million in the modernization of the plant and to increase the 
capital of "Prefabet-Rakowice" by DMO.5 million.  The German firm 
has also guaranteed to "Prefabet" a standing order for its concrete 
elements.  "Prefabet-Rakowice", operating in Jelenia Gora province, 
manufactures concrete products designed for industrial and housing 
construction.  It has been cooperating with the German firm since 
1989.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2123 GMT 25 Nov 93 AU) 

   CONSORTIUM ESTABLISHED TO APPLY FOR TV LICENSE:  The Polish 
television consortium TV 7 was established today by a group of 
Polish private businessmen, the Polish Investment Consortium, CLT TV 
network of Luxembourg, and REUTER Poland Ltd.  TV 7 plans to apply 
to the National Radio and TV Council for a license for TV 
broadcasting in Poland, both from terrestrial stations and via 
satellite.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1540 GMT 26 Nov 93 AU) 

   ELECTRICAL FIRM TO EQUIP INDIAN POWER STATION:  The "Elektrim" 
company has signed an agreement with the Indian firm "Gujarat 
Electricity" providing for the delivery of equipment to the Kutch 
power station in India.  The contract is worth $65 million dollars. 
"Elektrim" has been carrying out contracts in India for 20 years now 
worth several hundred million dollars.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1827 
GMT 26 Nov 93 AU) 

   FORMER MILITARY PLANT TO MAKE MERCEDES VEHICLES:  The employees' 
council of the military motor plant in Glowno near here has agreed 
to its merger with the Sobieslaw Zasada Centrum SA firm in Warsaw. 
The agreement is to result in the production in Glowno of various 
types of Mercedes cars.  The start of the production of the Mercedes 
cars depends on how swiftly the factory in Glowno is privatized. 
Until now, the plant has been part of the Defense Ministry.  The 
plant has already started assembling Mercedes delivery vans.  The 
merger of both firms will make it possible to produce various types 
of cars of the Mercedes company.  (Warsaw PAP in English 1821 GMT 29 
Nov 93 AU) 

   MCDONALD'S OPENS NINTH RESTAURANT:  The ninth McDonald's 
restaurant in Poland opened in Krakow on 29 November.  The firm is 
to invest a further $16 million in Poland by the end of 1993. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1658 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   SKODA CONSIDERS SETTING UP ASSEMBLY PLANT:  Skoda, the Czech car 
manufacturer financially linked to the Volkswagen group, is 
considering opening an assembly plant in Poland, Volkhard Koehler, 
deputy chairman of Volkswagen, told the German HANDELSBLATT economic 
paper on 29 November.  Koehler explained the project was being 
examined in view of the high duties on car imports to Poland. 
Koehler represents the German Volkswagen concern in the board of 
directors of Skoda, in which the Czech Government continues to have 
a majority stake.  Volkswagen has a 30 percent stake in Skoda. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1948 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   BUSINESS FORUM STARTS OPERATIONS:  The forum of leaders of the 
world of business in Poland, a branch of the international business 
forum set up by heir to the British throne Prince Charles, 
inaugurated its Polish operations on 29 November by means of a press 
conference headed by chairman of the board Janusz Golebiowski.  The 
Polish forum aims to support the development of small business, and 
of tourist operations.  It also plans operations in the fields of 
youth employment and the restructuring of state enterprises. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 2109 GMT 29 Nov 93 AU) 

   COMPAQ OPENS SUBSIDIARY IN WARSAW:  The Compaq Corporation, the 
world's second largest manufacturer of personal computers, opened 
its Polish subsidiary in Warsaw on 30 November.  Compaq Vice 
President Andreas Barth said at a press conference that the Polish 
computer market is developing more dynamically than in Western 
countries and that only high-quality hardware can be sold here. 
(Warsaw PAP in English 1710 GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   BRITISH GAS SUBSIDIARY TO EXPLORE FOR OIL, GAS:  Polish 
Environment Minister Stanislaw Zelichowski and Philip Byrne, head of 
exploration for Central Europe of British Gas PLC, signed an 
agreement on 30 November enabling British Gas to explore some 9,000 
square kilometers of Polish territory.  Under the agreement, the 
company's subsidiary, British gas Oil and Production Ltd., will 
spend around $30 million conducting seismological and drilling tests 
around Kutno, some 100 km west of Warsaw.  According to experts, the 
geological terrain in the area resembles that of gas-bearing strata 
in the North Sea, where British gas played a major developmental 
role.  "It is a great success that such an important firm is 
interested in exploring for oil and gas in Poland," commented Michal 
Wilczynski, Poland' chief geologist.  He added that if gas is 
discovered in commercial quantities, it would greatly improve 
Poland's energy balance of payments.  (Warsaw PAP in English 2219 
GMT 30 Nov 93 AU) 

   OFFICIALS HAPPY WITH VAT COMPLIANCE:  A deputy minister of 
finance announced that proceeds from the value-added tax have been 
growing steadily; the projected intake for October comes to 17 
trillion zlotys.  The growth trend is considered to be stable.  In 
addition, no "dramatic" arrears have so far been registered in VAT 
collection. To be sure, the largest late payment came to a few dozen 
billion zlotys, but it was only outstanding for one month.  No 
substantial mistakes have been registered in filling out tax 
declarations, nor has the Ministry of Finance received complaints 
from taxpayers about delays in receiving the VAT refunds due them. 
(Warsaw NOWA EUROPA in Polish No 207, 22-24 Oct 93 p 4) 

   DATA SOUGHT ON PROPERTY SUBJECT TO REPRIVATIZATION:  The Ministry 
of Ownership Transformations has published in the press a detailed 
questionnaire on property taken over by the state between 1944 and 
1962.  The purpose is to assess the exposure of the state budget in 
the event a reprivatization law is passed by the Sejm.  It is 
stressed that filling out the confidential questionnaire does not 
constitute filing for the return of the property.  Property lost by 
individuals in conjunction with World War II, including in the 
Polish territory taken over by the Soviet Union, is specifically 
excluded. 

   Detailed personal information is solicited about the owners of 
nationalized assets and their legal successors (including their 
citizenship at the time of the takeover and at present; if their 
Polish citizenship has been acquired the date should be furnished). 
Legal title to ownership (sole proprietor, partner, shareholder, 
etc.) should also be mentioned.  Other data concerns the type, 
estimated current value, and current owner/user of the nationalized 
assets (a farm, an industrial enterprise, an apartment, etc.).  The 
questionnaire lists 13 decrees under which private property was 
confiscated between 1944 and 1962; the one used to nationalize the 
assets in question should be marked.  A separate questionnaire needs 
to be filled out for each type of confiscated property (farm, urban 
real estate, vessels on inland waterways, etc.).  (Warsaw NOWA 
EUROPA (WEEKEND SUPPLEMENT) in Polish No 207, 22-24 Oct 93 p VI) 

   RETURN TO SHORTAGE-DRIVEN INFLATI0N SEEN:  Proceeding from his 
personal business experience, a ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE author foresees a 
prompt recurrence of the most "malignant" form of inflation, that 
driven by shortages of merchandise.  It is not generally understood 
how much the production potential of Polish enterprises has shrunk, 
in many cases irreversibly.  Merchants already have problems 
purchasing many types of popular merchandise from "the few producers 
who survived the pogrom of transformation and operate more or less 
normally."  Nor are imports always a good way out, since the 
exchange rate of the zloty has drawn closer to its value based on 
the productivity of the Polish economy.  Needless to say, nothing 
gives merchants a better incentive to raise prices. 

   The author quotes the owner of a shop carrying tailor and 
upholsterer supplies:  "No, we do not have thread like that; the 
state factory in Silesia has gone under, while the private factory 
in Gdansk is taking orders on a waiting list running through the end 
of next month.  No, you will not get such punching dies anywhere; 
the only producer has closed down shop, and his son has started an 
alcohol wholesale business.  Ask me for taps next month.  I visited 
the producer yesterday and went on a sit-down strike, but I only got 
100 of them."  (Warsaw ZYCIE GOSPODARCZE in Polish No 42, 17 Oct 93 
p 31) 

   POLISH FARMERS GETTING YOUNGER, DIVERSIFYING:  Recent economic 
dislocations have spurred a generational change in Polish farming 
and caused farmers to diversify their operations.  A drop in 
migration to urban areas (from 38 persons per 1,000 rural population 
in 1988 to 36 in 1992) and an increase in returns from the cities 
(from 12 to 16 per 1,000) have combined to make the rural population 
younger.  Men have started returning to farms after military 
service.  School graduates have remained in the rural areas in 
greater numbers.  The rate of generational change in Polish 
agriculture came to 4 percent, the highest it has been since World 
War II.  As a rule, farms were taken over by just one younger family 
member; only one farm in eight was split between two or more heirs. 
The tradition of passing farms on to men is becoming less of a 
factor -- one-quarter of the farms went to women.  As a result of 
such changes, the proportion of farm owners under 44 years of age 
increased by 10 percent, to one-half of the total; one farm owner in 
five is under 35. 

   Some 52 percent of Polish farms still have additional sources of 
income, as they used to; however, the proportion of those employed 
in urban areas fell from 62 to 52 percent.  The greatest change is 
that one in three farmers is now employed privately, whereas a few 
years ago only one in 11 was.  Almost one-half of those employed 
privately are self-employed.  The services they offer either fill in 
the gaps left by the now defunct socialist-era organizations (farm 
equipment rentals) or are new to rural areas (e.g., videocassette 
rental).  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 40, 1 Oct 93 p 27) 

   REASONS FOR DISMISSAL OF PZU CHAIRMAN QUESTIONED:  The chairman 
of the board of the PZU (State Insurance Bureau) has been fired by 
the board of trustees, ostensibly for juggling statistics on the 
balance sheet to show a profit instead of a loss.  However, the 
dismissed official maintains that more profound differences in 
insurance philosophies were at the root of his discharge. 

   PZU is a single-person partnership of the state treasury; as a 
result, the deputy minister of finance plays the role of the general 
meeting of shareholders.  To fire the chairman, the deputy minister 
changed the composition of the board of trustees so that out of 10 
members, six are directly associated with the Ministry of Finance, 
or were until recently.  Two of the others represent the trade union 
of PZU employees. 

   The PZU, a former state insurance monopoly, showed losses on the 
balance sheet in 1990 and 1991.  The dismissed chairman was brought 
in to repair company finances.  The 1992 balance sheet (unaudited) 
showed gross profits of 182 billion zlotys.  This was accomplished 
by assigning some of the PZU deficit accumulated in previous years 
to its subsidiary, PZU-Life.  This transaction was entered on the 
books in early 1993 but backdated to 31 December 1992.  It improved 
the balance sheet of PZU without worsening that of PZU-Life because 
it was classified as prepaid expenses.  However, the necessary 
solvency margin for PZU-Life was lost. 

   The general meeting of PZU shareholders was informed about the 
transaction in April; no questions were raised by the minister until 
some time later.  Insurance supervision did not raise an objection 
or demand to see plans for restoring the solvency margin of PZU-Life 
(which it had the right and duty to do).  The reversal of the 
transaction was not ordered until July, and the PZU chairman was not 
dismissed over alleged improprieties until the end of September. 

   It is noted that the government has been pursuing a 
demonopolization policy in the insurance industry (breaking up and 
downsizing the PZU); this is the opposite of the government policy 
with regard to banks where the government is promoting mergers and 
consortiums. The chairman of the board who was fired did not regard 
the PZU as a monopoly; he pointed out that its market share has been 
pushed below 40 percent in some types of insurance.  He expected 
this share to be driven further down by competition.  The former 
chairman also viewed the breakup of the PZU as counterproductive and 
reducing the value of the company for privatization purposes. 

   The timing of the chairman's dismissal was extremely unfortunate, 
as it severely disrupted the continuity of management at a time when 
strategic decisions needed to be made for the year 1994.  The 
dismissal alarmed Western reinsurers doing business with the PZU and 
has the potential for worsening the terms which the company may 
expect to secure.  It is suspected that the outgoing government was 
in a hurry to fire the PZU chairman so as not to leave in place an 
individual capable of persuading the incoming minister of finance 
that breaking up the PZU is not wise.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in 
Polish No 41, 8 Oct 93 p 3) 

   'QUASI-BANKS' STILL DOING WELL:  The cottage industry of "quasi- 
banks" -- institutions engaging in banking operations without 
relevant licenses -- is still strong in Poland.  Technically, such 
activities may earn one a prison sentence of three years.  However, 
not even the recurring failures of quasi-banks and the attendant 
negative publicity seem to scare away their potential clients, who 
are lured by promises of high interest rates.  Actually, one of the 
quasi-banks is still in operation despite the arrest of its chairman 
of the board.  Another one does not seem to be hurting despite 
investigative reports in the press to the effect that the operation 
is fraudulent.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 41, 8 Oct 93 p 
5) 

   INTEREST IN MILITARY INSTITUTE INVENTIONS GROWING:  For several 
months, interest on the part of the business community in inventions 
and technologies developed by the WAT (Military Technical Institute) 
has been growing steadily.  On some days, businessmen line up at the 
headquarters of the military school.  Of 900 patents received by the 
personnel of the school to date, some 300 to 400 may be used in 
various civilian industries.  The school would like to put the 
patents to commercial use as soon as possible.  However, military 
scientists speculate that the interest in their developments is due 
to the businessmen's hopes for future military orders rather than 
the profit motive.  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA in Polish No 42, 15 Oct 
93 pp 16-17) 

   LACK OF LONG-TERM VALUATION IN MONEY MARKET:  Poor liquidity and 
economic uncertainty have combined to stunt the development of the 
Polish money market.  Stagnation -- and some say retrogression -- in 
this sector is particularly apparent in comparison with the capital 
market and the securities exchange.  Hope of stabilizing and 
extending the quotation periods (to at least six months) is becoming 
unrealistic.  At present, three-month investments are the longest 
ones available on the market and then only for small amounts of 
funds.  Treasury bills and certain commercial bills are six-month 
instruments; however, they are not liquid enough, and the volume of 
trading is too small to arrive at the real price of money for longer 
periods of time.  The same is true of one- and three-year bonds 
quoted on the exchange. 

   The further shortening of transaction periods may bring about 
disappearance of the real price for three-month funds, as well. 
This situation results in a lack of confidence on the part of 
foreign financial institutions; one of their representatives called 
funds shorter than three months "a speculative dealer game."  Within 
Poland, this lack of confidence is exacerbated by periods of acute 
shortages of "cash" when, as an experienced dealer put it, 
"obtaining funds hinges on social contacts."  (Warsaw GAZETA BANKOWA 
in Polish No 42, 15 Oct 93 p 22) 

   FUNDING FOR HOUSING CONSTRUCTION PONDERED:  The "New Housing 
Order" -- a document of the old Polish government which the incoming 
coalition intends to follow -- would introduce several significant 
changes in funding for housing construction.  First, contractor 
enterprises will use short- and medium-term credit only for the 
duration of construction proper.  Long-term credit will be reserved 
for the builders of rental housing.  Funding for the acquisition of 
housing will be separate from construction funding; it will be 
differentiated depending upon the affluence of residents. 

   Long-term mortgages will be intended mostly for affluent 
families. It is envisaged that the use of proprietary capital of PKO 
BP (General Savings Bank-National Bank) for sustaining such credit 
will be restricted gradually in favor of using a World Bank credit 
line for these purposes.  Savings and loans institutions will 
provide mortgages for families in the middle income brackets. 
Finally, there will be "social housing construction" for those in 
the lowest income brackets. 

   The outgoing government has started a dozen or so pilot projects 
which involve the use of matching government funding, with some of 
the monies coming from proprietary sources and off-budget funds. 
(Warsaw RZECZPOSPOLITA (ECONOMY AND MARKET SUPPLEMENT) in Polish 22 
Oct 93 p 8) 

   IMPACT OF ARRANGEMENTS WITH AUSTRIA ASSESSED:  The free-trade 
agreement with the EFTA is expected to improve the competitive 
position of Poland on the Austrian market.  Currently, Austria ranks 
fifth in Polish imports and seventh in Polish exports.  In addition 
to the EFTA agreement, a bilateral Polish-Austrian agreement is 
being prepared which will cover the employment of Poles in Austria 
and environmental issues. 

   Liberalization of customs duties on manufactures will be 
important for Poland; about 80 percent of Polish exports will come 
to Austria duty-free, including cars (the Bielsko-Biala Automotive 
Plant is already present in Austria).  The Polish commercial attache 
expects exports to grow in several significant groups, even if the 
reduction in duties is from 3-5 to zero percent (copper, electric 
motors, apparel, furniture, certain chemicals). Growth is expected 
even in agricultural exports, despite the many protections remaining 
in place in Austria. 

   Poland is interested in increasing transit trade through Austria 
(it is estimated that such imports account for 29 percent, and 
exports for 19 percent, of Polish trade with Austria).  Differences 
in the statistical treatment of transit trade are responsible for 
Polish statistics showing a far greater exchange with Austria than 
Austrian statistics suggest.  (Warsaw RYNKI ZAGRANICZNE (D0MESTIC 
MARKETS SUPPLEMENT) in Polish No 126, 21 0ct 93 p 7) 

ELAG/29 December/ECONF/East Europe Division/PF 03/1836z Jan 

