CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Haiyan (3769 3189 1750) of Policy and </F>
Regulation Department, Anhui Provincial Economic Commission: 
"The Current Problem of Enterprise Losses and Its Solutions" -- 
Responsible Editor: Shi Yinsheng (0670 1377 3932)] 
  [Text] I. Main Features and Causes of Losses Suffered 
by Enterprises at Present 
  Losses suffered by enterprises have long been a striking 
problem hampering China's national economic development. 
Particularly in recent years, enterprises' losses have continued 
to soar, imposing a heavy financial burden on the state and 
posing difficulties for enterprises to participate in 
competition and to operate and develop independently. According 
to statistic figures released, the amount of losses seems to 
have declined in the first half of 1993. The statistics show 
that from January through June last year, 31.1 percent of the 
state-owned industrial enterprises listed in the nation's budget 
operated in the red, a drop of 0.9 percentage point from the 
same period of the previous year. The amount of losses was 13.2 
billion yuan, down by 16.5 percent compared with the losses 
registered a year ago. However, the declined figures were 
attributed mainly to a change in the petroleum industry's 
accounting procedure. In June last year, the petroleum industry 
included in the profit and loss statement a price-differential 
income of 3 billion yuan resulting from an upward adjustment of 
the price of crude oil sold during the first half of that year. 
If this extra income had not been taken into account, the total 
amount of losses suffered by the nation's industrial enterprises 
for the first half of 1993 would have been 17 percent more than 
the previous year's corresponding period. In July, the losses 
suffered by these enterprises soared sharply to 3.96 billion 
yuan. As can be seen from accounting figures, the losses for 
July was 51.5 percent more than that for June and showed a 200 
percent rise, compared with the same month of the previous year. 
The increase in the number of loss-suffering enterprises and in 
the total amount of losses reported for July was due, in part, 
to the introduction of a new financial and accounting system, 
which brought to light the hidden losses of some enterprises. 
Another reason for the increased losses was that some 
enterprises suffered more operational deficits than before. 
Overall, enterprises' losses are generally caused by the 
following factors: 
  1. Enterprises are short of working capital. Because of the 
shortage of working capital, some enterprises have no money to 
buy raw materials, and production is in a state of suspension or 
semi-suspension. Since the beginning of last year, one-third of 
the enterprises in Chongqing City in the fields of the light, 
textile, and chemical industries have totally or partially 
suspended their production, and the staff members and workers 
put on the "special leave" status have exceeded 100,000. These 
staff members and workers receive only a living allowance of 
about 50-70 yuan a month from their employers. In Jiangsu 
Province, 649 enterprises had totally or partially suspended 
their operations, and 297,000 people's jobs had been affected as 
of the end of July. 
  2. Transportation facilities are inadequate in all places. 
During the past few years, with the accelerated pace of the 
reform and opening-up drive, production and construction have 
developed by leaps and bounds, the economy has developed quickly 
in coastal areas, and imports and exports have grown steadily. 
All this has made our transportation facilities even more 
inadequate to meet the demands. During the period from January 
to July, our gross industrial output increased 25.1 percent, but 
the volume of goods transported declined 0.3 percent. At some 
critical points along the trunk railways, the freight-handling 
capacity can only meet 30-40 percent of the requirements. As 
transportation capacity falls short of the demands, large 
stockpiles of raw materials and other supplies in inland 
provinces cannot be sent out, nor is it possible to fully 
utilize the processing capacity and marketing advantage of 
coastal areas. Under such circumstances, quite a number of 
enterprises have to base their production plans on the 
transportation space available and rely on transportation 
facilities for their "survival." Unfortunately, the problem that 
out-bound cargoes cannot be loaded on the train and sent out 
promptly and in-bound cargoes cannot be unloaded in time to meet 
the needs has become more and more acute with each passing day. 
  3. State-owned enterprises have to bear heavy financial 
burdens and are faced with a relatively serious problem of 
unfair competition. First of all, they have a heavy tax and 
profit-contribution burden. In 1991, the output value of 
state-owned industrial enterprises accounted for 64 percent of 
the nation's total, while the revenue they turned over to the 
state made up 79 percent of the total revenue contributed by 
enterprises. For nonstate-owned enterprises, the percentages 
were only 36 percent and 21 percent respectively. In 1991, 
state-owned enterprises gave 94.8 percent of their revenue to 
the state in the form of taxes and profit contribution. The 
percentage of revenue turned over to the state as taxes and 
profit contribution was 76.6 percent for collective enterprises 
and 51 percent for other enterprises (including the three kinds 
of foreign-funded enterprises). Second, state-owned enterprises 
have too many superfluous personnel. In most cases, 20-30 
percent of the personnel are superfluous. But they cannot be 
dismissed because so far our society has no sound 
unemployment-welfare or social-security system to take care of 
them. Besides, there is a large number of retired workers that 
the enterprises must take care of. In most state-owned 
enterprises, the retired personnel are equivalent to 22 percent 
of the incumbent employees. In some old enterprises, the 
retirees and the incumbent employees are in a 1:1 ratio. Third, 
the enterprises have to bear the heavy burden of providing 
social welfare benefits to their employees. All the above have 
intensified the problem of unfair competition among enterprises 
of different ownership systems. This, coupled with state-owned 
enterprises' own problems regarding operational mechanisms and 
management, has curtailed their growth and slimmed down their 
share in the nation's gross value of production. In 1991, the 
output of state-owned industrial enterprises accounted for 63.8 
percent of the nation's gross value of industrial production. It 
fell to 59.2 percent in 1992 and 53.9 percent in the period 
January-July 1993. 
  4. There have appeared more factors causing the expenditure 
to increase and revenue to shrink. Beginning 1 July, the railway 
freight rate has increased by an average 1.5 fen per ton-km. The 
electricity charge also rose on 1 July by an average 2.75 fen 
for each kwh. The interest rate on bank loans has been raised 
twice by 0.8 and 1.38 percentage points, respectively. All these 
factors have increased the enterprises' expenditure and reduced 
their revenue. 
  5. A new financial and accounting system has been put into 
effect. The "General Financial Guidelines for Enterprises" and 
"Guiding Principles for Enterprise Accounting," both effective 
on 1 July, have enabled enterprises to raise their depreciation 
rate, increase their technological development expense, and set 
up a reserve for bad debts, thus boosting their capacity for 
sustained development. In doing so, however, they have also 
increased their operating costs. In addition, the new financial 
and accounting system has exposed the hidden losses and, 
therefore, reduced the profit figure on the book. This has 
aggravated the problem of losses suffered by enterprises. 
<H5>  II. Attitude To Be Taken Toward Losses Suffered by </H5>
Enterprises 
  In the market economy, profit and loss are both normal for 
enterprises. In foreign countries, some enterprises are 
constantly operating in the red. It is, therefore, not 
surprising that some enterprises in our country have suffered 
losses. To eliminate all loss-suffering enterprises in 
developing the economy is not a realistic thinking. However, if 
more than one-third of our enterprises are suffering losses, the 
situation is abnormal--it indicates that some aspects of our 
economy should be adjusted. In view of our current situation 
with respect to loss-suffering enterprises, we should at least 
do the following: 
  1. We should maintain a relatively stable macroeconomic 
environment. Facts have proved that in our country the 
proportion of loss-suffering enterprises to the total number of 
enterprises is closely related to the macroeconomic environment. 
When the macroeconomic environment is "hot," there are always a 
greater number of enterprises suffering losses. By maintaining a 
relatively stable macroeconomic environment, we can perceive the 
real situation of losses suffered by enterprises and how serious 
the problem is. This will also help ensure the relative 
stability and correct the abnormal swelling of the number of 
loss-suffering enterprises. 
  2. Among the loss-suffering enterprises in our country, a 
sizable number have suffered losses for a long time. Some are 
already in a state of less assets than liabilities. We have 
tried for a long time to "rescue" these enterprises, but without 
success. As a matter of fact, if these enterprises are 
incorrigible, we should resolutely let them go bankrupt and 
close down. Prolonging the status quo can in no way help these 
enterprises stop losses and increase profits, nor is it possible 
to make effective use of the state assets held by them. 
  3. An enterprise's deficit often involves a number of 
factors. One factor may be the incompetence of the factory 
director. Another factor may be too heavy financial obligations 
apportioned to the enterprise. Still another factor may be that 
its line of business is not right from the very beginning. So 
the work of stopping enterprises' losses and increasing their 
profits should not be just "whirling" among economic 
departments. Rather, it should be attended to by the entire 
society. 
<H5>  III. Several Measures To Stop Enterprises' Losses and </H5>
Increase Their Profits 
  1. It is imperative to rationalize the property rights of 
enterprises and transform their operational mechanism. Now, 
while transforming enterprises' operational mechanism in 
accordance with the "Regulations on Transformation of 
Operational Mechanism of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the 
Whole People," some local authorities and enterprises have 
gradually extended their reform efforts to rationalizing 
property rights. State-owned enterprises can be divided into two 
groups in terms of their property rights. One group must keep to 
the state ownership. This group consists mainly of big and extra 
big enterprises in the basic sectors of the national economy. We 
should clarify the property rights and beef up the management of 
the state assets held by these enterprises. Under the 
legal-entity property system, we should grant these enterprises 
the status of legal entities and go all out to reorganize them 
into companies in an effort to form a modern enterprise system. 
The other group are enterprises that can have multiple property 
rights. They include predominantly those engaged in competitive 
production. In addition, we should rationalize the relationship 
between the central and local property rights and take various 
steps to transform state-owned enterprises into shareholding 
enterprises, such as selling a part of their original and newly 
acquired assets as shares to collectives and individuals, 
absorbing investment from other enterprises and the public, and 
developing joint ventures, legal-entity shareholders, and 
proprietary companies. 
  2. With respect to our guiding thought for economic work, we 
should shift emphasis from speed to efficiency. So far, comrades 
in some localities, departments, and enterprises have not 
changed their thinking and viewpoint. When addressing the 
question of accelerating development, they stress the need to 
boost the output value, increase the speed of growth, launch new 
projects, and expand the scope of development. They regard the 
work of stopping losses and increasing profits and the campaign 
to raise efficiency as non-concrete tasks, which require great 
efforts but yield no appreciable results. This is a 
misunderstanding. No matter how fast the economy grows, it is of 
no use if things are done without efficiency. At this time, it 
is important to speed up the self-sustaining development of the 
whole economy and make every effort to raise our economic 
efficiency. In no way should we blindly seek a high-speed growth 
of production. 
  3. Enterprises should continue to devote their efforts to 
meeting market demands. They should study the law of market, do 
well in market forecasting, and take an active part in market 
competition at home and abroad. Based on market demands and 
their own conditions, they should develop new products in good 
time and make ceaseless efforts to explore new markets in 
accordance with the law of value. Meanwhile, they should adjust 
their operational strategies from time to time in line with the 
demands on the market and changes in the environment and dare to 
find ways for their survival and development amid acute 
competition. In addition, they should gear up the marketing work 
and offer good after-sale service. 
  4. Great efforts should be made to promote technological 
progress. More work should be done to let enterprises have 
decision-making power with regard to technological 
transformation and investment. It is imperative to ensure the 
progress and completion of the projects currently under 
construction and see to it that they are put into operation and 
meet the production targets as scheduled. In particular, 
enterprises should do well in introducing advanced technology 
from abroad and energetically translate successful scientific 
and technological research results into new productive forces. 
Meanwhile, they should further improve their product quality, 
strenuously follow and make perfect the comprehensive quality 
control procedure, and institute a quality assurance system. And 
they should launch an extensive and in-depth campaign to achieve 
double increase and double the economy [a campaign to increase 
production and practice economy and to increase revenue and 
retrench expenditures]. 

