BFN 

<F P=106> [Russian Federation Federal Law No. 5-FZ "On the Procedure </F>
for Publishing and Entry Into Force of Federal Constitutional 
Laws, Federal Laws, and Acts of the Federal Assembly Chambers", 
adopted by the State Duma 25 May 1994 and approved by the 
Federation Council 1 June 1994; dated Moscow, The Kremlin, 14 
June 1994 and signed by Russian Federation President B. Yeltsin] 
  [Text] Article 1. Only those federal constitutional laws, 
federal laws, and acts of the Federal Assembly chambers which 
have been officially published are applied on the territory of 
the Russian Federation. 
  Article 2. The adoption date of a federal law is considered 
to be the day the State Duma adopted it in its final version. 
  The adoption date of a federal constitutional law is 
considered to be the day the Federal Assembly chambers approved 
it in the manner established by the Russian Federation 
Constitution. 
  Article 3. Federal constitutional laws and federal laws are 
subject to official publication within a period of seven days 
from the day of their signing by the Russian Federation 
president. 
  Acts of the Federal Assembly chambers are published no later 
than 10 days after the day of their adoption. 
  International treaties which have been ratified by the 
Federal Assembly are published at the same time as the federal 
laws on their ratification. 
  Article 4. The official publication of federal 
constitutional laws, federal laws, and acts of a Federal 
Assembly chamber is considered to be the first publication of 
their full texts in ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA or SOBRANIYE 
ZAKONODATELSTVA ROSSIYSKOY FEDERATSII. 
  The Russian Federation president sends federal 
constitutional 
laws and federal laws for official publication. The chairman of 
the relevant chamber or his deputy send acts of the Federal 
Assembly chambers for official publication. 
  Article 5. Federal constitutional laws, federal laws, and 
acts of the Federal Assembly chambers may be published in other 
printed publications as well as brought the attention of 
everybody (made public) on television and radio, circulated to 
state bodies, officials, enterprises, establishments, and 
organizations, transmitted via communications channels, and 
disseminated in machine-readable form. 
  Laws, acts of the Federal Assembly chambers, and other 
documents may also be published as separate publications. 
  Article 6. Federal constitutional laws, federal laws, and 
acts of the Federal Assembly chambers enter into force 
simultaneously throughout the Russian Federation's territory 10 
days after their official publication, if the laws or acts of 
the chambers themselves have not established another procedure 
for their entry into force. 
  Article 7. SOBRANIYE ZAKONODATELSTVA ROSSIYSKOY FEDERATSII 
is the official periodical in which federal constitutional laws, 
federal laws, acts of the Federal Assembly chambers, edicts and 
directives of the Russian Federation president, decrees and 
directives of the Russian Federation Government, decisions of 
the Russian Federation Constitutional Court concerning the 
interpretation of the Russian Federation Constitution and on 
whether laws and normative acts of the Russian Federation 
president, Federation Council, State Duma, Russian Federation 
Government or individual provisions of these acts, conform to 
the Russian Federation Constitution. 
  Article 8. SOBRANIYE ZAKONODATELSTVA ROSSIYSKOY FEDERATSII 
comprises five sections: 
  Federal constitutional laws and federal laws are published 
in 
the first section; 
  Acts of the Federal Assembly chambers are published in the 
second section; 
  Edicts and directives of the Russian Federation president 
are 
published in the third section; 
  Decrees and directives of the Russian Federation Government 
are published in the fourth section; 
  Decisions of the Russian Federation Constitutional Court 
concerning the interpretation of the Russian Federation 
Constitution and on whether laws and normative acts of the 
Russian Federation president, Federation Council, State Duma, 
Russian Federation Government or individual provisions of these 
acts, conform to the Russian Federation Constitution, are 
published in the fifth section. 
  The second section is subdivided into two parts: Decrees of 
the Federal Assembly chambers adopted on questions falling 
within the jurisdiction of the chambers inaccordance with 
Articles 102 and 103 of the Russian Federation Constitution are 
published in the first part; the second part contains other acts 
of the Federal Assembly chambers. The third and fourth sections 
are also subdivided into two parts: The first part contains 
normative acts while the send contains acts which are not 
normative in nature. 
  Article 9. Acts published in SOBRANIYE ZAKONODATELSTVA 
ROSSIYSKOY FEDERATSII are contained in articles with 
corresponding ordinal numbers. Appendixes to the acts are 
placed in the same articles as the acts themselves. 
  When a federal constitutional law or a federal law is 
published its name is indicated along with the date it was 
adopted (approved) by the State Duma and the Federation Council, 
the official who signed it, the place and date of its signing, 
and its registration number. 
  When a decree of a Federal Assembly chamber is published its 
name is indicated along with the official who signed it, the 
place and date of its adoption, and its registration number. 
When other other acts of a Federal Assembly chamber are 
published their names are indicated along with the place and 
date of their adoption, and their registration number. 
  Federal constitutional laws, federal laws, and acts of the 
Federal Assembly chambers to which changes or additions have 
been made may be published officially a second time in a full 
version. 
  Article 10. The following laws are deemed to no longer be in 
force: 
  The Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic [RSFSR] Law 
of 13 July 1990 "On the Procedure for Publishing and Entry Into 
Force of RSFSR Laws and Other Acts Adopted by the Congress of 
RSFSR People's Deputies, the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, and their 
Organs" (VEDOMOSTI SYEZDA NARODNYKH DEPUTATOV RSFSR I 
VERKHOVNOGO SOVETA RSFSR [THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE CONGRESS OF 
RSFSR PEOPLE'S DEPUTIES AND THE RSFSR SUPREME SOVIET], No. 6, 
page 93, 1990); 
  The RSFSR Law of 27 December 1990 "On Making Changer and 
Additions to the RSFSR Law 'On the Procedure for Publishing and 
Entry Into Force of RSFSR Laws and Other Acts Adopted by the 
Congress of RSFSR People's Deputies, the RSFSR Supreme Soviet, 
and their Organs'" (VEDOMOSTI SYEZDA NARODNYKH DEPUTATOV RSFSR I 
VERKHOVNOGO SOVETA RSFSR, No. 1, page 8, 1991). 
  Article 11. The Russian Federation president and the Russian 
Federation Government should bring their legal acts into line 
with this Federal Law. 
  Article 12. This Federal Law enters into force from the day 
of its official publication. 
  [signed] President of the Russian Federation B. Yeltsin 
  [dated] Moscow, The Kremlin, 14 June 1994 
  No. 5-FZ 

