CSO 

<F P=106> [Two-part interview with Baltabek Kuandykov, deputy minister </F>
of power and fuel resources of the Republic of Kazakhstan and 
president of the state-owned company Kazakhstankaspiyshelf, by 
Khaliolla Baymen, in Almaty; date not given: "We Are Starting in 
the Caspian Not With the Sinking of Wells but With Ecological 
Research"] 
<H5>  [24 Mar p 3] </H5>
  [Text] [Baymen] Baltabek Mukhanovich, the news media have 
reported repeatedly the formation of the state-owned company 
Kazakhstankaspiyshelf and the creation of an international 
consortium to study and develop the Kazakhstani shelf of the 
Caspian. Please describe the significance of this new project 
for Kazakhstan's economy and its immediate prospects. 
  [Kuandykov] Kazakhstan is, as everyone knows, quite rich in 
natural raw material resources, including oil and gas. We have 
for the past several years running produced 26-28 million tonnes 
of oil and 7-8 billion cubic meters of gas annually. But, in 
practice, the bulk of the hydrocarbons is recovered from old oil 
and gas fields, and for this reason the level of this recovery 
has been in a state of stagnation, as it were. And however much 
we would wish it, we cannot observe any movement in the 
direction of an increase, which is so essential for the needs of 
the republic, although the potential raw material reserves are 
quite substantial, which is recognized not only by Kazakhstani 
but also foreign specialists. 
  However, as far as the recently discovered major fields of 
West Kazakhstan at Tengiz and Karashyganak are concerned, they 
are not yet being opened up at full strength because of the 
absence in the republic of the corresponding modern technology 
and the present economic difficulties. Joint ventures with 
foreign firms are being formed on the basis of these raw 
material giants today (more precisely, one already exists at 
Tengiz, and one is being formed at Karashyganak) to accelerate 
the development of these fields and to obtain a palpable overall 
increase in the production of oil and gas in the republic. 
  One of the biggest facilities, which could not only provide 
the republic with an immense influx of hydrocarbons but also 
appreciably influence the progress of the economic reforms of 
the young independent state, is the territory of Kazakhstan's 
sector of the Caspian. 
  As individual results obtained earlier by Russian and 
Azerbaijani geological and geophysical enterprises show and 
which are indicated by general geological premises also, this 
territory has colossal forecast reserves of raw material. 
According to specialists' estimates, there is a high probability 
of the discovery of a deposit far in excess, say, of the unique 
Tengiz field. But it has to be said that until recently 
Kazakhstan has not operated under offshore conditions, 
unfortunately. Today the republic lacks modern equipment and 
trained specialists and the so necessary skills and experience 
of offshore exploration. 
  Following a thorough consideration of this problem, the 
Kazakhstan Government decided to form the Kazakhstankaspiyshelf 
specialized state-owned company, which was entrusted with a 
comprehensive study of the prospects of the territory of the 
Kazakhstani sector of the Caspian and determination of the paths 
for the optimum assimilation of the underwater storehouses. 
  Considering the lack of technology and the experience of 
work 
under offshore conditions, from the first day of our activity we 
began to assimilate the experience of similar territories. The 
North Sea, the China Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, areas of the 
Adriatic, and other similar bodies of water, for example. Then 
we embarked on the creation of a republic concept for the 
assimilation of offshore deposits. The main essence of the 
concept, of course, amounted to the attraction of foreign 
investments since we could not cope with such a scale of 
operations with our own resources. The conditions for attracting 
Western oil companies were prepared, and all our proposals were 
presented to the most important international companies with the 
corresponding experience and unprecedented world authority under 
conditions appropriate to the Caspian. Thanks to the 
organization of lengthy and scrupulous negotiations we rested 
our choice by way of tender on six companies--the Italian Agip 
and British Petroleum, which is acting as one entity in 
conjunction with the Norwegian Statoil company, and also British 
Gas, the American Mobil, the Dutch Shell, and the French Total. 
Then, on 9 June of last year, a preliminary agreement on the 
basic principles of our relations and interaction was signed 
with representatives of the above companies, and a final 
agreement on the creation of an international consortium of the 
oil companies for the realization of a comprehensive program for 
study and development of the Kazakhstani body of the sea was 
signed on 3 December 1993. The said dates were historic for us 
in a way, incidentally, and we hope that they will be the start 
for a new history of the offshore oil and gas industry of 
Kazakhstan. 
  [Baymen] Overseas representatives are calling the 
preliminary 
plan for the geological and geophysical study of and development 
of the deposits one of the biggest in the world. What are the 
reserves of hydrocarbon raw material and what are the particular 
features of the impending efforts? 
  [Kuandykov] According to experts' estimates, the Caspian 
region is, as I have already said, unique, and the plan for 
future development is rightly considered one of the most 
important in the world. Of course, the results will be revealed 
by the time that the drilling and the recovery of the oil and 
gas begin. Such preliminary estimates are conditioned not only 
by the big anticipated reserves of hydrocarbons, but also by the 
particular ecological conditions connected with the expected 
difficult technical conditions of the sinking of deep wells and 
the assimilation of deposits with a particular concentration of 
hydrogen sulfide, high formation pressures, and a number of 
recent engineering solutions. 
  Concerning natural gas reserves: According to the most 
modest 
estimates of both local and Western specialists who have made a 
study of areas of the sea, about 3.5 billion tonnes of oil and 
about 2.5 trillion cubic meters of gas are anticipated in the 
Kazakhstani sector. Very large reserves. I am citing relatively 
modest forecasts so far. There are, of course, bolder 
assumptions also, but these will be shown by exploration. 
  [Baymen] The problem of the environment has become 
increasingly urgent as of late. The Caspian also has been in far 
from the best position in this respect, and many people are 
today, therefore, anxiously asking: Is it possible to guarantee 
a safe and most assiduous method for the recovery of the 
expensive industrial raw material? 
  [Kuandykov] I would like to say that many questions arise in 
connection with the particular ecological conditions because the 
Caspian is a closed body of water and is not the Mediterranean 
or, say, the Gulf of Mexico. Both the water exchange and the 
marine flora and fauna and living organisms differ from other 
seas also. The northern part of the sea was formerly, in 1974, 
declared a protected zone for the preservation of all that there 
is here--the animal and vegetable world--and the surrounding 
environment--the air and water--for future generations. All 
drilling operations, the recovery of mineral resources, large 
nautical transport systems, construction operations at sea, and 
so forth were banned. But life, as they say, does not stand 
still, and our present project is distinguished by the fact 
that, having adopted all world experience of work under 
approximate conditions, we are making of paramount importance 
the resolution of ecological problems. Our future efforts must 
not cause the least damage to the existing natural balance of 
this region. After all, very valuable species of fish have their 
habitat here, as you know: The northern Caspian accounts for 
approximately 90 percent of the world's sturgeon catch and the 
production of black caviar. There are many species of animals 
that have been entered in the Red Book, and this is also a 
migration route for many rare birds. Considering all this, we 
are embedding in the plan of upcoming operations the strictest 
demands, in accordance with the highest international standards. 
  [Baymen] The state of the sea and the land are giving rise 
to 
certain apprehensions even today, when no operations have even 
yet begun. 
  [Kuandykov] The state of the sea today is far from the best, 
unfortunately. The catch level is falling by the year, fish 
stocks are melting away before our eyes, it may be said, and the 
content of harmful elements in the water is increasing 
catastrophically. We have analyses performed by various 
institutes and organizations of the composition of the Volga 
water and the water from the Ural (Zhayk) River. Global changes 
in the composition of the sea water because of technogenic human 
influences, the construction of a multitude of dams on the 
Volga, the use of various chemicals in agriculture, coastal 
operations, and so forth, are occurring even here, evidently. 
All this could not fail to influence the overall state of the 
body of water. 
  In addition, since about 1978 the Caspian has been rising, 
and at the present time the level of the rise is the almost the 
equivalent of more than two meters. This means tremendous 
changes for the sea; the former littoral deposits, agricultural 
land, and communities are being flooded. The catastrophic 
influences of the risen sea waters on the coastal areas, 
particularly in the northern part where the shore is very flat 
and each change in the weather and strong wind are palpably 
reflected in the water level, have been frequent phenomena 
lately. 
  On the whole, therefore, I believe that even were we to 
perform no offshore operations, the state of the Caspian would 
deteriorate by the year. And this process could be quite rapid: 
The overall changes in the composition of the water and the 
general rise in the level of pollution in connection with the 
inundation of new littoral territories and individual riparian 
oil wells are being superimposed on top of one another. 
Everyone, I mean the inhabitants of those regions, knows about 
this, research organizations and our government authorities know 
about this. And if we are today speaking about saving the Aral, 
I would say that the problem of preservation of the Caspian is 
no less serious today. But not in the sense of sitting and doing 
nothing and admitting no one to the sea but taking today even 
some specific action to improve the situation. Unfortunately, it 
has to be affirmed that no particular attention is being paid to 
this with us, nor is there the money. 
  [Baymen] Consequently, we need to take a somewhat broader 
view of the problem and pose the question not only of pollution 
of what is already quite a polluted body of water from the 
upcoming large-scale operations but of measures specified in an 
agreement to improve its present state? 
  [Kuandykov] Yes, this is the task we set ourselves. Our 
actions will be geared to assisting the utmost improvement. How 
might this be achieved? First and foremost, we will employ the 
most modern methods of work. We are planning to build various 
facilities, for the production of young fish--fish 
hatcheries--say, and will participate in cleaning up the 
polluted sectors of the sea, that is, the ecological state of 
the sea will be monitored constantly. And I would like to repeat 
yet again that it is these problems which will be given 
priority. The project itself--which begins with ecological 
research, and the rest of the work will begin only upon the 
completion of this first ecological stage--is confirmation of 
this. If the stage shows that it is possible to work with the 
use of the best world experience, we will do so, if, however, 
the results are negative, the question of the impossibility of 
development will truly arise. 
  Incidentally, our approach in terms of this plan is somewhat 
different from the approaches in other parts of the world: we 
intend, thanks to foreign investments, to initially perform 
research work and not to begin, as some people believe, with the 
immediate sinking of wells, but taking account of all the 
special conditions of the vulnerable region. Upon the completion 
of this work, all the negative consequences being reduced to 
nothing, geological and geophysical research is to begin, 
permitting the study of the geological structure and the 
tectonics of highland allotments, clarification of the available 
forecast reserves, and determination of the most interesting and 
promising zones. Only then can we speak of the allocation on the 
territory to be developed of packages of future drilling 
operations and future production areas. All the participants in 
the international consortium will cooperate on these terms, and 
after the research part has been completed, they will obtain 
packages and the exclusive right to perform production and 
drilling operations to compensate for their outlays invested at 
the initial stage. In the event of the discovery of an oil or 
gas field in their packages, they will compensate their outlays, 
and in the event of failure, that is, nondiscovery, their 
outlays shall not be compensated. 
  All six firms that I have named are among the world's top 
10-20 oil companies. They have their own character, their own 
tremendous experience, and unsurpassed equipment and techniques 
for such operations, and this is why we chose them. The drilling 
operations scheduled for subsequent years will not appreciably 
influence the environment, or this influence should not be that 
perceptible. At the same time, all that is produced in the 
waters of the Caspian and the entire recovery of hydrocarbon raw 
material will afford Kazakhstan big economic benefits. 
<H5>  [25 Mar p 3] </H5>
  [Baymen] The Caspian region is rightly considered oilmen's 
territory; several generations of specialists have grown up over 
many decades, there are whole family dynasties, even, and 
tremendous experience of the working of deposits has been 
accumulated, and there are at the same time virtually no 
operators skilled in offshore development.... 
  [Kuandykov] The training of local personnel is a principal 
section of the agreement. Yes, marine geologists, geophysicists, 
environmental experts, drillers, extractors, and other 
specialists are lacking in Kazakhstan today. We are planning to 
train them with the facilities of the best Western technology. I 
would like to emphasize: to train local personnel, for which the 
future project is essentially being put together. This in itself 
will entail substantial capital investments also. 
  The next important aspect is the provision of local 
enterprises with modern equipment, that is, at our demand 
Western firms are required to equip the local geophysical 
organizations the way they themselves have them equipped. They 
will have to pass on their know-how to Kazakhstani 
organizations. In addition, large sums will be allocated for the 
formation of the social infrastructure and also for the 
infrastructure necessary for performance of the planned 
operations: the installation of depots, machine shops, warehouse 
premises, moorings for the ships, and such facilities as, say, 
desalination units for turning the sea water into drinking water 
and industrial water for the needs of the public and the work of 
the consortium. We intend to build helicopter pads to serve both 
Western and local specialists, and fish hatcheries, and we 
believe that we will be benefiting the development of cities' 
water and sewerage systems. We will also take part in other 
social programs, of which the region is greatly in need. I 
cannot today, unfortunately, give you the figures which are 
contained in the plan, since they are still in the modification 
phase, but it can be said even now that quite large sums for an 
improvement in the condition of the region are contemplated. It 
should be added that it is not only the oil sector that will be 
developed. The republic will require with the performance of the 
offshore work the development of all the attendant sectors, such 
as iron and steel, enterprises for the construction of offshore 
installations, electronics industry, agriculture, medicine, and 
so forth. In a word, the entire gamut of interrelated sectors 
will be developed. 
  [Baymen] This is why the project is considered one of the 
world's biggest, evidently? 
  [Kuandykov] Primarily because, according to estimates of 
certain specialists, and this is what we believe also, tens of 
billions of dollars of investments will be required for the 
development of the deposits in the bed of the Caspian. These 
immense resources will be invested on the territory of 
Kazakhstan. And, naturally, the people who live in the Caspian 
region will receive their corresponding share and will, 
consequently, acquire the possibility of accelerated 
development. We do not intend to reconcile ourselves to the way 
in which we have lived hitherto, when oil has been produced on 
this territory for 80 years, and our people and our fathers are 
still living in huts. We have no desire to organize our work 
like this. New technology, a new social atmosphere, and new 
facilities will come, and we want herewith to raise the culture 
of production and society's living standard. 
  [Baymen] A commonly held opinion is that big oil means big 
politics.... Kazakhstan is becoming a pioneer in the field of 
international contracts and a kind of example for the former 
Union republics. How is this fact being reflected in its 
political image, and are not disagreements arising among Caspian 
states over the division of spheres of influence and 
determination of the water boundaries? What have the recent 
interstate meetings in this connection done in this sense? 
  [Kuandykov] There are various kinds of talk and various 
opinions surrounding the Caspian at this time. For instance, 
there was a conference last fall of representatives of states of 
the former Union in Astrakhan. I took part also. It was the 
first attempt to solve contentious and problematical questions 
concerning the future of the Caspian. Questions pertaining to 
development of the sea's mineral resources, what the division of 
territories would be, what the movement of sea-going ships would 
be, how the fish industry would develop, and so forth, were 
raised. Questions of the environment, specifically, how the 
states, which are now independent, intended to pursue a common 
environmental protection policy, were examined. 
  Without expatiating on all the problems, it may be said that 
on the question of the development of mineral resources a 
positive solution was reached. The parties agreed on the 
principles of the division of the states' economic zones. They 
are in keeping with world standards and world experience (the 
experience of the Black Sea, the North Sea, the Adriatic, and 
other water basins, say). That is, an agreement providing for 
the division of economic zones along the sea bed and the depths 
of the Caspian along the median between opposite shores and 
opposite states was reached. This document has now been prepared 
by the Kazakhstan side and has been sent to all the Caspian 
states. I believe that we will sign such an agreement in the 
near future. This is just one aspect, and negotiations are 
currently under way between fishermen and environmentalists and 
between military personnel where there are military interests. 
  I believe that we will come to an agreement on the Caspian 
with Russia, Azerbaijan, and Turkmenia [Turkmenistan] and will 
try to make joint use of the current production bases and human 
resources for the assimilation of the riches of this region. It 
may be stated candidly that there is no insoluble global problem 
among these states in respect to this territory. 
  [Baymen] And the final question. The republic still has no 
law on oil and, particularly, offshore research, as a 
consequence of which certain difficulties in cooperation with 
our Western partners will, most likely, arise. 
  [Kuandykov] A draft law on oil was prepared long since and 
has been discussed repeatedly in various committees and 
commissions of the republic Supreme Council and in the 
ministries. The draft was prepared by Kazakhstani specialists in 
conjunction with foreign experts. And we believe that it 
corresponds to all international standards. It contains sound 
opportunities for foreign investments in the economy of 
Kazakhstan. Unfortunately, this law was passed on from one 
session to another, and the previous parliament ultimately did 
not have time to adopt it. And it was passed on not because it 
was bad, it is simply that there are certain forces which do not 
welcome it--for far from objective reasons. International expert 
evaluation also took a long time. I hope that we will ultimately 
approve such a law and that it will perform a positive role not 
only for the republic but also for all who wish to work with us. 

