BFN 

<F P=106> [Inger Jagerhorn article: "EU Could Mean Grand Slam for </F>
Sparsely Populated Areas"] 
  [Text] Sweden's sparsely populated areas could win a grand 
slam in the event of Swedish EU [European Union] membership. At 
the same time an internal tug-of-war has already begun about 
where the Swedish share of the money should come from. 
  In principle, Sweden's current regional support grants can 
continue more or less as hitherto. The grand slam will occur 
when about the same amount of regional support money -- from the 
EU's coffers -- is added. 
  Swedish farmers will receive more support in the future if 
the EU is responsible for payments than they would if the money 
came from the Swedish state. But the question is whether it is 
not the sparsely populated areas that will be the real winners 
(also in those cases where the recipients of support coincide). 
  "But those local politicians who have already added a number 
of millions per inhabitant to their budgets are probably 
counting their chickens before they are hatched," said Gunnar 
Blomkvist, Labor Ministry assistant under secretary. 
  However, there will be money. It is not surprising that at 
their meeting in Ornskoldsvik a week ago the governors of 
Sweden's five northernmost provinces were jubilant. And they 
seem quite happy to accept the other side of the coin: that 
they themselves will have less say. 
  Swedish regional policy will no longer be decided 
exclusively 
inside the country's borders. Hitherto provincial governments 
have ruled the roost and had their own regional policy budgets. 
Now it will be the Commission in Brussels which will set its 
seal of approval on various programs, at least formally and as a 
finishing touch. 
  But there will be no automatic inflow of a number of 
billions 
per year, Gunnar Blomkvist explained. The sums could vary from 
year to year, perhaps with a peak in 1995-96. Sweden must 
provide the EU with details of what it wants to do with the 
money. 
  Also, there must always be matching sum of national money 
for 
investment, in certain cases a krona for every EU krona, in 
other cases a little more or a little less in national 
investments. If Sweden chooses not to contribute any money, 
there will not be any EU money either. 
  "We have to match sums of money for everything we want to 
do," Gunnar Blomkvist said. 
  The introductory fanfares to an internal tug-of-war about 
where the Swedish money is to be taken from can already be 
heard. According to Gunnar Blomkvist, the EU defines "regional 
policy" in much broader terms than Sweden. 
  "No definition says that the EU's money must be matched by 
money which goes under the name of Swedish regional policy 
funds," Blomkvist said. He stressed that the EU is really more 
oriented toward what in Sweden is called "major" regional 
policy, and this money is not available to the Labor Ministry. 
  "The extent to which regional support money determines 
conditions in the interior of Norrland is very small. The 
arrangements affecting air traffic, freight transport, post, 
telecommunications, health care, education, research, and so on 
are much more important. To say nothing of contributions from 
the state in the form of tax equalization." 
  This is what people in Sweden call "major" regional policy. 
  The Swedish money will probably therefore be taken from many 
sources: from the government, from Nutek, from provincial 
administration's funds, from regional high school investment 
(such as Ostersund's high school), and the like. 
  Would it not be simplest to keep total regional support at 
more or less the old level simply by halving the Swedish grants 
and letting the EU be responsible for the other half? 
  "No, that is not at possible," Gunnar Blomkvist said. "This 
conflicts with the principle of additionality. Well," he 
explained patiently, "EU money presupposes that each country 
matches EU money with fresh money, in addition to the money that 
is already being spent on regional policy. There is a ban on 
subtraction, as we have understood it." 
  However, stubborn rumors from Brussels would have it that 
the 
borderline between old money and fresh money is not always that 
clear in all countries. 
  This is how a law-abiding EU country should behave. 
  1. First the EU seeks clarification from Sweden about what 
we want to do in respect of Objectives 2, 6 and the other 
objectives. 
  2. The EU requires member countries to draw up a program for 
each regional policy budget period. The present period covers 
the years 1994 to 1999. Sweden may become a member in 1995 and 
would then have a shorter period to plan for. 
  3. Finally it is decided how finance is to be arranged. 
  The work involved in such a program will not be a great 
culture shock for Sweden. Today national programs are drawn up 
annually on the foundation of a long-term strategy. Things 
would have been more difficult around 10 years ago. Sweden has 
never had such carefully delineated systems. 
  The negotiations which were completed in Brussels on 1 March 
only set out the broad policy framework for regional policy. 
The rest -- and a lot is involved here -- must be clarified 
before the end of the year. This will not be at ministerial 
level, but in direct discussions between Sweden and the EU 
Commission, which is responsible for the practical application 
of regional policy. 
  Many questions will need to be answered. When will the 
balance between the EU's various "objectives" be clarified as 
far as Sweden is concerned? What does the Commission want to 
decide and what can be decided in Sweden? And not least the 
sensitive question: What things ought ideally to be clarified 
before the referendum? 
  For the government the EU campaign will be a balancing act. 
Do not promise too little, for the aim is to disarm with 
suitable bait the northern parts of the country where the 
majority of the opponents of the EU are to be found. But not to 
promise too much either, so that it is accused of already taking 
membership for granted. 
  Today the "little" regional policy kitty in Sweden is around 
2.6 billion kronor. These are funds which the Labor Ministry 
has at its disposal. In most cases the freedom for maneuver is 
relatively limited -- where the money will go is decided more or 
less automatically. 
  In the event of EU membership an EU kitty of around 2.4 
billion kronor will be added to this Swedish kitty of 2.6 
billion kronor. 
  The money for "major" regional policy is elsewhere. Here the 
flexibility is greater. 
  The fund that has attracted the most attention -- Objective 
6, which was tailor-made for the Nordic area in the negotiations 
-- is small beer in this context. It contains no more than 
around 380 million kronor. The largest part of this will be 
spent on roads, railroads, research, education and training, and 
retraining programs. 
  It will also be possible for Sweden to seek grants from five 
of the EU's six other regional policy funds. This is where the 
big money is. Two billion kronor are within Sweden's grasp. 
  Not all these grants are tied to the regions which will 
receive support under the terms agreed in the negotiations 
between the EU and Sweden. The money for objectives 3, 4, and 
5a could go to support projects throughout the country. It is 
only objectives 2 and 5b and the new objective 6 which are 
geographically tied. Once the map has been drawn and sums of 
money decided the Swedish authorities can more or less decide 
how the grants are to be spent. 
  The only "objective" that is closed to Sweden is objective 
1. 
Objective 6 can be said to be the northern variant of this. 
Objective 1 is generally called the misery fund. The support 
for the EU's poorest areas is paid out from it. 
  For objective 6 it is Nordic-style misery which applies: 
sparse population, long distances, and cold climate. In the 
eyes of the EU these disadvantages can be cancelled out by 
relatively high incomes. 
  For a while the EU's negotiators had difficulty in 
understanding that the Swedish maps showing massive GNP incomes 
per person which were being sent to Brussels were only 
statistics produced by civil servants which could not be linked 
to the real living standards of inhabitants. Hydroelectric 
power or a pulp mill could distort the picture and the Swedish 
papers were therefore misleading -- something which the Swedish 
negotiators were forced to remind their counterparts 
energetically. 
<H5>  [Box, p A7] </H5>
<H5>  EU Objective Funds </H5>
  Objective 1 -- To promote the development of underdeveloped 
regions. The "misery fund." Not open to Sweden. 
  Objective 2 -- To restructure regions with industries in 
decline (linked to areas receiving support). 
  Objective 3 -- To combat long-term unemployment (applies to 
the whole country). 
  Objective 4 -- To facilitate the entry onto the labor market 
of young people (applies to the whole country). 
  Objective 5a -- To restructure agriculture and forestry 
(applies to the whole country). 
  Objective 5b -- To facilitate the development of 
agricultural 
areas (linked to areas receiving support). 
  Objective 6 -- New fund set up for sparsely populated 
regions 
with a cold climate. Nordic "misery fund" (linked to areas 
receiving support). 

