Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jan Taljaard] </F>
  [Text] The cabinet has been briefed about a comprehensive 
rightwing war plan that has been in existence since the end of 
last year. The cabinet was told -- in a document marked 
"secret" leaked to the MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN [WM&amp;G] -- of 
rightwing 
plans to hijack the South African Defence Force's Rapid 
Deployment Force (RDF) at the outbreak of hostilities and use 
former SADF [South African Defense Force] Special Force members 
to neutralise key communication structures. 
  They also plan to "neutralise" SADF generals in the event of 
martial law. These allegations are made in an intelligence 
document drafted for the cabinet. Divergent sources contacted 
in connection with the document after it was faxed anonymously 
to the WM&amp;G, confirmed it was authentic. 
  According to the document, the Afrikaner Volksfront (AVF) 
[Afrikaner National Front] has information about a secret 
agreement between the government and the ANC providing that 
martial law will be declared in the case of the AVF seceding. 
All functions of government will then simultaneously be 
transferred to the Chief of the Defence Force. In the event of 
this happening, it is alleged that the AVF will react by 
"neutralising all hostile SAF generals" within 48 hours after 
the declaration of martial law. In this regard, the document 
reads, contingency planning is in place. 
  Rightwingers allege that virtually the whole of the command 
structure of RDF is loyal to the Freedom Alliance and AVF in 
particular. Through counter-intelligence networks inside the 
government's intelligence services, they also believe that they 
will be able to thwart any planned action by the government. 
  The next step will be the mobilisation of the total support 
of the Freedom Alliance for a conventional civil war. This 
support is estimated to be as much as 2.7 million people. These 
disclosures follow claims by both the rightwing and the 
government claiming the allegiance of the security forces, and 
the ongoing shambles around the National Peacekeeping Force. 
  Independent sources also confirm that while the rightwing 
may 
not truthfully claim the support of the entire defence force, 
those who are part of the all-white commando system, especially 
in many rural areas, seen to have strong rightwing sympathies. 
Some commando members have refused to obey to call-up orders 
while others are reported to have hoisting the Vierkleur [Old 
Republican Play] in front of their offices. The document also 
contains "unconfirmed" allegations concerning military 
co-operation between the different members of the Freedom 
Alliance. Among these allegations are that members are 
supplying, securing and caching arms. 
  According to the document, several people formerly linked to 
the SADF or South African Police are also involved in training 
Inkatha Freedom Party members in rural Zululand. Mention is 
also made of the possibility of heavy armaments, including 
aircraft and artillery, being available to the Freedom Alliance. 
These allegations were given substance this week when ANC 
[African National Congress] Secretary-General Cyril Ramaphosa 
said at a session of the Transitional Executive Council that 
people were being trained and armed in Natal with the apparent 
aim of "serving the stated goal of certain parties". 
  He added that between 500 and 1,000 people were being 
trained 
and armed in Northern Natal every fortnight. The document 
reasons that the AVF and its Freedom Alliance partners have the 
capacity to seriously destabilise the security situation in 
South Africa, but that this will depend on a "collective will" 
to actually embark on destabilising actions. 
  The authors of the document estimate the AVF's active 
paramilitary capacity at between 20,000 and 30,000 people. 
Factors favouring the AVF are seen as the concentration of 
supporters in the Transvaal and, [Orange] Free State and the 
high level of military and intelligence expertise of some of its 
leading members. 
  A "collective will" to go into action will be strengthened 
by 
a perception that the option of negotiation has failed and that 
resistance may be the only alternative to realise the right's 
political ideals. 
  Other factors bolstering the rightwing are "a government 
policy perceived to be unsympathetic" and "socio-economic 
realities such as unemployment". The document nevertheless 
concludes that the following factors, among others, may 
"inhibit" the potential of destabilising actions: 

  -  A moral tradition in conservative communities of 
reluctance to become involved in passive or violent resistance. 
  -  A fear, especially among whites, of loss of material 
possession 
and jobs if they participate in violence. 
  -  Dedicated security force action aimed at nipping rightwing 
resistance in the bud. 
  -  Uncertainty about the support of "black" Freedom Alliance 
members. 


