Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Sha'th Tells AL-HAYAH: Disagreement </F>
Between Rabin and Peres Over Results of Davos Meetings"] 
  [Text] Cairo, AL-HAYAH -- Dr. Nabil Sha'th, political 
adviser to Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat, has said that he 
believes there are differences between Israeli Prime Minister 
Yitzhaq Rabin and Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres over security 
issues. He stressed in a statement to AL-HAYAH that 
negotiations are being conducted "inside the Israeli Government" 
-- which automatically suspends Palestinian-Israeli negotiations 
over arrangements for implementing self-rule in the Gaza Strip 
and the Jericho area. 
  Sha'th disclosed that Rabin asked Peres to postpone his 
talks 
with Palestinian President 'Arafat and to return to Israel to 
get his approval of what had been agreed in Davos. And he said: 
"We consider what was agreed between 'Arafat and Peres in Davos 
an objective shift toward easing the the problems obstructing 
the implementation of the Palestinian self-rule agreement." 
  The head of the Palestinian delegation to the Taba talks 
criticized Rabin's position on the negotiations, pointing out 
that it "delays" reaching an agreement. He said: "We 
understand the need for the agreement Peres has reached to be 
approved by his leadership. But Rabin's announcement that no 
agreement has been reached with the Palestinians makes the 
Israeli side's credibility the object of doubt. It also 
violates the Declaration of Principles agreement signed by the 
two sides." 
  Sha'th pointed out that Peres' position was positive, which 
is why President 'Arafat agreed to suspend the negotiations and 
postpone them until next week in Cairo to give him a chance to 
discuss the matter with Rabin. 
  He said: "The Palestinian side is still awaiting the Israeli 
position before 'Arafat and Peres meet next week, and the 
Israelis have to come back to us with what they have agreed upon 
so that our commitment to what we agreed upon in Davos will 
continue." 
  Sha'th described what 'Arafat and Peres agreed upon as "an 
objective shift." He said that they agreed that the corridor 
linking the Jericho area with the Gaza Strip be under the 
control of the Palestinian National Authority only, and that the 
two sides jointly assume security supervision of the crossings, 
on the grounds that Israel considers itself responsible for 
external security during the transitional phase, and it is 
entitled to obtain the necessary security information about the 
crossing traffic. 
  He pointed out that the two sides "nearly reached a full 
agreement on the issues concerning the crossings, the size of 
the Jericho area, and the road linking Israeli settlements in 
the Gaza Strip with the Israeli and Palestinian borders." 
  He stressed the Palestinians' adherence to "the 
implementation of measures to safeguard the Palestinians' 
dignity, including raising the Palestinian flag over the main 
building of the crossing and the presence of Palestinian police 
at the crossings." 
  Sha'th went on: "The Israelis must realize that there are 
common interests for the two sides which have been agreed upon, 
even though we consider that what was agreed upon between 
'Arafat and Peres is suspended, pending what he is going to come 
back with." He stressed that, if the Israelis do not backtrack 
on what 'Arafat and Peres agreed upon, "it will represents a 
step forward." 
  He believes that delaying the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza 
and Jericho "would disrupt the withdrawal timetable. We insist 
that the withdrawal be completed on 13 April, and the Israelis 
must bear the consequences of their delay. And they must 
complete the withdrawal on the set date." 
  He warned that "patience has limits. The U.S. and Russian 
cosponsors must intervene if no tangible progress is achieved." 
  He urged the Americans to "intervene so that what was signed 
in front of them in the White House will be implemented." 

