BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 2 KYODO -- Plant and equipment 
investment by Japanese corporations in fiscal 1994 will edge up 
1.1 percent from the previous year on an all-industry basis, 
marking the first gain in three years, a survey by the Ministry 
of International Trade and Industry (MITI) revealed Thursday [2 
June]. 
  The planned spending for this year was revised upward from a 
0.1 percent drop estimated in the initial forecast. 
  The showing could be taken as a sign that corporate capital 
spending in Japan stopped decelerating, said the Industrial 
Structure Council, an advisory body to the trade minister. 
  But the upturn was mainly in reaction to a marked 8.7 
percent 
fall estimated for fiscal 1993, the council said, noting 
corporate managers are still cautious about boosting investment 
for the current year. 
  The survey was conducted at the end of March to update the 
original survey of October last year. It covered 1,615 
companies in 11 manufacturing sectors and seven nonmanufacturing 
sectors. 
  The survey revealed outlays by manufacturers for fiscal 1994 
will drop 3.5 percent, the third consecutive yearly fall but a 
substantial improvement from an estimated 19.6 percent drop in 
the previous year. 
  Nonmanufacturers plan to boost spending by 3.6 percent for 
this year after suffering an estimated 1.1 percent dip the 
preceding year. 
  The council said corporate inventory adjustment appears to 
have progressed substantially. But an excess of facility 
investment made during the boom of the late 1980s still lingers 
among major Japanese corporations, leaving the possibility of 
their inventory adjustment being further prolonged. 
  In view of an expected further delay in a full-scale 
recovery 
in final demand and manufacturing activity, it is likely to take 
a "substantially long time" before plant and equipment 
investment in Japan shifts to a smooth growth track, the council 
said. 
  It also said restructuring efforts are underway in sectors 
that would lead to an immediate cut in fixed expenses, but added 
that such efforts lack a long-term business prospect, noting 
spending aimed to promote research and development and create 
new business has been stagnant. 
  The survey said Japanese companies' direct overseas 
investment will continue to slacken in fiscal 1994, falling 27.9 
percent from the previous year. 
  But Asia-bound investment for the reporting year will surge 
26.0 percent in a turnaround from an estimated 2.6 percent slide 
in the previous year. 
  Investment in Asia by manufacturers will grow a sharper 56.1 
percent, following an estimated 3.5 percent fall in fiscal 1993. 
  As a result, Japan's direct investment in other Asian 
countries this year will account for 37.5 percent of the total 
overseas spending, up from 16.4 percent in the previous year. 
  The tilt toward Asian investment reflects Japanese 
companies' 
added emphasis on enhancing cost competitiveness, the council 
said. 
  As a way to put Japan's corporate activity on a smooth 
recovery track, the council proposed the government carry out 
macroeconomic policy measures adequately and flexibly in line 
with a series of market-priming packages. 
  The government should also support corporate restructuring 
efforts to facilitate creation of new business through tax 
incentives, deregulation and diversification of fund raising, 
the council said. 

