Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [NODONG SINMUN 16 February article: "We Will Win Only If You </F>
Are With Us"] 
  [Text] One great faith is ringing the era and history. Our 
people who are vigorously advancing along the single road of 
socialism of chuche, firmly united as one mind around the great 
leader [widaehan yongdoja], are loudly expressing the faith in 
the certain victory that we will win only if you are with us. 
Today when a troubled and chaotic atmosphere of confusion and 
pessimism is increasing everywhere in the world due to the 
raging storm of counterrevolution, we hear the exciting 
exclamation that was heard in Korea of the sixties as a victor's 
answer! Why is this exciting exclamation so strongly hitting the 
hearts of a countless number of people and creating the waves of 
excitement in today's struggle and life of ours? We will win 
only if you are with us. Here, the great, firm faith in certain 
victory of our times, in which our people are staunchly 
traversing the road of socialist march, while fighting their way 
through all sorts of formidable adversities, is oscillating 
profoundly. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has taught: Because 
Comrade Kim Chong-il is outstandingly inheriting our 
revolutionary cause everything is being properly carried out in 
our country today and will be properly carried out in the 
future, too. 
  Faith in certain victory is synonymous with faith in the 
leader [yongdoja]. The faith in certain victory which one can 
have comes from one's awareness of the greatness of the leader 
[yongdoja] and one's absolute trust in him. We will win only if 
you are with us. This is a solemn declaration of the faith in 
the certain victory of our people who have keenly felt through 
their formidable and complicated struggle that the dear comrade 
leader is the destiny of the fatherland and the symbol of 
victory and who have firmly believed the final victory of 
socialism through his greatness. 
  Greeting the February holiday, a significant day in the 
history of our nation and country, this morning our people's 
hearts are soothing with the ideological feeling of upholding 
the great leader [widaehan yongdoja] with one mind of reverence 
and excitement. What is bursting forth from the hearts of the 
people who are running to the native house in the secret camp of 
Mt. Paektu where snow flowers bloom; from the hearts of those 
people who are visiting significant historic sites of the 
revolution with red Kim Chong-il flowers despite the cold 
weather in February; from the hearts of officers and men of the 
Korean People's Army who are cultivating their strength of 
annihilating the enemies, cherishing in their hearts the dignity 
and honor of upholding the great commander; from the hearts of 
the working class who are holding aloft the flames of innovation 
under deep deadends in mine galleries, upholding the party's 
revolutionary economic strategy; and from the hearts of 
functionaries who are devotedly working, mingling with the 
masses? It is precisely our people's absolute trust in the dear 
comrade leader and their firm faith that we will win if only you 
are with us. 
  An old hero in Kangson revealed his excited mind as follow: 
We will win only if you are with us. This word is precisely the 
faith which makes our hearts burn and which gives us strength 
and courage. No matter what storm may blow and may hit earth we 
will always be victorious only if General Kim Chong-il is with 
us. 
  We will win only if you are with us. This word is not only 
Korea's spirit of the times, which is burning in our struggle 
and life, but is also a vigorous pulse of all of our struggles 
and advances and a strong mettle of our nation. 
  Faith is trust. Human beings should have trust. The people 
who are carrying out the revolution should have the pillar of a 
firm mind. Trust is the faith and will that enable one to be 
true to one's principle and conscience under all adversities and 
trails. It is the burning zeal and fighting spirit that make it 
possible to surmount any difficulties. It is also the faith, 
vitality, and mettle that make it possible to advance toward a 
bright future without faltering. 
  Without trust we cannot avoid the destiny of endless 
despair, 
frustration, and destruction -- like a ship that has lost a 
compass on a ocean. The supreme trust of human beings is 
precisely the trust in his leader. 
  Christians [kyoin] believe in God as the savior of their 
destiny, and capitalists believe in only money in the world. 
  A person who embodies genuine truths and great power in the 
highest form in the world is the leader [yongdoja] of the 
revolution. The leader [yongdoja] of the revolution who leads 
the popular masses into the cause of independence and pushes 
ahead with history gives one ideas and ideology, wisdom and 
courage, and strength for unity and invincibility. 
  General Kim Chong-il is our heaven [hanul]. Because our 
heaven is boundlessly high and because our heaven is glorious 
eternally, our hearts feel secure [uriui maumi tundunhago], and 
our future is bright. 
  General Kim Chong-il: When we cherish his (?noble call) to 
our hearts, chuche-oriented truths lit our heads and the blood 
of loyalty rushes through our hearts. When we call his great 
noble name, the fire of determination flickers in our eyes and 
the might of 12 (?generals) springs from our hands. 
  Great experiences give rise to genuine truths. People 
consider truths -- which they learned from history, realized 
through experiences, and verified through lives and struggles -- 
to be their belief. Our people has come to have absolute trust 
for General Kim Chong-il not because any textbook or book or 
anyone teaches them to do so. Already a half century ago the 
first generation of our revolution [word indistinct] celebrated 
the birth of the bright star of Mt. Paektu as the nation's [word 
indistinct]. They wrote: The bright star of Mt. Paektu is an 
uncommon, great man who will glorify 10 thousand generations of 
our nation on trees in all mountains, fields, and rivers in this 
country. 
  How is Korea continuously walking along the single road of 
socialism in high spirits without being shaken or chaotic even 
when socialism has collapsed in many countries of the world and 
when the cold wind of imperialism is violently sweeping the 
entire world? How are revolution and construction advancing more 
vigorously and why are all people smiling happy smiles at a time 
the imperialists are desperately maneuvering to crush [apsal] 
us? From where does this strong nerve, which no political and 
ideological offensives can shake, which no nuclear weapons can 
frighten, or which no money can lure, come? This is possible 
due to our people's absolute trust for General Kim Chong-il. 
  Our people absolutely trust General Kim Chong-il, who is the 
great leader [yongdoja] of our party and people and the supreme 
commander of our revolutionary Armed Forces. 
  Our wisdom and courage in turning adversity into advantage, 
the might of our single-hearted unity in creating miracles of 
the century, and the strong spirit of our invincible Armed 
Forces: All of this might comes from the wise leadership of 
great General Kim Chong-il. 
  People who carry out the revolution believe their leader, 
their leader [chagi suryong chagi yongdoja], and firmly believe 
in the victory of the revolution based on the greatness of their 
leader, their leader [chagi suryong chagi yongdoja]. 
  Standing at the podium of the historic eighth League of 
Socialist Working Youth Congress in which our young people 
consolidated their determination to become 5 million people like 
Yi Su-pok and 5 million guns and bombs that resolutely defend 
Supreme Commander General Kim Chong-il, a representative 
expressed the following resolve: People ask us how socialism is 
ever-victorious in Korea without being shaken when socialism has 
collapsed in many countries of the world. Every time, we answer 
filled with pride that we have a great man of the century and a 
society idealistic to mankind. Supreme Commander Marshal Kim 
Chong-il is our heaven [hanul], and the chuche-oriented 
socialism is our earth [ttang]. Because our heaven is high and 
because our earth is solid, we are victorious all the time. 
  This is [words indistinct] for General Kim Chong-il, who is 
the great leader [yongdoja]. 
  Trust for General Kim Chong-il: This gives our people 
absolute confidence, absolute optimism, and a philosophy for a 
great victory in our era. 
  While walking along tens of millions of ri of revolutionary 
roads under the dear comrade leader's leadership, our people 
cherished deep in their hearts the notion that he is the 
people's great leader [yongdoja] who sets directions in history 
and who decides our destiny and that he is also a banner of 
invincibility who guarantees the victory of our revolution and 
socialism and the future of the nation. 
  The thought that without General Kim Chong-il, neither we 
nor the fatherland exist, and that a system without him is 
meaningless -- like the darkness without the sun -- and the firm 
belief that only when he exists can we keep our dignity and 
happiness and defend the socialist cause, and that only when he 
exists, the earth revolves, history goes on, and mankind can be 
salvaged from disaster; these are our people's real-life 
experiences gained from living in today's history and the 
deepest firm belief of all of us that enabled us to solemnly 
exclaim "We will win only if you are with us" looking up to the 
dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. 
  With such lofty ideological emotion of our people, Comrade 
Yi 
In-mo said to a functionary that there was one thing about his 
experience from the deepest of his heart that he really wanted 
to talk about and expressed his genuine feeling: After I was 
returned to the bosom of the Republic, witnessing the 
fatherland's high spirit and the invincible grandeur of firmly 
defending the country's independence right and the nation's 
dignity resolutely against the imperialists, I felt from head to 
foot that the dear comrade leader is truly a great man. Today, 
Korea must have the dear comrade leader, and if we only have the 
comrade leader, the country shall remain strong and the people 
will always win even if the world disappears. 
  On the revolutionary road to overcome trials, the people 
know 
their leader [yongdoja] and firmly believe in the leader's 
[yongdoja] greatness in the life-or-death experience that 
determines destiny. Our people [passage indistinct] the 
extraordinariness, peerless courage, tested leadership of 
General Kim Chong-il, who smashes all the challenges of history 
to defend our destiny, and trust and follow him with faithful 
loyalty and filial piety. 
  There are leaders [yongdoja] who were respected and loved by 
the people in history, and there are great men praised as 
[passage indistinct] for their braveness and virtue. However, 
there has never been a peerless great man, extraordinary hero, 
and great human being across the ages and countries of the world 
like our dear comrade leader who perfectly and flawlessly 
personified all the qualifications and personalities of a leader 
[yongdoja] at the highest. 
  The dear comrade leader is an outstanding genius in ideology 
and theory, an extraordinary giant general in the art of 
leadership, the utmost reincarnation of faith and will, and a 
great benefactor who bestows benevolence and love. His ideology 
and wisdom is a flame for the joy, sorrow, and life that lifts 
the curtain of the times and lightens the future of mankind, and 
extraordinary wisdom and surprising insight that clearly sees 
through everything and grasps the key for victory in a flash. 
  The art of his leadership is a view of creativity and 
innovation that sees everything from a new point of view and 
gives unique explanations, and skillful cleverness and 
extraordinary sweep that enables him to know the entire country 
as well as he knows his own palms and move all the people as 
one. His faith and will is the faithful loyalty that goes on 
and on along the single road of chuche even if thousands of 
mountains and exploding volcanoes block the way; the boldness 
and stubbornness that always sets out on all work in a big way 
and push it ahead boldly looking down at the world; and the 
invincible fighting spirit and infinite might that carries out 
the work once he made up his mind, even if the sky falls. 
  His love is thousands kinds of love embraced in one bosom 
that gives joy and happiness; the fatherly and comradely love 
that blossoms flowers in snow and storm; and the utmost 
benevolence that would pick up the stars in the sky for the 
people and lay carpets of the most valuable gems for the joy of 
the people. 
  At the time when new political tasks were given to our 
revolutionary march and many challenges and trials were in front 
of us, what did we see from the ideology and leadership of the 
dear comrade leader who presented the slogan "We serve the 
people" and majestically proclaimed the determination and will 
of the Workers' Party of Korea to defend to the end and 
elucidate the popular masses-centered socialism of our style? 
  What did we witness with emotion in the peerless resolution 
and courage of the Supreme Commander General Kim Chong-il, who, 
when the imperialists staged a nuclear war exercise and imposed 
pressure and threat on us by all means in a bid to crush our 
Republic in the past, brilliantly defended the country's 
sovereignty and the nation's dignity by sternly warning that the 
enemies cannot [words indistinct] and that no one can deny our 
dignity? What are we witnessing in the great leadership of the 
dear comrade leader who demonstrated the might of our 
self-reliant economy and unfolded a hopeful blueprint of the 
revolutionary economic strategy despite the imperialists' 
tenacious economic blockade against us and who made this land 
full of the beautiful fragrance of communist human beings when 
the hubbubs of human being's moral corruption and destruction 
were raised everywhere in the world? 
  We have the trust that [passage indistinct] and there is an 
ever-victorious, invincible banner. We have the faith that we 
are always strong and we will always win victory in all fields 
because the greatest commander of the world, who are equipped 
with knowledge and military, is with us. 
  Because General Kim Chong-il is with us we won victory 
yesterday, we are winning victory today, and we will win victory 
tomorrow. 
  History advances along its own track, and we firmly believe 
the final victory of our socialist cause. There always exists 
the great commander and the excellent leader [chidoja] at the 
head of our revolution. We have firmly grasped the philosophy of 
great victory, which is the truth of invincible revolution of 
our times when we are always victorious. General Kim Chong-il! 
His disposition is always strong and ever-victorious. His bold 
courage is precisely the will of an unrivaled general. With this 
bold courage, history advances in this world, and with this will 
the people are advancing along [word indistinct]. 
  General Kim Chong-il's ideology and wisdom are the supreme 
ideology and wisdom of mankind; General Kim Chong-il's politics 
of benevolence are the best in this world; and his firm faith, 
will, courage, and leadership ability are matchless. 
  The people firmly believe that even though all sorts of 
adversities and chaos shake people's minds, we can live better 
off and can win victory only if General Kim chong-il is with us 
and only if we follow him. The road of the revolution is far and 
rough and difficult. There may be trials and adversities on the 
road of the revolution. 
  We who have directly confronted the imperialists should have 
the firm determination to break through more serious trials and 
difficulties in the future. We have nothing to fear. Korea is 
upholding the matchless great commander as invincible and no 
force can block the historic advance toward socialism. 
  Imperialism will be ruined without fail, and socialism will 
win victory without fail. This is the rule of history. Justice 
and victory are with us, and [word indistinct] and doom are with 
imperialism. No force can break the single-hearted unity of our 
party, Army, and people around General Kim Chong-il in this 
world. 
  Let us advance toward victory, following General Kim 
Chong-il, ever-victorious and iron-willed general. 
  We will win only if you, General Kim Chong-il, are with us. 
This is the eternal faith of our people. 

