Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Kimihide Nishimura, Politics and Economics </F>
Section, Press Department, Yomiuri Shimbun Chubu Main Office] 
  [Excerpt] 
<H5>  Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd., as Industry Leader </H5>
  The development and manufacturing of the large 
domestically-developed H-II rocket have been undertaken by a 
number of companies mainly located in Aichi and Gifu prefectures 
in western Japan. The ground combustion testing of the rocket 
engine was conducted successfully in June 1993. 
  Among these companies, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, the 
largest in scale with respect to the development and 
manufacturing work undertaken and the number of personnel 
involved, has assumed the leadership role. In July 1989, 
Mitsubishi changed the names of its Ohe factory located in the 
coastal area of Nagoya City and its Komaki-Minami factory 
located next to the Nagoya airport and to the Nagoya Airport 
Space System Works. These name changes were designed so that 
these factories could engage in assembling Boeing 767 and 777 
aircraft and devote time to research on space-related technology 
and production work. At the same time, the Komaki-Kita factory 
was renamed Nagoya Guiding and Propulsion Works to serve as 
Mitsubishi's center for rocket engine testing and production. 
  So far, the factory has manufactured 24 rockets, i.e., seven 
N-I rockets, eight N-II rockets and nine H-I rockets. Recently 
the factory began producing the LE-7, i.e., the main engine for 
the H-II rocket. In August 1991, an accident involving an 
explosion of the fuel injection unit occurred at the factory 
during a pressure test, causing a delay in the launch of the 
H-II rocket. The final combustion test and engine operation 
check were under way in May 1993 at the Tanegashima Space Center. 
  As for the H-II rocket, the plan is for seven of them to be 
launched in the coming years. According to a Mitsubishi 
official, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, expecting to produce the 
H-II rocket at the rate of one or two a year, is beefing up 
manpower at the Nagoya Guided and Propulsion System Works. 
  In June 1989, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries set up a space 
station engineering team (JEMET) by recruiting approximately 40 
engineers from the company's Space Station Design Section. 
However, the team was disbanded at the end of March 1992. The 
detailed design of the space station is currently being promoted 
by a number of the companies involved in the space station 
project. 
  As for the project to develop the Japanese space shuttle 
HOPE 
being promoted by the National Space Development Agency of Japan 
(NASDA), Mitsubishi Heavy Industries has been engaged in the 
development of the basic technology, such as that of high 
temperature-resistant ceramic tiles. The company has finished 
the construction of an experimental model of an orbit-to-earth 
re-entry vehicle (OREX) which is scheduled to be launched by the 
H-II rocket. 
  Nagoya Airport Space System Works has 4,600 employees, while 
Nagoya Guiding and Propulsion Works employs 2,200 workers. 
<H3>  Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd.--Another Major Space 
Developer </H3>
  Kawasaki Heavy Industries is one of Japan's major aircraft 
manufacturing companies. The firm has accumulated technologies 
in space-related industrial fields. The products being 
manufactured by the company include parts for use in the H-II 
rocket. 
  The southern part of Gifu Prefecture, centering around 
Kakamigahara City, boasts about 70 companies, including the 
aerospace division of Kawasaki Heavy Industries, which are 
engaged in space-related endeavors. In recent years, Kawasaki 
Heavy Industries has constructed new factories for producing 
aircraft and space-related equipment and machines near Nagoya 
port and on the coastal area of Ise Bay where an interchange of 
the Tomei-Meishin Highway No. 2 is scheduled to be built in the 
future. 
  In May 1992, Kawasaki Heavy Industries constructed the first 
such factory, with a floor space of approximately 70,000 square 
meters, in Yatomi Town, Aichi Prefecture, a region adjoining 
Nagoya City. In April 1993, the company built the second 
factory, with a floor space of approximately 18,000 square 
meters, on a plot of land along Ise Bay in Tobishima Village, 
Aichi Prefecture. The number of people working in space and 
aircraft production fields at these factories exceeds 4,000. 
  In the project to develop the Japanese space experiment 
module, JEM, which will be attached to the projected space 
station, Kawasaki Heavy Industries is responsible for developing 
a number of types of systems, including a system for removing 
carbon dioxide from the experiment quarters within the module. 
The R&amp;D resources at Kawasaki's Gifu Technology Research 
Center 
and the Space Technology Center have been improved to develop 
the advanced technologies needed to produce aerospace and 
defense systems. The company is also engaged in the development 
of astronaut training systems and robots designed to perform 
various tasks in space. 
  Other products Kawasaki Heavy Industries is developing 
include a fairing cover which, when installed on the tip of the 
H-II rocket, is designed to protect a satellite from the 
physical shock of the launch. 
  In the meantime, Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd., has a space 
industry division in its factory in Utsunomiya City in the 
central Japan prefecture of Tochigi. The company has been 
assembling wings for the B777 since early 1993 at its 
newly-constructed factory. The factory, with a floor space of 
approximately 49,000 square meters, is situated in Handa City on 
the Chita peninsula, Aichi Prefecture. 
  At the Utsunomiya factory, Fuji Heavy Industries is 
developing circuit breakers for use in the H-II rocket's engine. 
The breakers are being delivered to Nissan Motor Co., Ltd. Fuji 
Heavy Industries is also producing test pieces of the tiles to 
be used to protect the surface of future space shuttles from 
heat. Officials at the Handa factory say that their company has 
no intention, for the time being, of starting the production of 
space-related equipment or machines in Aichi Prefecture. From 
the start, the establishment of Fuji Heavy Industries' 
facilities in the prefecture has been welcomed by the local 
community, which intends for Handa City to develop into a major 
industrial center for the space and aircraft industries. 
<H5>  Other Companies Operating in Aichi Prefecture </H5>
  There are many other companies which are operating in Aichi 
Prefecture. 
  Nippon Oils and Fats Co., Ltd., is manufacturing the solid 
fuel for the H-II rocket. The company's original establishment 
was in the Chita Peninsula area in 1919. The company's Taketoyo 
factory in Taketoyo Town, Aichi Prefecture, is currently 
delivering the solid fuel to Nissan Motors, which is in charge 
of procuring solid fuel for the H-II rocket. The factory is also 
producing the fuel for the booster-stage auxiliary rockets of 
the H-II rocket, scheduled to be launched in spring 1994, as 
well as the fuel used for separating the rocket's second and 
third stages. The ground test using similar fuel has been 
conducted successfully at the Tanegashima test range in 
Kagoshima Prefecture. The H-II rocket will carry two auxiliary 
rockets, each weighing 55 kg, which will be bonded to the 
booster. Officials at Nippon Oils' Aichi operation, to which the 
Taketoyo factory belongs, seem confident about the success of 
next spring's launch, saying, "We have also achieved great 
progress in bonding technology in recent years." 
  One company affiliated with Fuji Heavy Industries and 
operating in Aichi Prefecture is Yusoki Kogyo. Headquartered in 
Handa City, the company has actively invested in aircraft part 
production facilities, including automatic riveters, in recent 
years. According to Akira Soejima, president of the company, 
"Yusoki Kogyo will try to actively develop new fields of 
business, including space development, in the coming years." 
  The B777 marks the first time in the history of aircraft 
development that a three-dimensional CAD technique has been used 
to design an aircraft. In the effort to develop the aircraft, 
Computer Technology Integrator (CTI), a company headquartered in 
Nagoya City, has served as the data center. 
  The CAD network connects Boeing's headquarters in Seattle, 
five private Japanese companies, including Mitsubishi Heavy 
Industries which is responsible for the assembly work, and Japan 
Aircraft Development Corp., headquartered in Otemachi, Tokyo, an 
establishment representing these Japanese concerns in the 
development effort, using exclusive communications lines. The 
three-dimensional data is filed into the database using IBM's 
general-purpose computers connected via the network. Referring 
to the possibility of using the data in the space industry, 
Takenari Wani, managing director of CTI, said, "For the data to 
be used in the industry, three-dimensional CAD software must be 
developed. However, it would not be difficult to develop such a 
program if sufficient time and money were available." 
<H3>  Efforts by Chubu Regional Bureau of International Trade and 
Industry and Chubu Business Community </H3>
  In the past several years, a move has been mounting among 
the 
business community in the Chubu region to actively promote the 
development of the space and aircraft manufacturing industry in 
the region to help develop the regional economy. In August 1993, 
the Chubu Council for the Promotion of Aerospace Technology 
(C-ASTEC), an organization composed of representatives from the 
Chubu business world, academia and the three Chubu region 
prefectural governments of Aichi, Gifu and Mie, as well as the 
Nagoya municipal government, and headed by Kamesaburo Matsunaga, 
chairman of the Chubu Economic Federation, was to be promoted to 
the status of a corporation. With the promotion, C-ASTEC could 
step up its efforts to invite state research establishments into 
Nagoya and the surrounding areas in an effort to form a major 
space industrial center in Japan. 
  This move was triggered by an idea included in the "Sophia 
Plan," a long-term industrial promotion plan with sights set on 
the 21st century, which was compiled and publicized by the Chubu 
Regional Bureau of International Trade and Industry (CRBITI) in 
June 1989. The plan envisaged the construction of a Chubu 
aerospace technology center equipped with a wind tunnel facility 
to make it possible to conduct the evaluations and experiments 
required to develop a supersonic transport (SST) and hypersonic 
transport (HST). In October 1989, C-ASTEC was organized with the 
intention of establishing an aerospace technology center in the 
Chubu region. 
  Following the above compilation, the plan for constructing 
the center was furthered with the establishment of the Committee 
for the Realization of the Idea (chairman: Shigeo Uchida, 
professor emeritus at Nagoya University). The results of the 
committee's study were announced in June 1990. The study 
results, entitled "Aerospace Technology for the 21st Century," 
were published by the Tsusho Sangyo Chosa-kai, an organization 
affiliated with MITI. 
<H5>  Aerospace Technology Plan </H5>
  The plan comprises projects to construct seven major 
facilities: (1) a large-scale testing and evaluation center, (2) 
a space technology development center, (3) an earth observation 
center, (4) a national aerospace research center, (5) an 
aerospace information center, (6) a flight experiment center and 
(7) a recreational arena of aircraft-space science and 
technology. 
  One problem encountered in promoting this plan is that it 
will be difficult to accommodate all these facilities within the 
Chubu region. In addition, the construction sites for these 
facilities have yet to be secured. With respect to this, 
Tadataka Kinoshita, head of the Secretariat, C-ASTEC, said, "The 
projects will be implemented by starting with the one that is 
the easiest to implement." As such a project, he singled out the 
large-scale testing and evaluation center which would involve 
the construction of a high-Reynold's number wind tunnel facility. 
  The facility will make it possible to simulate, on the 
ground, the flow of air around the fuselage when a plane is 
flying. In order to realize the conditions which a supersonic 
plane experiences during flight, the facility will be designed 
so that wind of a very high Reynold's number will be created by 
blowing liquid nitrogen into the tunnel at the highest-possible 
pressure to lower the temperature within the wind tunnel. The 
operation of such a wind tunnel facility will consume much 
electricity and natural gas, and will require a great volume of 
cooling water. The facility will produce much noise and, thus, 
sites where such a facility can be constructed are quite 
limited. The current candidate site for the building of the 
center is a 440-hectare reclaimed land plot located on the 
border of Aichi and Mie prefectures. The Kisozaki site faces Ise 
Bay. There is a plan to construct an interchange of the 
Tomei-Meishin Expressway No. 2 near the candidate site. One 
problem is that these two prefectures are contesting how to draw 
the border line on the reclaimed land. Arbitration efforts by 
the Home Affairs Ministry and the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries, the ministries which promoted the 
reclamation project, are currently under way, aiming at 
resolving the dispute by the end of 1993. 
<H5>  Agreeable Distribution of Space-Related Industrial Facilities </H5>
  Active efforts are being made by people across Japan to 
invite space-related industrial facilities into their regions. 
In September 1985, Hokkaido established a regional council to 
promote a plan for improving the facilities required for the 
construction of rocket launching and space plane takeoff-landing 
bases. A similar council was then set up in the Tohoku region in 
September 1989, with a Kyushu council organized by the 
Kyushu-Yamaguchi Economic Federation in December of the same 
year. A Kagoshima council has been active since July 1987, 
inviting more space-related industrial establishments into 
southern Kyushu Prefecture, in addition to the Tanegashima Space 
Center. 
  Under the mounting attention being directed toward the space 
industry, which is expected to grow into a major industry in the 
21st century, the Chubu Economic Federation played an important 
role in inviting the high-Reynold's number wind tunnel facility 
into the Chubu region. In July 1992, the federation proposed an 
idea for dividing Japan into several segments, with each 
engaging in different types of space development endeavors. 
According to the proposal, the capital sphere where the Tsukuba 
Space Center is located is to be devoted to research on basic 
technology, the Tohoku district where the Kakuta Rocket 
Development Center is situated (Miyagi Prefecture) should be 
devoted to the development of rocket engines, Kyushu should 
continue to specialize in rocket launching and control, as well 
as satellite tracking, and the Chubu district would engage in 
development and production using large R&amp;D facilities. The 
proposal is aimed at preventing many space-related facilities 
from being concentrated in a limited number of regions by 
ensuring the effective utilization of existing facilities. The 
proposal also takes the regional factors of the districts 
concerned into account. 
  The Chubu district is active in its efforts to have as many 
of the new space-related facilities built there as possible. In 
April 1990, the Nagoya Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
dispatched a mission to France to inspect the space-related 
industrial facilities located there. The mission toured Toulouse 
City, where the major facilities of the French National Space 
Development Center (CNES) are located, and other towns having 
space-related facilities. In September 1992, another mission was 
dispatched to the United States to inspect NASA's Marshall Space 
Flight Center in Alabama. Takashi Morita, head of the Nagoya 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry's Industry Section, points out 
the importance of concentrating not only the facilities for 
developing production technology, but also the facilities for 
researching software. According to Morita, "We should make an 
effort to have Nagoya and the surrounding areas develop 
industrially, with aerospace technology serving as the nucleus 
of the development effort." 
<H5>  Growing Activities of Space-Related Establishments </H5>
  Numerous space-related companies and research established 
are 
concentrated in the Chubu region. It is urgent that a network be 
established to connect these R&amp;D establishments. 
  On 29 May 1993, the construction of a free-fall experiment 
facility for creating a weightless experiment environment for 
the Microgravity Laboratory of Japan (MGLAB) was started in Toki 
City, Gifu Prefecture. The 150-meter free fall tower is being 
constructed using an abandoned mine shaft. When completed, the 
facility will be able to produce an approximately 
4.5-second-long weightless environment within a falling capsule. 
It will be used to develop new industrial materials. 
  In May 1991, the construction of a material research center 
at which materials can be tested at super-high temperatures was 
completed in Tajimi City, Gifu Prefecture. Material testing and 
evaluation is currently being conducted under simulated space 
plane flight conditions using the facility. 
  Tokyo University's Cosmic Ray Laboratory's Kamioka 
underground observation station has been used to observe the 
supernova explosions and to explore black holes by trapping 
neutrinos, i.e., particles that are far smaller than atoms. The 
technology for creating a virtual reality (VR) environment could 
be used in the space industry in the future. Having received the 
government's permission to construct a VR technology center in 
Kakamigahara City, Gifu Prefecture, preparations are under way 
for the completion of research center construction, scheduled 
for 1995. 
  The Japan Fine Ceramics Center in Atsuta Ward, Nagoya City, 
headed by Masaaki Ohashi, president of Aichi Steel Works, Ltd., 
secured MITI's permission [to engage in research] in May 1985. 
In 1993, the center started research on a "higher 
order-structure-controlled and fusion-produced inorganic 
material," a "flexible" ceramic that can be used at 1,350ÎC 
and has the ability to repair itself. This ceramic is a 
promising material for future use in the space industry. 
  In March 1991, the Artificial Intelligence Research 
Promotion 
Foundation, headed by Kunio Senda, chairman of Toho Gas Co., 
Ltd., was established to extend financial assistance mainly for 
research in artificial intelligence, an element vital in 
computer and space industry applications. 
  A behind-the-scenes effort is afoot to expand the 
Aeronautical Department of Nagoya University's Faculty of 
Engineering to the Aerospace Department. 
  C-ASTEC is purchasing technological information from the 
National Technology Information Service (NTIS), an organization 
attached to the U.S. State Department, in the form of microfilm 
sheets. So far, 70,000 items of information have been 
accumulated by C-ASTEC, one of the largest Japanese databases 
specializing in aerospace technology. The information in the 
database is offered to researchers and research organizations 
free of charge. 
  C-ASTEC will be required to play a larger role in promoting 
the creation of an information communication network, linking 
private companies, R&amp;D establishments and universities, and 
in 
promoting the development of a space industry which, in turn, 
will lead to the development of the local economy. 
<H3>  Spin-Offs 
of Space Technology </H3>
  The domestic space industry is still far smaller in scale 
than the auto industry--approximately one-fiftieth the size. 
Despite this, space technology has already been used in a number 
of daily life businesses, just as in the case of the United 
States where many of the space technologies developed by NASA 
are being used by private companies. The players in the effort 
to develop space technology are the state and a handful of 
private companies, with the general public ignored with respect 
to endeavors in space development. Under these circumstances, it 
would be appreciated if these space developers were to pay a 
little more attention to translating the technology they develop 
into the production of consumer goods. After all, it is the 
"consumer" who pays the taxes that are used to fund space 
development efforts. This effort to divert space technology to 
consumer industrial applications could lead to the generation of 
more space-related industries in Japan. 
  For example, the system introduced by Meika, a vegetable and 
fruit wholesaler headquartered in Hozan Town, Aichi Prefecture, 
to control the ropiness of imported bananas was developed and 
manufactured by Hitachi, Ltd., by taking a hint from the space 
exploration technology developed by NASA. The system makes it 
possible to tell the best time to eat bananas that, under 
Japan's Food Control Law, must be imported when green. The 
technology involved in this system combines a computer with 
light spectrum analysis. The NASA-developed advanced technology 
is being used for mineral resource exploration in space. 
<H5>  Romance of Space </H5>
  The Society of Japanese Aerospace Companies, Inc., is 
considering creating an aerospace industry museum--one that can 
be regarded as a Japanese version of the Smithsonian in the 
United States. As for the Chubu region, a theme park, i.e., Blue 
Sky Park, which will exhibit the short takeoff and landing 
(STOL) plane Asuka and display articles introducing the progress 
made in space development, will be completed in Kakamigahara 
City, Gifu Prefecture, in summer 1995. A 1.33-meter 5.8-kg 
rocket, Satsuki No. 1, which was successfully launched by the 
Kakamigahara branch of the Japanese Association of Space-Loving 
Children at an international rocket launching competition in 
France in 1992, will be exhibited and preserved in the park. The 
competition marked the 1992 observation of International Space 
Year. 
  Haneda Airport in Tokyo is the most likely candidate as the 
site for the aerospace industry museum. However, officials at 
the Kakamigahara municipal office in charge of promoting the 
Blue Sky Park project are being aggressive by saying, "During 
the second phase of our project, we intend to launch a drive to 
have the museum located in our city." 
  The era in which we live makes it possible for us to hear 
voices directly from the astronauts aboard the space shuttle 
Endeavor or Columbia. 
  Approximately 2,000 people attending a talk show held in 
Gifu 
City in April 1993 to which Japan's first astronaut, Mamoru 
Mori, had been invited were enthralled by the experiences he 
recounted, using slides in giving his explanation, with respect 
to conducting experiments in space. Entitled "A Journey to Space 
and Talk with Mori," the program was sponsored jointly by the 
Gifu prefectural government and the Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper 
company. Earlier, in December 1992, Mori attended an 
international aerospace symposium in Nagoya City sponsored by 
the Chubu Aerospace Industrial Technology Promotion Institute. 
Mori's descriptions of his space experiences at these gatherings 
made people perceive space-related matters as being more 
familiar and intimate. 
  The experiments conducted aboard the Endeavor included an 
experiment on space sickness employing a carp. The experiment 
was proposed by Shigeo Mori, assistant professor at the 
Environmental Medicine Research Institute, Nagoya University. 
The carp was raised in Yatomi Town, Aichi Prefecture, and the 
selection of a carp raised in the town made the local mass media 
highlight the news throughout the Endeavor mission. A carp from 
the same town will be used in the next flight of the space 
shuttle Columbia, scheduled to be launched in July 1994. Female 
astronaut Chiaki Mukai will board the space shuttle as the 
second Japanese to fly in space. With the Yatomi Goldfish 
Fishery Cooperative supplying carp for the second time, the 
cooperative will feel that it has joined the ranks of 
space-related industries in Japan. 
<H3>  Administration of Space Development and Regional, as Well as 
Corporate, Efforts To Propagate Information </H3>
  As already described in this article, many space-related 
companies and other establishments are concentrated in the Chubu 
region. However, the region's ability to transmit space-related 
industrial information to the capital sphere and other areas 
across Japan is still poor. As part of the sixth phase of an 
airport construction project, boring is being conducted in the 
sea off the Chita Peninsula in Aichi Prefecture in preparation 
for the construction of the New Chubu International Airport. 
However, it is regrettable that more urgency is being placed on 
the construction of a third airport in the capital sphere than 
on the construction of the new Chubu airport. 
  Taichi Sakaiya, economic critic, in a speech at a meeting of 
the new airport research society held in Nagoya and sponsored by 
the Mitsui group of companies, made an interesting observation 
on the differences in the interest of the mass media in 
reporting on the new Kansai airport. In January 1986, Sakaiya 
counted the number of news items concerning the projected Kansai 
airport that were carried in Japan's five major dailies. The 
Osaka editions of these papers carried a total of 64 news items 
concerning the airport, the Nagoya editions ran a total of 17 
news items, and the Fukuoka editions published 13 items. 
However, the Tokyo editions carried news on the airport only one 
time, and this was done by the YOMIURI SHIMBUN, according to 
Sakaiya. This may have resulted from the fact that the head 
offices of these dailies are located in Tokyo. However, more 
than that, this indicates the difficulty of transmitting from a 
region that is far away from the capital. 
  To promote the effective propagation of information from the 
Chubu region, it will be necessary to resort to the inclusion of 
something that appeals to a wider segment of the population, 
such as mobilizing the Kin-san and Gin-san sisters [centenarian 
twins turned celebrities]. In order to have the Chubu region 
recognized as the center of the space industry in Japan, it will 
be necessary to internationalize the space development effort by 
opening the region more widely to the world, i.e., not confining 
the players to local companies and other local establishments. 
Inviting researchers and engineers from abroad will be one 
measure that must be taken for internationalization. The term 
"space" conjures up something romantic in people's minds. This 
something romantic must not be oppressed by "a regional egoism," 
since the Japanese sometimes tend to resort to such practices. 
  There are some who believe that the aerospace industry has 
something to do with the defense industry. This is partly 
because the aerospace industry is less familiar to the general 
public than are other domestic industries, since the former has 
contributed less to the growth of the local economy. Another 
reason for this is the failure of the private companies involved 
in space development to publicize their activities and the 
results of such activities that are able to be cited. With the 
Cold War now over, it is expected that the demand for space 
technology from consumer industries will begin to increase. This 
will make it important for these companies to better publicize 
their efforts toward peaceful applications of space technology. 
  As for the high-Reynold's number wind tunnel facility, it 
has 
been reported that the Science and Technology Agency's National 
Aerospace Laboratory in Tokyo's Mitaka area and the Defense 
Agency are separately studying the construction of similar wind 
tunnel facilities. It would not be wise for the government to 
construct such costly high-Reynold's number facilities 
separately by the two related government agencies. The United 
States and the EC are currently the only countries in the world 
that have high-Reynold's number wind tunnels. 
  Shigeo Uchida, professor emeritus at Nagoya University and a 
specialist in aerospace engineering, emphasized the importance 
of promoting the construction of the wind tunnel as a national 
project. "Now it has become more important to promote 
international cooperation in space development. We intend to 
promote international cooperation as early on as the stage of 
rocket development, not confining such cooperation to research 
purposes. To promote this, the high-Reynold's number wind tunnel 
must be constructed in Japan as soon as possible," he said. 
  Space has almost infinite possibilities. To realize our 
dreams in space it is necessary (1) for the business world, in 
its efforts to promote space development, to avoid being 
preoccupied with practicing regional egoism, (2) for private 
companies to try to publicize the information they have as much 
as possible so that the information can be used to promote the 
application of space technology in nonmilitary fields, and (3) 
for the government to nurture the space industry by playing the 
positive role of a "space agency." 

