Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Major-General Yevgeniy Korotchenko, candidate of </F>
military sciences and professor, and Colonel Nikolay Plotnikov, 
officer graduate student at the Military Academy of the General 
Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, under "A 
Look at the Problem" rubric: "Information Is Also a Weapon: 
About What Must Not Be Forgotten in Working with Personnel"] 
  [Text] It is not without reason that the mass media are 
called the "fourth power." The resolution of political, 
economic, and defense tasks depends to a considerable extent 
upon the fullness of information and its objectivity and 
dependability. 
  As everyone knows, however, information can be used not just 
for creative purposes. It is no accident that in the 
military-political confrontation of states and in other kinds of 
foreign and domestic conflicts we are now seeing a tendency 
toward a shift in the center of gravity away from traditional 
methods of force and means of combat toward nontraditional 
methods, including information. Their impact is imperceptible 
and appears gradually. It is less burdensome economically and is 
not dangerous ecologically. But the main thing is that it is 
difficult to get rid of. More and more often they will turn 
openly to military force when all other available possibilities 
for influence are already exhausted or military actions will 
likely be brief and, as they say, certain of victory. A graphic 
example of this is the war in 1990-91 in the zone of the Persian 
Gulf. 
  Thus, today information and information technologies are 
becoming a real weapon. A weapon not just in a metaphoric sense 
but in a direct sense as well. Natural questions are: What is 
the objective of the information action, under what principle 
does it work, and what kinds of dangerous effects of information 
are there? 
  One of the basic targets of the influence of information is 
the consciousness and mind of man. Depending on the objectives 
being pursued, the scope of the actions, the nature and content 
of the tasks being resolved, and the forces and means being 
applied, these people may be specific persons (state and 
political leaders, employees of special services, military 
personnel, workers in law enforcement agencies, scientists, and 
members of political parties and movements) or particular social 
groups (workers, entrepreneurs, young people, housewives, etc.). 
But under the conditions when the system for the management of 
the state has been disrupted and a situation of public-political 
and socioeconomic instability has been created in the country or 
in a specific region, the entire population may be the target of 
its influence. 
  The basis of the information action is a specially selected 
or developed information put into circulation with the help of 
well-defined and above all psychological methods and means at 
the proper time by some state or other or particular political 
forces against a selected target. Especially great here is the 
role of negative information or disinformation. Let us remember 
how the bloody events began in one of the former Central Asian 
republics of the USSR. A rumor ("They slaughtered our people at 
the bazaar because of a glass of strawberries") falling on the 
still-smoldering embers of interethnic disagreements about 
purely routine matters provoked mass killings of completely 
innocent women, children, and old men and led to many thousands 
of refugees. 
  The events of recent years abroad and in our country show 
that a special role in the influence of information on the 
public consciousness belongs to television, above all, 
apparently, because it gives the viewers the illusion of 
participating in what is taking place on the screen. Moreover, 
we live under conditions in which the receipt of information 
from other official sources is made more difficult. A very 
dangerous phenomenon in this respect was the crisis in the 
newspaper and magazine business, the dramatic decline in the 
circulation of printed publications, and the worsening of their 
distribution. 
  Here, for example, is how television was used in the 
development of public opinion at the very beginning of the 
bloody events in Bosnia. On one of the days, the television 
companies of many countries showed the mortaring of peaceful 
inhabitants of Sarayevo--Muslims standing in line for bread. And 
it all happened live, as they say, as though those who filmed 
the chilling scenes were informed of the coming events in 
advance. And is it possbile that this is how it was? They 
blamed the Serbs for the crime. And many television viewers 
hundreds or thousands of kilometers away from the place of the 
tragedy, not to mention the Muslims of Bosnia, certainly 
believed this. Later, however, UN workers were able to determine 
that in reality the bloody provocation was the work of Muslim 
militants who had selected their coreligionists as targets. But 
the deed, as they say, had already been done. 
  It is possible to present a great many such examples of 
falsification and manipulation of facts, including in the public 
mass media. 
  Television and radio are becoming the predominant means of 
information in the army as well. And if one takes into account 
the growing psychological tension in the society, the loss of 
moral guidelines and values by most of our citizens, and the 
uncertainty about tomorrow, then television--if its standards 
are set by commercial interests as is done here--can also become 
an agent for social degradation. The scenes of violence on the 
screen, the propaganda of profit by any means, the 
permissiveness and disdain for the law, the pornography, and the 
forgetting of the many centuries of Russian history hardly 
strengthened the moral foundations of the army. 
  The techniques for the introduction of negative information 
and disinformation into the consciousness of people are quite 
varied. They may conditionally be divided into obvious 
techniques, unconvincing methods, delayed perception, 
repetition, argued methods, and techniques for resolute 
conclusions. 
  Obvious techniques are those that do not require additional 
information for the understanding of the basic content of the 
material being disseminated. Assertions are one example. They 
represent firm statements presented as obvious facts not 
requiring proof. Here any complex situation may be simplified to 
the point where, let us say, the cause of all troubles 
(economic, political, military, etc.) becomes quite obvious. 
Thus, for example, the culprit in the economic crisis in a 
number of republics of the former USSR may be declared to be 
either persons of another nationality, so-called "migrants," or 
people with a different political orientation. And this, as 
everyone knows, was one of the reasons for the national-civil 
wars in Moldova, the Transcaucasus, and Tajikistan.... 
  Unconvincing methods operate under the principle: "You can 
believe it or not, I do not vouch for its authenticity." 
Particularly outstanding among these methods are insinuations 
employed to establish or evoke in the target of the action 
doubts about particular ideas, social groups, or individual 
personalities with the purpose of producing a schism in the 
midst of the target group. This is usually done through 
allusions, half-truths, and allegories so that the target of the 
action will draw his own conclusions but in such a way that is 
necessary for the one disseminating the information. The themes 
of the insinuations may be political views, socioeconomic, 
national, and religious differences, the personal lives of 
undesirable representatives of the state and military 
leadership, power structures, leaders of political parties, and 
entrepreneurs, the sources of their income, and the like. 
  In the use of methods of delayed perception, the target of 
the action perceives the basic content of the information only 
after becoming familiar with secondary materials. The 
premeditated concealment of certain information until it is no 
longer of current interest may serve as an example here. 
  Methods of repetition make it possible, figuratively 
speaking, to "pound" information into the subconciousness of the 
individual, the destructive action of which may subsequently be 
initiated at the proper time with the help of some slogan, 
appeal, combination of words, or symbols. 
  Arguments used in a negative information action are 
presented 
as a reason explaining the behavior or thinking of the target of 
the action. In so doing, it is sufficient to set different 
accents, remove some "inconvenient" details, and make some 
selective passes and the same argument can have a different 
sound to it and accordingly and different effect. 
  In speaking of the negative information effect on the 
personnel of the army and navy, it is necessary to pay special 
attention to rumors. Let us see what rumors represent, what are 
the reasons for their formation, how they influence the 
attitudes, behavior, and life aims of the individual, and what 
measures can be taken to counteract them. 
  People who encounter something that they cannot 
understand--real or invented but, as they see it, 
important--always strive to get rid of mental tension and to 
obtain the information necessary for their social orientation 
and the organization of their behavior in any situation. If for 
some reason the official information system does not provide 
satisfactory explanations and remains silent or says too little 
about something, then the people begin to offer their own 
version. This gives rise to rumors that spread unbelievably 
quickly without being subject to practical control. In crisis 
situations, by the way, it has always been that because of the 
disruption of the work of official sources of information rumors 
become the main means of satisfying the society's need for 
information. In the contemporary information space, they are 
capable of becoming a kind of "fifth power" when they take over 
the mass consciousness. 
  Rumors reproduce themselves and are believed not so much 
because they appear to be true but because the correspond to the 
information and psychological needs of people who have not been 
satisfied with the necessary information through official 
sources. 
  In terms of their origin or source, rumors may be 
spontaneous, conditioned by the objective conditions of the 
existence of man (a difficult social and economic situation and 
state of the social consciousness and mass psychology), or 
deliberately fabricated and purposefully spread for specific 
purposes. 
  In accordance with the characteristics of information, 
rumors 
may be subdivided into four basic types: Absolutely unreliable; 
unreliable with elements of plausibility; plausible; and 
reliable with elements of implausibility. 
  In terms of the nature of the general emotional reaction 
that 
they produce, they are also subdivided into frightening rumors, 
so-called "wishful" and "hopeful" rumors" (during the years of 
World War II, for example, the propaganda agencies of Germany 
spread the rumor of a "new secret retaliatory weapon"), and 
aggressive rumors. The first kind of rumors usually expresses 
the foresight of some unpleasant events. Such rumors have a 
favorable psychological basis in an environment with the 
predominant moods of alarm, uncertainty, and fear and usually 
substantially block the people's realization of their official 
duties and disorganize their actions. Rumors of the second kind 
most often represent the attempt to present what is desired as 
real. If the desired goes contrary to reality, then there is 
also a sharp decline in the morale and psychological stability 
of people. And aggressive rumors upset the interrelationships of 
people, disrupt the established ties between them, and promote 
interethnic and interreligious hostility and hatred. 
  How can one counteract the destructive effect of rumors, 
including in the army environment? 
  The most effective means of preventing the rise and 
circulation of rumors, of course, is the timely, systematic, 
and, the main thing, objective informing of personnel about 
events, facts, and problems. The more convincing information is 
and the more adequate it is from the point of view of quantity, 
the less reason there is for the rise of different conjectures 
that put a negative stamp on developing or existing public 
opinion. 
  An important role in the prevention of rumors, especially 
under the conditions of an unstable military-political or 
socioeconomic situation, is played by meetings of managers of 
different levels with the mass audience (television and radio 
appeals, direct contacts, press conferences, briefings, etc.). 
It is precisely from such people that they expect the 
appropriate information in a complex situation. Such meetings 
must be regular regardless of how events develop. 
  But what should be done if the rumor has already appeared? 
How should one react to it--remain silent, which amounts to 
promoting its further circulation, or deny it, which indirectly 
also serves to spread it? To counteract rumors in an active way, 
practice shows that the very best thing to do is to put specific 
undeniable facts up against it. That is, one must strive to fill 
the lack of information at once. 
  Probably one ought to include in the category of important 
educational tasks the development of a culture in service 
personnel for the perception of information, so to speak. We 
will not forget that for many years our people were not educated 
in the spirit of excessive trust in any printed word and any 
statement made on television or radio. It is necessary to 
develop in them the ability to analyze information critically 
and a certain mental outlook, a culture of perception. It is 
necessary to teach people to orient themselves independently in 
the flow of information and to assess the degree of authority of 
some source or other and to develop in them a kind of immunity 
against clearly unprincipled information actions. 
  Of course one should not overestimate the role of the mass 
media and rumors in influencing the consciousness and mind of 
the individual. Here other factors also play a role. But nor 
should one underestimate the fact that the behavior and life 
attitudes of practically all of us is largely determined by the 
content of the information that we obtain from newspapers, 
journals, radio and television broadcasts, and direct 
interpersonal contact. All of this must be considered in daily 
work with personnel. 

