CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Arnaud Leparmentier and Pierre-Henri de </F>
Menthon: "Is the COB Doing Its Job"--first paragraph is LE 
NOUVEL ECONOMISTE introduction] 
  [Text] Is the Stock Market Operations Commission doing too 
much in its triple role of legislator, policeman, and judge? 
Yes, according to some, when it goes after a few cases in order 
to make examples of them. No, according to others, when it 
closes its eyes in the name of the market credibility. Unequal 
justice? 
  On 26 April during the ritual presentation of the annual 
report of the Stock Market Operations Commission (COB), nobody 
was really listening to its chairman Jean Saint-Geours' speech. 
Addressing the financial and economic press, his director 
general Pierre Fleuriot at his side, this affable man could 
expound on restrictions on voting rights, criticize French 
boards of directors, and rejoice at the improved operation of 
the mutual fund system. But on that day on the ninth floor of 
Mirabeau Tower, Quai de Javel, Paris, the audience had its mind 
on other matters: the latest financial debates agitating the 
Paris Stock Exchange and a question: Was the COB, whose mission 
is to defend investors, doing its job? 
  On 14 April it issued a warning contesting the conditions 
and 
terms of the Pinault-Printemps/La Redoute merger. Many 
considered this audacious move beyond the scope of the COB's 
powers. Under corporate law, mergers are the concern of the 
general shareholders' meeting and it alone. The debate is all 
the more heated because the operation was handled by Lazard, the 
most prestigious of the investment banks, and was backed by 
Georges Bathes de Ruyter, head of Arthur Andersen France, and 
Rene Ricol, new president of the certified accountants' 
association. The COB responded by saying: "We have carried out 
our duty to provide the public with fuller information, even if 
we are aware that we cannot prevent the operation." Later, in an 
interview granted to LE FIGARO on 27 April, Jean Saint-Geours 
disassociated himself from the legal actions initiated by La 
Redoute's minority shareholders to quash the operation. Turning 
first one way and then the other, COB's trial-and-error approach 
to this case will have caused many a pen to bleed. 
  Another recent action that has raised a ruckus is the 
Jean-Francois Henin "affaire." This high flying financier, the 
former head of Altus and Jean-Yves Haberer's right-hand man, 
took over Electricite et Eaux de Madagascar (EEM) from Credit 
Lyonnais as a shell corporation for obtaining investor 
financing. The funds were to be used for risky investments in 
U.S. coal and real estate. A bad idea, according to the COB: 
"Listed securities are sound stock. It is normal to exclude 
Jean-Francois Henin's project." In order to protect the 
investor, the COB decided to limit access to EEM to "informed 
investors" able to invest at least half a million francs. It 
also recommended that EEM should simply be struck from the 
official list. These measures shocked many legal experts, 
horrified to see the COB overstep its powers again in the name 
of its sacrosanct vocation of protecting the investor. 
  This mission is so ambitious that it is becoming impossible. 
Still, in order to fulfill it, on 2 August 1989 the Treasury 
officials who head the Commission got parliament to grant it 
powers that exceed those of the highly feared SEC (Securities 
Exchange Commission) [as published] in the United States. The 
COB has tripartite power to control all financial operations for 
the investor's protection: legislative power (it writes its 
rules); executive power (it applies them); and judiciary power 
(it imposes penalties on those who break them). After five years 
of trial and error, the COB is still having trouble using this 
power wisely. It seems to be doing either too much, when it gets 
involved in the affairs of Francois Pinault or Jean-Francois 
Henin, or too little, when national interests or market 
credibility may be threatened. 
  In the very political Rhone-Poulenc privatization operation, 
it dared to issue a harsh "opinion" on the chemical group's 
accounting procedures. However, it gave no publicity to these 
comments, which are buried on page 29 of the memorandum 
published in the economic press. There was no question of 
serving due and proper "warning" on the company in an operation 
of such strategic importance for the government. 
<H5>  Sidestepping the Issues </H5>
  In another sensitive case--Credit Lyonnais--the COB has been 
conspicuous by its discretion. "This is a matter of a credit 
institution, which operates on trust. Making a concern public is 
always delicate," Jean Saint-Geours says to those who criticize 
his inaction. He offers an additional explanation that sidesteps 
the issue: "Credit Lyonnais' primary watchdog is obviously the 
Banking Commission, since the company's stock is not widely 
traded." Still, nonvoting preference shares in the bank are 
listed on the Stock Exchange. The COB's chairman also pays 
little heed to Thomson-CSF, a bellwether company on the Stock 
Exchange that, with a 20-percent interest in Credit Lyonnais, is 
directly affected by the bank's difficulties. Alain Gomez' group 
is currently unable to close its books because of its 
participation the bank's rescue. 
  The third sin of omission is the case of Euro Disney. 
Certainly, a routine investigation of the stock's performance is 
still underway. However, the COB's duty to provide accurate 
information and defend the investor's interests has gone by the 
board. "In the face of this disaster, it is difficult to reach a 
decision on the treatment of the minority shareholders," the 
COB's chairman says to excuse his silence. In an instance of 
flagrant inequality, some shareholders and creditors have 
received privileged information in the form of a report on the 
park's actual position by the KPMG accounting firm. "I would 
have preferred for the report to have been made public," says 
Jean Saint-Geours, who has not intervened to end this 
informational inequality. 
<H5>  Enlightening Minds </H5>
  Deemed too strict by some and too lenient by others, the COB 
has opted to fulfill its mission by the most audacious means: 
making examples. Though it denies doing so, faced with the 
inability to monitor everything on behalf of investors, it has 
made a big commotion over certain cases that it considers worthy 
of interest. Its goal is to find an example that can inform and 
contribute to case law--even if this sometimes means breaking 
the rules. The COB's offices at Mirabeau Tower make no secret of 
the fact that it considers going by the book a heavy constraint. 
  In 1991 Bertrand d'Illiers, then head of the Commission's 
accounting office, wrote in HAUTE-FINANCES that his long tenure 
in that post had allowed him "to make the COB very influential 
with respect to legal doctrine. Moreover, I have been able to 
take advantage of the vagueness of the laws to act effectively 
by exceeding the scope of the COB's powers." Jean Saint-Geours 
had prepared the ground for this philosophy two years earlier in 
the Commission's bulletin: "In 20 years, the COB's efforts have 
made it a regulatory authority. It has worked skillfully and 
rigorously to create a body of case law by using the laws and 
even going beyond them." However praiseworthy it may be, does 
the end justify these means? 
  As a result of its overzealousness, the COB has been 
reprimanded in the courts on several occasions for overstepping 
its powers. In January 1993 the Court of Appeal voided a 
300,000-franc [Fr] fine which the Commission had imposed on 
Christian Derveloy, former head of the VEV textile group. The 
grounds cited were violation of the presumption of innocence by 
announcement of the initiation of administrative proceedings in 
a press release. The COB learned its lesson from this case. "We 
no longer give out information until the penalty has been 
decided. This is what we did in the Ciments Francais and Yves 
Saint Laurent cases in which the directors were fined," a 
department head says. But publicity is a penalty, too. Didier 
Pineau-Valencienne, the head of Schneider, learned this to his 
own cost when, in early 1993, helpless and terrified, he saw the 
COB release to the press a letter of reprimand concerning 
Schneider's financial information. 
<H5>  Cannot Be Sued </H5>
  However, the courts are ill-equipped to repair any injury 
caused by the Commission. The COB is more or less immune from 
prosecution. The legislature, while allowing its chairman to 
investigate whatever he pleases, forgot to provide it with any 
legal competence. As demonstrated by the 6 April decision in the 
Compagnie Diamantaire d'Anvers case, to obtain damages from it, 
it is necessary to sue the state directly and to establish the 
existence of "culpa lata" [liability] --an all-but-impossible 
legal exploit. 
  The COB has decided to take action to counter these 
criticisms. With its Fr131 million budget, its 226 employees, 
and its power to target everything involving publically traded 
securities, turn case records over to the government for legal 
investigation, and impose fines of up to Fr10 million, the COB 
has accepted reality: one cannot do everything and do it well. 
It has undertaken reforms with two goals in mind: simplification 
and delegation. "I want to trim and simplify everything I can," 
Treasury official Pierre Fleuriot said shortly after his 
appointment as director general. That was in March 1991. Since 
then, the Commission has standardized the approval of bond 
issues, reduced the period required to obtain authorization to 
launch a mutual fund by several months, and developed a 
simplified, easy-to-understand prospectus for stock issuers. 
Millions of these two-page summaries have been distributed to 
banks on the occasion of privatizations. And that is not all. On 
26 April Jean Saint-Geours confirmed that from now on the COB 
will issue approval for mutual fund management companies instead 
of each individual mutual fund. This is good news for the 43 
employees responsible for monitoring the 2,856 mutual funds and 
unit trusts on record at the close of 1993. 
  This simplification can be achieved only by increased 
reliance on outside professionals. The COB itself no longer 
checks the work done by the auditors of listed companies. 
However, it still expects these account auditors to inform it 
annually of any anomalies they have noted in the course of their 
audits. It would like to extend this procedure to the work of 
capital contribution and merger auditors beginning in 1995. As 
for mutual funds, whose accounting and management procedures 
recently underwent extensive changes, the COB intends to rely 
more and more on the professional organization, the French 
Association of Investment Companies and Funds (ASFFI). 
<H5>  Is the Stock Exchange Mature Enough? </H5>
  Pierre Fleuriot has another major project: developing the 
role of independent opinions and certificates of fairness. The 
principle is simple. When investors do not have all the data on 
an operation in hand, the Commission will suggest that 
investment banks or independent auditing firms certify its 
irreproachable nature and financial fairness. The idea has 
already been tried on several public tender offers: the Bernard 
Tapie Finance OPR [compulsory buyout offer], Altus and CIP's 
friendly OPA [cash tender offer] on Fnac, and Lagardere Groupe's 
OPE [public exchange offer] on Matra-Hachette. It is not clear 
that the Stock Exchange is mature enough to find experts who do 
not have conflicting interests and are qualified to judge the 
fairness of an operation in an absolutely independent manner. 
The COB will not be successful in its mission until the major 
bankers and certified accountants have gained universal trust by 
adhering to a code of ethics. 
  More generally, one cannot expect the COB to be more 
credible 
than the market it is supposed to monitor. 
<H5>  [Box, p 16] </H5>
<H5>  The Sheriff of Mirabeau Tower </H5>
  "Emotionally disturbed," "full of himself"--there is always 
some corporate lawyer, banker, or financial director to whisper 
a kind word, off the record of course, about the 40-year-old 
director general of the Stock Market Operations Commission 
(COB), Pierre Fleuriot. Some say his only dream is to take the 
place of his boss, Jean Saint-Geours, whose term as chairman of 
the Commission expires in October 1995. Even if he does not, 
given the meticulous care with which he as always managed his 
carrier, there can be little doubt: Fleuriot will energize one 
of the market's biggest financial institutions. In presenting 
the annual report on 26 April, Jean Saint-Geours commented that 
"one cannot make a carrier of the COB, not even half a carrier." 
  The always impeccably dressed Fleuriot can easily explain 
the 
stream of spiteful remarks by jealousy. Do they hit their mark? 
When by chance he agrees to meet with reporters, he rarely 
confides. In March 1991 when he became director general of the 
Commission--a post invented out of thin air--he told his staff 
that his role would be the most thankless one: that of punch 
bag. He would take a pounding from the Treasury, where he is 
criticized and envied for helping an administrative authority 
endowed with increased powers fly on its own power. He would 
also take one from the captains of Parisian capitalism in 
response to an increasing self-assured COB's frequent blockage 
of certain maneuvers. "He is extremely dangerous and powerful," 
says one banker, "but he is a pro." For the COB's director 
general, such condemnation is a proof of independence. Surely, 
for this senior official who has always needed to be liked and 
acknowledged, this must be a difficult calling. 

