BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by Wang Nan: "U.S.-Japan Trade Compromise"] </F>
  [Text] Washington, May 24 (XINHUA) -- When the U.S. and 
Japan agreed today to restart trade framework negotiations, 
their agreement is a fine-print compromise. 
  More than three months after the collapse of the first 
talks, 
it is in the interests of Washington and Tokyo to break the 
logjam, observers said. 
  But is the agreement, as officials here stressed, a "firm 
commitment" towards reducing Japan's trade surplus with America, 
60 billion dollars last year? 
  Today's agreement is the ninth of its kind between 
Washington 
and Tokyo in 16 months, following those on apples, rice, copper, 
chemicals, construction and phones. 
  The two countries have had 37 trade pacts in the past, 
though 
many are not working or working well because, according to the 
U.S. officials, they are merely process-oriented. 
  It was last fall that the U.S. and Japan started the 
framework negotiations on three priority trade areas: Auto and 
auto parts, insurance, and government procurement of 
telecommunications and medical equipment. 
  As Japanese officials maintained, though frequently denied 
by 
Washington, the U.S. tried in vain to set numerical targets in 
the talks and use them to measure the progress Japan made in 
market access. 
  The government of then Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa 
found 
it hard to yield, and after his Washington meeting with U.S. 
President Bill Clinton on February 11, the framework talks were 
finally declared dead. 
  Today's agreement, as explained by U.S. officials, has a few 
key differences, at least in forms. 
  Instead of setting numerical targets to measure Japanese 
trade liberalization, Washington agreed to use "objective 
criteria", both qualitative and quantitative, as the 
prerequisite to restart talks. 
  Meanwhile, unlike last year's agreement which self-imposed a 
deadline of six months for final talks on priority areas, no 
deadline can be found in today's compromise. 
  Moreover, Washington and Tokyo agreed, quite optimistically, 
to extend their framework talks soon to cover financial 
services, glass and intellectual property. 
  The agreement, U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor 
declared, "shows that (we) can resolve issues and strengthen 
relationships and boost confidence between the two countries to 
move in the right direction." 
  U.S. officials, speaking to reporters today, stressed that 
the new qualitative and quantitative criteria are only used to 
measure progress and are never intended to constitute numerical 
targets or quotas. 
  In a 1992 agreement, Japan was made to agree that foreign 
penetration of its semiconductors market should reach 20 
percent, a numerical target or quota. 
  "We were never for (the quotas)," Kantor explained. "We're 
not doing that in this agreement." 
  As to quantitative criteria, the number of Japanese auto 
dealers handling cars built in the U.S., for example, will be 
measured. 
  As to qualitative criteria, the degree of cooperation in 
joint research, development and design between U.S. auto parts 
suppliers and Japanese car makers, for example, will be measured. 
  Why not a deadline? "It would be unfortunate, unnecessary 
and unreasonable to put any particular date on these agreement," 
Kantor explained. "We'll move quickly, though." 

