BFN 

  [Text] Paris, May 4 (XINHUA) -- New Japanese Prime 
Minister Tustomu Hata, on a one-day official visit to France, 
said here today that it is improper for Japan's Justice Minister 
Shigeto Nagano to describe the Nanjing massacre as a 
"fabrication." 
  Hata's spokesman Kishichiro Amae told reporters that Hata 
said he himself was going to talk with Nagano about the issue. 
  Hata arrived here earlier today for talks with French 
leaders 
on the Naples summit of the Group of Seven most industrialized 
countries scheduled for July. 
  Hata reiterated his viewpoint on the past history: "Japan 
had 
launched a war of colonialism and aggression, which had caused 
huge agony and catastrophes to many peoples. Therefore, every 
Japanese should envisage the history of that period and, 
together with the Japanese Government, never allow similar 
events to occur." 
  "This is of vital importance," he stressed. 
  In an interview with Japan's major daily newspaper "MAINICHI 
SHIMBUN" Tuesday, Nagano, who was appointed by Hata just last 
week, termed the 1937 Nanjing massacre as a "fabrication" and 
even denied Japanese invasion of other nations during the second 
world war. 
  Nagano, a 71-year-old senior member of Hata's Japan renewal 
party, said it was "wrong" to call Japan's invasion of its Asian 
neighbors in the 1930s and 1940s aggression, according to the 
newspaper. 
  "I think the Nanjing massacre is a fabrication, and it is 
wrong to describe the war as a war of aggression," Nagano said. 
  In December 1937, Japanese invasion troops occupied Nanjing, 
the then Chinese capital, and slaughtered up to 300,000 innocent 
Chinese civilians and prisoners of war in the city. The 
notorious massacre has been proved by undeniable evidence. 
  Nagano, who graduated from a Japanese military academy, 
joined Japanese invasion troops to China during World War II. 
He entered the Self-Defense Force (SDF) after the war, was once 
chief of staff of the SDF ground force and retired from the 
military in 1980. 
  Last year, then Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa said Japan 
had undertaken a war of aggression against its Asian neighbors 
during World War II. 
  Hata said last July that Japan should apologize for its war 
atrocities. 

