Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Jia Zhaoquan (6328 2507 0356) and </F>
XINHUA reporter Ma Xiaochun (7456 2556 2504)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 19 Mar (XINHUA) -- Speaking yesterday to 
high- ranking cadres attending a political work meeting and 
reading class on Volume 3 of the Selected Works of Deng 
Xiaoping, held by the General Staff Department, Zhang 
Wannian, member of the Central Military Commission and chief of 
general staff, stressed: In theoretical studies, we must 
properly handle the issue of political firmness. The most 
important thing is to unite the thoughts of officers and men on 
the theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics, 
the party's basic line, the party's reform principles, and the 
military commission's policies to ensure that they maintain a 
high degree of unanimity with the party Central Committee and 
the Central Military Commissions at all times and under all 
circumstances. 
  Zhang Wannian said: To quicken the establishment of the 
socialist market economic system, the party and state have 
introduced a series of major reform measures. Deepening reform 
and adjusting interest patterns will definitely arouse different 
reactions from society. Only by deepening the study of Volume 3 
of the Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping and mastering 
the key to the correct understanding of various issues can we 
profoundly understand the correctness of central policies, thus 
enabling us to properly handle the pattern of interests and 
adjust relations among different interests, particularly when 
reform measures involve the personal interests of some officers 
and men. Further, only through such measures can we keep the 
fundamental interests of the country and people in mind, 
properly handle and take the overall interest into 
consideration, as well as consciously maintain a high degree of 
unanimity with the party Central Committee and the Central 
Military Commissions on ideology and politics. 
  Zhang Wannian asked leading cadres at all levels to stand 
for 
the party and people. He called on them to, through theoretical 
studies, correctly understand domestic and international 
situations, correctly understand and handle various complex 
social phenomena, strenghten their sense of hardship, always 
maintain a sober attitude, firmly remember the army's 
fundamental functions, steadfastly comply with the command of 
the party Central Committee and the Central Military Commission 
with Comrade Jiang Zemin at the core, and contribute to the 
country's reform, opening up, and stability. 
  Zhang Wannian asked military organizations at all levels to 
vigorously cultivate proper work styles. They should strongly 
encourage healthy trends and combat unhealthy work styles by 
conducting education in revolutionary soldiers' professional 
ethics; education in the army's glorious tradition; discipline 
education; and education in anticorruption and clean 
administration. They should strongly promote the work styles of 
attaching importance to the army's cause and downplaying fame 
and wealth; taking overall interest into consideration and 
safeguarding unity; strictly upholding principle and discipline; 
seeking truth from facts and doing pragmatic work; showing 
friendliness and sincerity toward people; practicing fairness 
and uprightness instead of favoritism; and maintaining unanimity 
in thoughts and actions as well as complete openness. They 
should actively struggle against liberalism, individualism, 
hedonism, and money-worship ideologies. It is necessary to 
respond to President Jiang Zemin's call and enthusiastically 
implement activities for emulating heroic soldier Comrade Xu 
Honggang, further carry forward healthy revolutionary trends, 
and cultivate good morality. It is necessary to strengthen 
training in party spirit, establish a revolutionary outlook on 
life and value standards, and create a good environment for 
satisfactorily completing various tasks entrusted by the party 
Central Committee and the Central Military Commissions. 

