CSO 

<F P=106> ["Constitution of the Republic of Belarus"] </F>
  [Text] We the people of the Republic of Belarus, 
proceeding from responsibility for the present and future of 
Belarus, recognizing ourselves to be a full subject of the world 
community and confirming our commitment to values common to all 
mankind, taking as a basis our inalienable right to 
self-determination, relying on the age-old history of the 
development of Belarusian statehood, endeavoring to firmly 
establish the rights and liberties of each citizen of the 
Republic of Belarus, and wishing to ensure civil harmony and the 
permanent foundations of the power of the people and a state 
based on the rule of law, adopt this constitution--the basic law 
of the Republic of Belarus. 
<H5>  Section I. PRINCIPLES OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL SYSTEM </H5>
  Article 1. The Republic of Belarus is a unitary 
democratic social state based on the rule of law. 
  The Republic of Belarus is supreme and possesses the 
fullness 
of power on its territory and exercises domestic and foreign 
policy independently. 
  The Republic of Belarus defends its independence and 
territorial integrity and the constitutional system and ensures 
legality and law and order. 
  Article 2. Man is the highest value of society and 
the state. 
  The state is responsible to the citizen for the creation of 
the conditions for the free and worthy development of the 
personality. The citizen is responsible to the state for the 
unswerving discharge of the obligations entrusted to him by the 
constitution. 
  Article 3. The sole source of state power in the 
Republic of Belarus are the people. The people exercise their 
power directly and via representative authorities in the forms 
and within the limits determined by the constitution. 
  All actions in respect to the achievement of state power by 
forcible methods and also by way of some violation of the laws 
of the Republic of Belarus shall be punished in accordance with 
the law. 
  Article 4. Democracy in the Republic of Belarus 
shall be exercised on the basis of a diversity of political 
institutions, ideologies, and opinions. 
  The ideology of political parties, religious or other public 
associations, or social groups may not be established as 
obligatory for the citizens. 
  Article 5. Political parties and other public 
associations shall, operating within the framework of the 
constitution and the laws of the Republic of Belarus, contribute 
to the ascertainment and expression of the political will of the 
citizens and shall participate in elections. 
  Political parties and other public associations are entitled 
to avail themselves of the official news media in the procedure 
determined by the law. 
  The creation and the activity of political parties and, 
equally, other public associations whose purpose is a forcible 
change in the constitutional system or which engage in 
propaganda of war or national, religious, or racial hatred are 
prohibited. 
  Article 6. The state takes as a basis the 
principle of the separation of powers: legislative, executive, 
and judicial. State authorities are within their competence 
independent: they interact among themselves and check and 
balance one another. 
  Article 7. The state and all its authorities and 
officials shall be bound by the law and shall operate within the 
limits of the constitution and the laws adopted in accordance 
with it. 
  Legal enactments or individual provisions thereof deemed in 
the procedure established by law to conflict with the provisions 
of the constitution shall not be legally valid. 
  Enforceable enactments of state authorities shall be 
published or brought to general notice in some way specified by 
the law. 
  Article 8. The Republic of Belarus recognizes the 
priority of the generally recognized principles of international 
law and shall ensure that legislation correspond to them. 
  The conclusion of international treaties that conflict with 
the constitution is prohibited. 
  Article 9. The territory of the Republic of 
Belarus is the natural condition of the existence and spatial 
limit of the self-determination of the people and the basis of 
their well-being and the sovereignty of the Republic of Belarus. 
  The territory of Belarus is unified and inalienable. 
  The territory is divided into oblasts, rayons, cities, and 
other administrative-territorial units. The 
administrative-territorial division of the state shall be 
determined by law. 
  Article 10. A citizen of the Republic of Belarus 
shall be guaranteed the protection and patronage of the state 
both on the territory of Belarus and outside. 
  No one may be deprived of citizenship of the Republic of 
Belarus or the right to change his citizenship. 
  A citizen of the Republic of Belarus may not be extradited 
to 
a foreign state unless otherwise specified by international 
treaties of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Citizenship shall be acquired and lost in accordance with 
the 
law. 
  Article 11. Foreign citizens and stateless persons 
on the territory of Belarus shall enjoy rights and liberties and 
discharge obligations on a par with citizens of the Republic of 
Belarus, unless otherwise determined by the constitution, laws, 
and international treaties. 
  Article 12. The Republic of Belarus may grant 
asylum to persons persecuted in other states for political or 
religious beliefs or for their national affiliation. 
  Article 13. The state shall accord everyone equal 
rights for the exercise of economic and other activity, except 
for that prohibited by law, and guarantee equal protection and 
equal conditions for the development of all forms of ownership. 
  The state shall regulate economic activity in the interests 
of man and society. 
  The law may determine facilities which are the property only 
of the state and also enshrine the exclusive right of the state 
to undertake particular types of activity. 
  Article 14. The state shall regulate relations 
between social, national, and other communities on the basis of 
the principles of equality before the law and respect for their 
rights and interests. 
  Article 15. The state shall be responsible for 
preservation of the historical and cultural heritage and the 
free development of the cultures of all national communities 
which live in the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 16. All religions and creeds are equal 
before the law. The establishment of some advantages or 
restrictions in respect to one religion or creed in relation to 
others shall not be permitted. 
  The activity of religious organizations and their bodies and 
representatives which is aimed against the sovereignty of the 
Republic of Belarus and its constitutional system and civil 
harmony or which entails a violation of citizens' rights and 
liberties is prohibited. 
  Relations of the state and religious denominations shall be 
regulated by law. 
  Article 17. The official language of the Republic 
of Belarus is Belarusian. 
  The Republic of Belarus shall provide for the right of 
unrestricted use of Russian as the language of interethnic 
communication. 
  Article 18. The Republic of Belarus shall proceed 
in its foreign policy from the principles of states' equality, 
the nonuse or threat of force, the sanctity of borders, the 
peaceful settlement of disputes, noninterference in internal 
affairs, and other generally recognized principles and rules of 
international law. 
  The Republic of Belarus aims to make its territory a 
nuclear-free zone, and the state, neutral. 
  Article 19. The symbols of the Republic of Belarus 
as a sovereign state are its national flag, national coat of 
arms, and national anthem. 
  Article 20. The capital of the Republic of Belarus 
is the city of Minsk. 
  The status of the city of Minsk shall be determined by law. 
<H5>  Section II. THE INDIVIDUAL, SOCIETY, AND THE STATE </H5>
  Article 21. Assurance of the rights and liberties 
of the citizens of the Republic of Belarus is the highest 
purpose of the state. 
  The state guarantees the rights and liberties of the 
citizens 
of Belarus enshrined in the constitution and the laws and 
specified by the international commitments of the state. 
  Article 22. All are equal before the law and are 
entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of 
rights and legitimate interests. 
  Article 23. Qualification of the rights and 
liberties of the individual shall be permitted only in the 
instances specified by law in the interests of national 
security, public order, and the defense of the morals and health 
of the population and the rights and liberties of other persons. 
  No one may enjoy advantages or privileges that conflict with 
the law. 
  Article 24. Everyone has the right to life. 
  The state shall protect the life of the individual against 
all unlawful endangerments. 
  Until it is abolished, the death penalty may be applied in 
accordance with the law as an exceptional measure of punishment 
for particularly serious crimes and only in accordance with the 
verdict of a court of law. 
  Article 25. The state ensures the freedom, 
inviolability, and dignity of the individual. The restriction or 
deprivation of personal liberty are possible in the instances 
and in the procedure established by law. 
  A person who has been taken into custody shall be entitled 
to 
judicial verification of the legality of his detention or arrest. 
  No one should be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman, 
or degrading treatment or punishment or be subjected without his 
consent to medical or other experiments. 
  Article 26. No one may be found guilty of a crime 
unless his guilt has been proven in the procedure specified by 
law and established by the verdict of a court which has acquired 
the force of law. A defendant shall not be required to prove his 
innocence. 
  Article 27. No one should be compelled to testify 
or provide explanations against himself, members of his family, 
or his close relatives. Evidence obtained in violation of the 
law is legally invalid. 
  Article 28. Everyone has the right to protection 
against unlawful interference in his private life, against 
encroachment on the secrecy of his correspondence and telephone 
and other communications and against his honor and dignity 
included. 
  Article 29. Inviolability of the dwelling and 
other legitimate possessions of the citizens is guaranteed. No 
one has the right without just cause to enter into the dwelling 
or other lawful possession of the citizen against his wishes. 
  Article 30. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
have the right to move without restriction and choose their 
place of residence within the Republic of Belarus, to leave it, 
and to return to it without hindrance. 
  Article 31. Everyone is entitled to independently 
determine his attitude toward religion, confess individually or 
together with others any religion or to confess none, to express 
and disseminate beliefs connected with his attitude toward 
religion, and to participate in the celebration of religious 
cults, rituals, and ceremonies. 
  Article 32. Marriage and the family and 
motherhood, fatherhood, and childhood are under the protection 
of the state. 
  Women and men shall upon reaching the age of consent have 
the 
right on a voluntary basis to enter into marriage and start a 
family. Husband and wife are equal in family relationships. 
  Parents or persons in loco parentis are entitled and are 
required to raise the children and display concern for their 
health, development, and tuition. A child must not be subjected 
to cruel treatment or humiliation or be enlisted in work which 
could be harmful to its physical, mental, or moral development. 
Children are required to display concern for their parents and 
also for the persons substituting for them and to render them 
assistance. 
  Article 33. Everyone is guaranteed freedom of 
opinions and beliefs and their free expression. 
  No one may be forced to express his beliefs or to deny them. 
  Monopolization of the news media by the state, public 
associations, or individual citizens and also censorship are not 
allowed. 
  Article 34. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are guaranteed the right to obtain, store, and disseminate full, 
reliable, and timely information on the activity of state 
authorities and public associations and on political, economic, 
and international life and on the state of the environment. 
  State authorities, public associations, and officials are 
required to afford a citizen of the Republic of Belarus an 
opportunity to familiarize himself with material affecting his 
rights and legitimate interests. 
  Article 35. Freedom of assembly, meetings, street 
marches, demonstrations, and picketing not violating law and 
order or the rights of other citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are guaranteed by the state. The procedure of realization of the 
said activities shall be determined by law. 
  Article 36. Everyone has the right to freedom of 
association. 
  Judges, employees of the public prosecutor's office, and 
staff of the internal affairs authorities, the Control Chamber 
of the Republic of Belarus, and the security authorities and 
servicemen may not be members of political parties or other 
public associations pursuing political ends. 
  Article 37. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are entitled to participate in the solution of matters of state 
both directly and via freely elected representatives. The direct 
participation of the citizens in the administration of the 
affairs of society and the state shall be ensured by the holding 
of referenda and the discussion of draft laws and matters of 
republic and local significance and in other ways determined by 
law. 
  Article 38. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
have the right to vote without restriction and to run for state 
office on the basis of universal, equal, and direct suffrage by 
ballot. 
  Article 39. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
have, in accordance with their capabilities and professional 
training, the right to equal access to all offices in state 
authorities. 
  Article 40. Everyone has the right to send 
personal or collective appeals to the state authorities. 
  The state authorities and also officials are required to 
examine an appeal and provide a response in point of substance 
within the timeframe specified by law. A refusal to consider an 
appeal which has been submitted must be justified in writing. 
  Article 41. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are guaranteed the right to labor as the worthiest mode of man's 
self-assertion, that is, the right to choice of profession and 
type of occupation and work in accordance with their vocation, 
capabilities, education, and vocational training, and with 
regard to social requirements and also to healthy and safe 
working conditions. 
  The state shall create the conditions for full employment. 
In 
the event of a person not being employed for reasons which are 
beyond his control, he shall be guaranteed instruction in new 
specialties and an upgrading of his qualifications with regard 
to social requirements and also unemployment benefit in 
accordance with the law. 
  Citizens have the right to defense of their economic and 
social interests, including the right to associate in trade 
unions and to conclude collective contracts (agreements) and the 
right to strike. 
  Forced labor, other than work or service determined by the 
sentence of a court or in accordance with the act governing a 
state of emergency or martial law, is prohibited. 
  Article 42. Persons working for wages are entitled 
to compensation for the work they have done in accordance with 
its quantity, quality, and social significance, but not less 
than the minimum established by the state. Women and men and 
adults and minors are entitled to equal compensation for work of 
equal value. 
  Article 43. Working people have the right to 
recreation. For those working for wages this right shall be 
secured by the establishment of a work week of not more than 40 
hours, shorter working hours at night time, and the allocation 
of paid annual leave and days of weekly recreation. 
  Article 44. The state guarantees everyone the 
right of property. 
  A proprietor has the right to possess, enjoy, and dispose of 
assets both individually and jointly with other persons. The 
inviolability of property and the right to inherit it are 
protected by law. 
  The compulsory alienation of assets is permitted only by 
reason of public need, with observance of the conditions and the 
procedure determined by law and with timely and full 
compensation for the value of the alienated assets, and also in 
accordance with the verdict of a court of law. 
  Exercise of the right of ownership must not cause harm to 
the 
environment or historical and cultural values or infringe the 
rights of other persons or their rights protected by law. 
  Article 45. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are guaranteed the right to health care, including free 
treatment in state health-care institutions. 
  The right of the citizens of the Republic of Belarus to 
health care shall be secured also by the development of physical 
culture and sport, measures to improve the environment, the 
possibility of the use of health-and-fitness establishments, and 
an improvement in occupational safety. 
  Article 46. Everyone is entitled to pleasant 
surroundings and to compensation for damage caused by violations 
of this right. 
  Article 47. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are guaranteed the right to social security in old age and in 
the event of illness, disability, loss of fitness for work, and 
loss of the breadwinner and in other instances specified by law. 
The state shall display particular concern for persons who have 
lost their health in the defense of state and public interests. 
  Article 48. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
have the right to habitation. This right shall be secured by the 
development of state, public, and private housing and assistance 
to the citizens in the purchase of housing. 
  No one may be deprived of housing arbitrarily. 
  Article 49. Everyone has the right to education. 
Accessible and free general, secondary, and vocational-technical 
education is guaranteed. 
  Secondary specialized and higher education shall be 
accessible to all in accordance with the capabilities of each. 
Everyone may on a competitive basis obtain the corresponding 
education in state educational institutions free of charge. 
  Article 50. Everyone is entitled to preserve his 
national affiliation, as, equally, no one may be compelled to 
determine or indicate national affiliation. 
  Insults against national dignity shall be prosecuted 
according to the law. 
  Everyone has the right to use his native language and choose 
the language of communication. The state guarantees, in 
accordance with the law, freedom of choice of language of 
education and tuition. 
  Article 51. Everyone has have the right to 
participate in cultural life. This right shall be secured by the 
general accessibility of the values of native and world culture 
in state and public collections and by the development of the 
network of cultural and educational institutions. 
  Freedom of artistic, scientific, and technical creativity 
and 
teaching is guaranteed. 
  Intellectual property is protected by law. 
  Article 52. Everyone on the territory of the 
Republic of Belarus is required to observe its constitution and 
laws and to respect national traditions. 
  Article 53. Everyone is required to respect the 
dignity, rights, liberties, and legitimate interests of other 
persons. 
  Article 54. Everyone is required to preserve the 
historical and cultural heritage and other cultural values. 
  Article 55. Protection of the environment is the 
duty of everyone. 
  Article 56. Citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
are required to participate in the funding of government 
spending by way of the payment of state taxes and dues and other 
payments. 
  Article 57. Defense of the Republic of Belarus is 
the obligation and sacred duty of the citizen of the Republic of 
Belarus. 
  The procedure of military service and the grounds and 
conditions for exemption from military service or its 
replacement by alternative service shall be determined by law. 
  Article 58. No one may be constrained to perform 
duties not specified by the Constitution of the Republic of 
Belarus and its laws or to deny his rights. 
  Article 59. The state is required to adopt all 
measures accessible to it for the creation of the internal and 
international order necessary for the realization in full of 
rights and liberties of the citizens of the Republic of Belarus 
specified by the constitution. 
  Article 60. State authorities, officials, and 
other persons to whom the exercise of official functions has 
been entrusted are required to adopt within their jurisdiction 
the necessary measures for realization and protection of the 
rights and liberties of the individual. 
  These authorities and persons shall be held liable for 
actions violating the rights and liberties of the individual. 
  Article 61. Everyone is guaranteed protection of 
his rights and liberties by a competent, independent, and 
impartial court of law in the timeframe specified by law. 
  For the purpose of defense of their rights, liberties, 
honor, 
and dignity the citizens shall be entitled to seek in legal form 
both redress for property damage and material compensation for 
moral damage. 
  Article 62. Everyone has the right to legal aid 
for the realization and defense of rights and liberties, 
including the right to use at any moment the assistance of 
lawyers and other of one's representatives in court, other state 
authorities, and organs of local administration, at enterprises, 
and in establishments, organizations, and public associations 
and in relations with officials and citizens. In the instances 
specified by law, legal aid shall be rendered at the expense of 
public funds. 
  Opposition to the rendering of legal aid in the Republic of 
Belarus is prohibited. 
  Article 63. The realization of the rights and 
liberties of the individual specified by this constitution may 
be suspended only under the conditions of a state of emergency 
or martial law in the procedure and within the limits determined 
by the constitution and the law. 
  The rights specified in Article 24, part three of Article 
25, 
and Articles 26 and 31 of the constitution may not be qualified 
at the time of the implementation of special measures in a 
period of a state of emergency. 
<H5>  Section III. ELECTORAL SYSTEM. REFERENDUM </H5>
<H5>  Chapter 1. Electoral System </H5>
  Article 64. The elections of deputies and other 
persons elected to state office by the people are universal: 
Citizens of the Republic of Belarus who have reached the age of 
18 are eligible to vote. 
  Citizens deemed incompetent by a court of law and persons 
held in accordance with the verdict of a court in places of 
confinement shall not participate in elections. Persons in 
respect to whom preventive punishment--custody--has in the 
procedure established by criminal-procedure legislation be 
chosen shall not participate in the ballot. Any direct or 
indirect qualification of the citizens' suffrage in other 
instances is impermissible and punishable according to the law. 
  Article 65. The age qualification of the deputies 
and other persons elected to state office shall be determined by 
the corresponding laws, unless otherwise specified by the 
constitution. 
  Article 66. Elections are free: The voter decides 
personally whether to take part in elections and for whom to 
vote. 
  Elections shall be prepared and held openly and publicly. 
  Article 67. Elections shall be equal: The voters 
shall have an equal number of votes. 
  The number of voters in each constituency should be roughly 
equal. 
  Candidates running for public office shall participate in 
elections on an equal basis. 
  Article 68. Elections are direct: The deputies are 
elected by the citizens directly. 
  Article 69. The elections shall be conducted by 
ballot: Control of the expression of the electorate's wishes in 
the course of the ballot is prohibited. 
  Article 70. Public associations, the work force, 
and the citizens have the right to nominate candidates for 
deputy in accordance with the law. 
  Article 71. Expenditure on the preparation and the 
holding of elections shall be borne by the state within the 
limits of the funds allocated for this purpose. 
  Article 72. Election commissions shall provide for 
the holding of elections. 
  The procedure of the holding of elections shall be 
determined 
by the laws of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Elections shall not be held in a period of a state of 
emergency or martial law. 
<H5>  Chapter 2. Referendum (National Ballot) </H5>
  Article 73. Republic and local referenda may be 
conducted for the solution of most important questions of state 
and public life. 
  Article 74. Republic referenda shall be scheduled 
by the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Belarus in accordance 
with a proposal of the president of the Republic of Belarus or 
no fewer than 450,000 citizens eligible to vote. 
  No more than 30 days following the submittal for its 
consideration, in accordance with the law, of the proposals of 
the president or the citizens concerning the holding of a 
referendum, the Supreme Soviet shall be required to schedule a 
date for the holding of a republic referendum. 
  The question of the holding of a republic referendum may 
also 
be considered by the Supreme Soviet on the initiative of no 
fewer than 70 deputies of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of 
Belarus. 
  Article 75. Local referenda shall be scheduled by 
the corresponding local representative authorities on their own 
initiative or in accordance with the proposal of not less than 
10 percent of citizens eligible to vote and resident on the 
corresponding territory. 
  Article 76. The referenda shall be conducted by 
way of general, free, and equal ballot. 
  Citizens of the Republic of Belarus eligible to vote shall 
participate in referenda. 
  Article 77. The decisions adopted by referendum 
may be canceled or revised only by way of referendum, unless 
otherwise determined by the referendum. 
  Article 78. The procedure of the realization of 
republic and local referenda and also the list of questions that 
may not be put to a referendum shall be determined by the law of 
the Republic of Belarus. 
<H5>  Section IV. LEGISLATURE, EXECUTIVE, AND JUDICIARY </H5>
<H5>  Chapter 3. Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Belarus </H5>
  Article 79. The Supreme Soviet of the Republic of 
Belarus is the highest representative permanent and sole 
legislative organ of state power of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 80. The Supreme Soviet shall consist of 
260 deputies elected by the citizens of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Any citizen of the Republic of Belarus who is eligible to 
vote and who has attained to the age of 21 may be a deputy of 
the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 81. The term of the Supreme Soviet shall 
be five years. 
  The powers of the Supreme Soviet may be terminated early in 
accordance with a decree of the Supreme Soviet adopted by a 
majority of no less than two-thirds of the elected deputies. 
  Elections of a new Supreme Soviet shall be scheduled no 
later 
than three months prior to the completion of the term of the 
Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 82. The first sitting of the Supreme 
Soviet shall be convened by the Central Commission of the 
Republic of Belarus for Elections and Republic Referenda no 
later than 30 days after the elections. 
  Article 83. The Supreme Soviet of the Republic of 
Belarus shall: 
  1) schedule republic referenda; 
  2) adopt and revise the constitution; 
  3) adopt laws and decrees and exercise supervision of their 
execution; 
  4) provide an interpretation of the constitution and the 
laws; 
  5) schedule elections of deputies of the Supreme Soviet and 
the local soviets of deputies; presidential elections; 
  6) form the Central Commission for Elections and Republic 
Referenda; 
  7) elect the Constitutional Court of the Republic of 
Belarus, 
the Supreme Court of the Republic of Belarus, the Supreme 
Economic Court of the Republic of Belarus, the prosecutor 
general of the Republic of Belarus, the chairman and council of 
the Control Chamber of the Republic of Belarus, and the chairman 
and members of the board of the National Bank of the Republic of 
Belarus; 
  8) determine the procedure of the solution of questions of 
the administrative-territorial arrangement of the state; 
  9) determine the guidelines of the domestic and foreign 
policy of the Republic of Belarus; 
  10) confirm the republic budget, the report on its 
administration, and the allowances from all-state taxes and 
revenue for the local budgets; 
  11) establish republic taxes and charges and exercise 
supervision of money issue; 
  12) ratify and denounce international treaties of the 
Republic of Belarus; 
  13) adopt amnesty decisions; 
  14) determine military policy; 
  15) declare war and conclude peace; 
  16) institute government awards and class ranks and titles 
of 
the Republic of Belarus; 
  17) adopt decrees on the dissolution of local soviets of 
deputies and schedule new elections in the event of their 
systematic or flagrant violation of the requirements of 
legislation; 
  18) rescind directives of the chairman of the Supreme Soviet 
of the Republic of Belarus in instances where they conflict with 
the laws and decrees of the Supreme Soviet. 
  The Supreme Soviet may decide other questions in accordance 
with the constitution. 
  Article 84. The deputies shall vote at sittings of 
the Supreme Soviet in person. 
  Laws and decrees of the Supreme Soviet shall be considered 
adopted provided that a majority of elected deputies have voted 
for them, unless otherwise specified by the constitution. 
  Adopted laws shall within 10 days' time following adoption 
be 
forwarded for the president's signature. 
  Article 85. The Supreme Soviet shall elect from 
the ranks of the deputies of the Supreme Soviet a chairman of 
the Supreme Soviet, a first deputy chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet, and deputy chairmen of the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 86. The chairman of the Supreme Soviet 
shall be elected by ballot. He shall be accountable to the 
Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 87. The chairman of the Supreme Soviet of 
the Republic of Belarus shall: 
  1) exercise general leadership of the preparation of 
questions to be considered by the Supreme Soviet; 
  2) chair sittings of the Supreme Soviet; 
  3) represent the Supreme Soviet in relations with bodies and 
organizations within the country and abroad; 
  4) sign decrees adopted by the Supreme Soviet; 
  5) introduce to the Supreme Soviet the candidates for the 
office of first deputy chairman and deputy chairmen of the 
Supreme Soviet, prosecutor general, and chairman of the Control 
Chamber; 
  6) direct the work of the Supreme Soviet bureaucracy. 
  The chairman of the Supreme Soviet issues directives. 
  The first deputy chairman and the deputy chairmen of the 
Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Belarus shall perform on 
behalf of the chairman of the Supreme Soviet certain of his 
duties and substitute for the chairman of the Supreme Soviet in 
the event of his being absent or it not being possible for him 
to perform certain of his duties. 
  Article 88. The Supreme Soviet shall elect from 
the ranks of the deputies standing commissions and other bodies 
for bill-drafting work, the preliminary consideration and 
preparation of questions within the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Soviet, and the supervision of execution of the laws. 
  If necessary, the Supreme Soviet may create investigative, 
auditing, and other temporary commissions. 
  Article 89. A Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of 
the Republic of Belarus shall be created for organization of the 
business of the Supreme Soviet. 
  The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet shall be composed of the 
chairman of the Supreme Soviet, the first deputy chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet, the deputy chairmen of the Supreme Soviet, and 
deputies in the procedure specified by the standing orders of 
the Supreme Soviet. 
  The Supreme Soviet Presidium shall be headed by the chairman 
of the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 90. The right of legislative initiative in 
the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of Belarus shall belong to 
deputies of the Supreme Soviet, the standing commissions of the 
Supreme Soviet, the president, the Supreme Court, the Supreme 
Economic Court, the prosecutor general, the Control Chamber, and 
the National Bank and also citizens eligible to vote in a number 
of no fewer than 50,000. 
  Article 91. The powers of the Supreme Soviet shall 
be retained until the opening of the first sitting of the 
Supreme Soviet of the new convocation. 
  Article 92. A deputy of the Supreme Soviet shall 
exercise his authority in the Supreme Soviet on a professional 
basis or, as he desires, without a break from industrial or 
office activity. 
  The president, members of the Cabinet of Ministers, and 
judges and also other persons appointed to office by the 
president or following consultation with him may not be deputies 
of the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 93. A deputy of the Supreme Soviet shall 
not be held legally liable for his activity in the Supreme 
Soviet exercised in accordance with the constitution, both in 
the period of execution of his deputy's authority and after the 
completion of his term. 
  A deputy of the Supreme Soviet may not be arraigned on 
criminal charges, be detained, or otherwise deprived of personal 
liberty without the consent of the Supreme Soviet, except in 
instances of arrest at the scene of a crime. 
  Criminal proceedings against a deputy of the Supreme Soviet 
may be instituted by the prosecutor general with the consent of 
the Supreme Soviet, and in the period between sessions, with the 
consent of the Supreme Soviet Presidium. 
  Article 94. The procedure of the activity of the 
Supreme Soviet and its bodies and deputies shall be determined 
by the standing orders of the Supreme Soviet, which shall be 
adopted by the Supreme Soviet and signed by its chairman, and 
also other legislative instruments of the Republic of Belarus. 
<H5>  Chapter 4. President of the Republic of Belarus </H5>
  Article 95. The president of the Republic of 
Belarus is the head of state and the executive. 
  Article 96. A citizen of the Republic of Belarus 
who is at least 35 years of age, is eligible to vote, and who 
has been resident in the Republic of Belarus for at least 10 
years may be elected president. 
  Article 97. The president is elected directly by 
the people of the Republic of Belarus. The president's term is 
five years. One and the same person may be president for no more 
than two terms. 
  Candidates for the office of president shall be nominated by 
no fewer than 70 deputies of the Supreme Soviet, and by citizens 
of the Republic of Belarus, with no fewer than 100,000 voters' 
signatures. 
  Elections for president shall be scheduled by the Supreme 
Soviet no later than five months and held no later than two 
months following the expiration of the term of the previous 
president. 
  If the office of president falls vacant, elections shall be 
held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 70 days from the 
time the office fell vacant. 
  Article 98. It shall be considered that elections 
have been held if more than half the citizens of the Republic of 
Belarus on the electoral roll have taken part in the ballot. 
  The president shall be deemed elected if more than half the 
citizens of the Republic of Belarus who took part in the ballot 
voted for him. 
  If no candidate amasses the requisite number of votes, a 
second round of voting for the two candidates who obtained the 
largest number of votes shall be conducted within two weeks. The 
presidential candidate who obtained in the runoff more than half 
the votes of those who took part in the ballot shall be 
considered elected. 
  The procedure of presidential elections shall be determined 
by law of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 99. The president assumes office after he 
has taken the oath, which reads as follows: 
  "Assuming the office of president of the Republic of 
Belarus, 
I solemnly swear to serve the people of the Republic of Belarus, 
observe the constitution and the laws of the Republic of 
Belarus, and conscientiously discharge the high obligations 
entrusted to me." 
  The oath shall be administered in a ceremonial atmosphere at 
a special sitting of the Supreme Soviet of the Republic of 
Belarus no later than two months from the day the president is 
elected. The term of the previous president ends as of the 
moment the newly elected president takes the oath. 
  Article 100. The president of the Republic of 
Belarus shall: 
  1) adopt measures to guard the sovereignty, national 
security, and territorial integrity of the Republic of Belarus 
and ensure political and economic stability and for observance 
of the rights and liberties of the citizens; 
  2) direct the system of organs of the executive and ensure 
their interaction with the representative authorities; 
  3) create and abolish ministries, state committees, and 
other 
central organs of administration of the Republic of Belarus; 
  4) with the consent of the Supreme Soviet appoint and 
dismiss 
the prime minister and his deputies, the ministers of foreign 
affairs, finance, defense, and internal affairs, and the 
chairman of the Committee for State Security; appoint and 
dismiss other members of the cabinet; accept the resignation of 
the persons specified in this clause; 
  5) introduce to the Supreme Soviet the candidates for 
election to the offices of chairman of the Constitutional Court, 
chairman of the Supreme Court, chairman of the Supreme Economic 
Court, and chairman of the board of the National Bank; 
  6) annually present to the Supreme Soviet reports on the 
state of the nation and on his own initiative or in accordance 
with a proposal of the Supreme Soviet inform the Supreme Soviet 
of the Republic of Belarus as to the realization of the domestic 
and foreign policy of the Republic of Belarus; 
  7) deliver addresses to the people of the Republic of 
Belarus 
and the Supreme Soviet; 
  8) report to the Supreme Soviet on the program of activity 
of 
the Cabinet of Ministers; 
  9) be entitled to participate in the business of the Supreme 
Soviet and its bodies and to present to them at any time a 
speech or report; 
  10) appoint judges of the Republic of Belarus, other than 
those whose election is within the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Soviet; 
  11) appoint other officials, whose offices are determined in 
accordance with the law, unless otherwise specified by the 
constitution; 
  12) decide questions of admittance to citizenship of the 
Republic of Belarus and its termination and the granting of 
asylum; 
  13) confer government awards and bestow class ranks and 
titles; 
  14) pardon convicted citizens; 
  15) represent the state in relations with other countries 
and 
international organizations; 
  16) conduct negotiations and sign international treaties and 
appoint and recall diplomatic representatives of the Republic of 
Belarus in foreign states and at international organizations; 
  17) receive the credentials and letters of recall of 
diplomatic representatives of foreign states accredited to him; 
  18) in the event of a natural disaster or catastrophe and 
also unrest accompanied by violence or the threat of violence on 
the part of a group of persons and organizations, as a result of 
which a danger to people's life and health and the territorial 
integrity and existence of the state has arisen, introduce on 
the territory of the Republic of Belarus or in particular 
localities thereof a state of emergency with the submittal 
within three days' time of the adopted decision for approval by 
the Supreme Soviet; 
  19) in the instances specified by law be entitled to 
postpone 
a strike or suspend it for a period of no more than two months; 
  20) sign laws and be entitled no later than 10 days 
following 
the receipt of a law to return it with his objections to the 
Supreme Soviet for further discussion and a vote. If by a 
majority of no less than two-thirds of the elected deputies the 
Supreme Soviet upholds the decision it adopted earlier, the 
president shall be required to sign the law within three days' 
time; a law that is not returned within the said timeframe shall 
be considered signed; 
  21) be entitled to rescind enactments of organs of the 
executive under his jurisdiction; 
  22) suspend decisions of the local soviets of deputies in 
the 
event of their failing to correspond to the law; 
  23) head the Security Council of the Republic of Belarus; 
  24) be the commander in chief of the armed forces of the 
Republic of Belarus; 
  25) introduce martial law on the territory of the Republic 
of 
Belarus in the event of a threat of war or attack and announce 
full or partial mobilization; 
  26) exercise other authority entrusted to him by the 
constitution and the laws. 
  The president is not entitled to delegate to some bodies or 
officials his powers as head of state. 
  Article 101. The president issues within his 
competence edicts and directives and organizes and supervises 
their fulfillment. 
  Article 102. The president may not hold other 
positions or receive monetary compensation aside from his pay, 
except for royalties for works of science, literature, and art. 
  The president shall suspend membership of political parties 
and other public associations pursuing political ends for the 
whole of his term in office. 
  Article 103. The president may tender his 
resignation at any time. The president's resignation shall be 
accepted by the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 104. The president may be removed from 
office in the event of a violation of the constitution or his 
perpetration of a crime and also relieved of office early should 
it be impossible for him to perform his duties on the grounds of 
his state of health by a decree of the Supreme Soviet adopted by 
a majority of no less than two-thirds of the elected deputies of 
the Supreme Soviet. 
  The question of removal of the president may be raised in 
accordance with the proposal of no fewer than 70 deputies of the 
Supreme Soviet. Findings concerning a violation by the president 
of the constitution shall be provided by the Constitutional 
Court, and on the perpetration of a crime, by a special 
commission of the Supreme Soviet. As of the moment of the 
presentation of the findings of the Constitutional Court 
concerning a violation of the constitution or the findings of a 
special commission concerning the perpetration of a crime, the 
president may not perform his duties prior to a corresponding 
decision being rendered by the Supreme Soviet. 
  In the event of the removal of a president in connection 
with 
the perpetration of a crime, the case shall be examined on the 
merits of the charge by the Supreme Court. 
  Article 105. In the event of the office of 
president falling vacant or it not being possible for the 
president to perform his duties, his powers until the 
swearing-in of the newly elected president shall be transferred 
to the chairman of the Supreme Soviet. 
  In this case the obligations of chairman of the Supreme 
Soviet shall be transferred to the first deputy chairman of the 
Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 106. A Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Republic of Belarus shall be formed under the auspices of the 
president of the Republic of Belarus for realization of the 
authority of the executive in the spheres of the economy, 
foreign policy, defense, national security, and the safeguarding 
of public order and other fields of state administration. 
  Article 107. The Cabinet of Ministers shall 
relinquish its authority before a newly elected president. 
  Members of the Cabinet of Ministers shall be appointed and 
dismissed by the president. The prime minister, his deputies, 
the ministers of foreign affairs, finance, defense, and internal 
affairs, and the chairman of the Committee for State Security 
shall be appointed and dismissed by the president with the 
consent of the Supreme Soviet. 
  The prime minister shall exercise direct leadership of the 
activity of the Cabinet of Ministers, sign instruments of the 
Cabinet of Ministers that are binding throughout the territory 
of the Republic of Belarus, and discharge other functions 
entrusted to him. 
  The Supreme Soviet shall be entitled to receive a report 
from 
any member of the Cabinet of Ministers on questions of execution 
of the laws. In the event of the violation by a member of the 
Cabinet of Ministers of the constitution and the laws, the 
Supreme Soviet shall have the right to raise before the 
president the question of his early dismissal. 
  Article 108. The jurisdiction of the Cabinet of 
Ministers and the procedure of its activity shall be determined 
on the basis of the constitution by the Law on the Cabinet of 
Ministers of the Republic of Belarus. 
<H5>  Chapter 5. The Court </H5>
  Article 109. Judicial authority in the Republic of 
Belarus belongs to the courts. 
  The judicial system in the Republic of Belarus is determined 
by the law. 
  The formation of special courts is prohibited. 
  Article 110. In the exercise of justice judges are 
independent and subordinate only to the law. 
  Any interference in the activity of judges in the 
administration of justice is impermissible and entails liability 
in accordance with the law. 
  Article 111. Judges may not engage in 
entrepreneurial activity or perform other paid work, other than 
lecturing or scientific research which does not involve holding 
regular staff positions. 
  The grounds for the election (appointment) of judges and 
their dismissal are specified by law. 
  Article 112. The courts shall administer justice 
on the basis of the constitution, the laws, and other 
enforceable enactments adopted in accordance with them. 
  If during the hearing of a specific case a court reaches a 
conclusion concerning the failure of an enforceable enactment to 
conform to the constitution or other law, it shall make a ruling 
in accordance with the constitution and the law and raise in the 
established procedure the question of this enforceable enactment 
being deemed unconstitutional. 
  Article 113. Cases in court shall be tried 
collegially, and in the instances specified by law, by judges 
individually. 
  Article 114. The trial of cases in all courts 
shall be open. 
  The hearing of cases in a closed session of the court shall 
be permitted only in the instances determined by law, with the 
observance of all the rules of legal procedure. 
  Article 115. Justice shall be administered on the 
basis of adversary proceeding and the equality of the parties in 
the trial. 
  Article 116. The parties shall have the right to 
appeal rulings, sentences, and other judicial decisions. 
<H5>  Section V. LOCAL ADMINISTRATION AND SELF-GOVERNMENT </H5>
  Article 117. Local administration and 
self-government shall be exercised by the citizens via the local 
soviets of deputies, executive and administrative authorities, 
organs of territorial community self-government, local 
referenda, assemblies, and other forms of direct participation 
in state and public matters. 
  Article 118. The local soviets of deputies shall 
be elected by citizens of the corresponding 
administrative-territorial units for a four-year term. 
  Article 119. The local soviets of deputies and 
executive and administrative authorities shall within their 
competence decide questions of local significance on the basis 
of all-state interests and the interests of the populace 
residing on the corresponding territory and execute the 
decisions of superior state authorities. 
  Article 120. The following pertain to the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the local soviets of deputies: 
  confirmation of programs of economic and social development 
and local budgets and accounts of their administration; 
  the establishment in accordance with the law of local taxes 
and dues; 
  the determination within the limits established by the law 
of 
the procedure of the administration and disposal of municipal 
property; 
  the scheduling of local referenda. 
  Article 121. The local soviets of deputies and the 
executive and administrative authorities shall on the basis of 
current legislation adopt decisions that are binding on the 
corresponding territory. 
  Article 122. Decisions of the local soviets of 
deputies not corresponding to legislation shall be reversed by 
superior soviets of deputies. 
  Decisions of local executive and administrative authorities 
not corresponding to legislation shall be reversed by the 
corresponding soviets of deputies and superior executive and 
administrative-territorial authorities and also by the president 
of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Decisions of local soviets of deputies and their executive 
and administrative-territorial authorities restricting or 
violating the rights, liberties, and legitimate interests of the 
citizens and also in other instances specified by legislation 
may be appealed in a court of law. 
  Article 123. In the event of the systematic or 
flagrant violation by a local soviet of deputies of the 
requirements of legislation, it may be dissolved by the Supreme 
Soviet. Other grounds for the early termination of the authority 
of local soviets of deputies shall be determined by law. 
  Article 124. The competence and the procedure of 
the creation and the activity of organs of local administration 
and self-government shall be determined by law. 
<H5>  Section VI. STATE CONTROL AND SUPERVISION </H5>
<H5>  Chapter 6. Constitutional Court of the Republic of Belarus </H5>
  Article 125. Supervision of the constitutionality 
of enforceable enactments in the state shall be exercised by the 
Constitutional Court of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 126. The Constitutional Court of the 
Republic of Belarus shall be elected by the Supreme Soviet of 
the Republic of Belarus from qualified specialists in the field 
of law in a composition of 11 judges. The term of members of the 
Constitutional Court shall be 11 years. The age limit for 
members of the Constitutional Court is 60. 
  Persons elected to the Constitutional Court may not engage 
in 
entrepreneurial activity or perform other paid work other than 
lecturing and scientific research not involving the holding of 
regular staff positions. 
  Persons elected to the Constitutional Court shall be 
entitled 
to tender their resignation at any time. 
  Direct or indirect pressure on the Constitutional Court or 
its members connected with activity pertaining to the exercise 
of constitutional supervision is impermissible and shall incur 
liability in accordance with the law. 
  Article 127. In accordance with proposals of the 
president, the chairman of the Supreme Soviet, standing 
commissions of the Supreme Soviet, no fewer than 70 deputies of 
the Supreme Soviet, the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic 
Court, and the prosecutor general, the Constitutional Court 
shall produce findings on: 
  the conformity of laws, international treaties, and other 
commitments of the Republic of Belarus to the constitution and 
instruments of international law ratified by the Republic of 
Belarus; 
  the conformity of legal instruments of interstate formations 
of which the Republic of Belarus is a part, edicts of the 
president, and decrees of the Cabinet of Ministers and also 
enactments of the Supreme Court, the Supreme Economic Court, and 
the prosecutor general of a prescriptive nature to the 
constitution, the laws, and instruments of international law 
ratified by the Republic of Belarus. 
  The Constitutional Court shall have the right to examine at 
its discretion the question of the conformity of enforceable 
enactments of any state authority and public association to the 
constitution and the laws and instruments of international law 
ratified by the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 128. Enforceable enactments and 
international treaty or other obligations deemed by the 
Constitutional Court to be unconstitutional in view of their 
violation of human rights and liberties shall be deemed legally 
invalid as a whole or in a particular part thereof as of the 
moment the corresponding enactment is adopted. 
  Other enforceable enactments of state authorities and public 
associations and international treaty or other obligations 
deemed by the Constitutional Court not to correspond to the 
constitution, the laws, or instruments of international law 
ratified by the Republic of Belarus shall be deemed invalid as a 
whole or in a particular part thereof from a time determined by 
the Constitutional Court. 
  Prescriptive-legal instruments of interstate formations of 
which the Republic of Belarus is a part deemed by the 
Constitutional Court not to correspond to the constitution, the 
laws, or instruments of international law shall be deemed null 
and void on the territory of the Republic of Belarus as a whole 
or in a particular part thereof from a time determined by the 
Constitutional Court. 
  The Constitutional Court shall make rulings by a simple 
majority of the votes of the full bench of justices. 
  Article 129. The findings of the Constitutional 
Court are final and not subject to appeal or protest. 
  Article 130. The Constitutional Court has the 
right to submit proposals to the Supreme Soviet on the need for 
revisions and addenda to the constitution and also on the 
adoption and revision of laws. Such proposals shall be subject 
to obligatory consideration by the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 131. Persons elected to the Constitutional 
Court may not be arraigned on criminal charges, arrested, or 
otherwise deprived of personal liberty without the consent of 
the Supreme Soviet, other than in instances of detention at the 
scene of a crime. 
  Criminal proceedings against a member of the Constitutional 
Court may be instituted by the prosecutor general with the 
consent of the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 132. The competence and organization and 
procedure of the activity of the Constitutional Court shall be 
determined by the law. 
<H5>  Chapter 7. The Procuracy </H5>
  Article 133. Supervision of the precise and 
uniform execution of the laws by ministries and other bodies 
under the jurisdiction of the Cabinet of Ministers, local 
representative and executive authorities, enterprises, 
organizations, and institutions, public associations, officials, 
and citizens shall be entrusted to the prosecutor general of the 
Republic of Belarus and the prosecutors subordinate to him. 
  The procuracy shall exercise supervision of execution of the 
laws in the investigation of crimes, the conformity to the law 
of judicial decisions in civil and criminal cases and in cases 
involving administrative offenses in the instances specified by 
law, conduct pretrial investigations, and support official 
prosecution in the courts. 
  Article 134. The uniform and centralized system of 
arms of the procuracy shall be headed by a prosecutor general 
elected by the Supreme Soviet. 
  Junior prosecutors shall be appointed by the prosecutor 
general. 
  Article 135. The prosecutor general and the junior 
prosecutors shall be independent in the exercise of their 
authority and shall be guided only by the law. The prosecutor 
general shall be accountable in his activity to the Supreme 
Soviet. 
  Article 136. The competence and the organization 
and procedure of the activity of the arms of the procuracy shall 
be determined by law. 
<H5>  Chapter 8. Control Chamber of the Republic of Belarus </H5>
  Article 137. Control of the administration of the 
republic budget, the use of public property, and the execution 
of enactments of the Supreme Soviet regulating public property 
relationships and economic, financial, and tax relationships 
shall be exercised by the Control Chamber. 
  Article 138. The Control Chamber shall be formed 
by the Supreme Soviet and shall operate under its leadership and 
be accountable to it. 
  Article 139. The chairman of the Control Chamber 
shall be elected by the Supreme Soviet for a five-year term. 
  Article 140. The competence and the organization 
and procedure of the activity of the Control Chamber shall be 
determined by law. 
<H5>  Section VII. FINANCIAL AND CREDIT SYSTEM OF THE REPUBLIC OF </H5>
BELARUS 
  Article 141. The financial and credit system of 
the Republic of Belarus includes the budget system and the 
banking system and also the financial resources of off-budget 
funds, enterprises, institutions, and organizations and the 
citizens. 
  A unified budgetary-financial, tax, credit, and currency 
policy is pursued on the territory of the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 142. The budget system of the Republic of 
Belarus includes the republic and local budgets. 
  Budget revenue is formed from taxes determined by the law 
and 
other mandatory payments and also other receipts. 
  State spending is realized from the republic budget in 
accordance with its revenue side. 
  In accordance with the law, off-budget funds may be formed 
in 
the Republic of Belarus. 
  Article 143. The procedure of the compilation, 
confirmation, and administration of the budget and state 
off-budget funds shall be determined by law. 
  Article 144. An account of administration of the 
republic budget shall be presented for consideration by the 
Supreme Soviet no later than five months following the 
completion of the fiscal year in review. 
  Accounts of administration of the local budgets shall be 
submitted for consideration by the corresponding soviets of 
deputies within the timeframe determined by legislation. 
  Accounts on the administration of the republic and local 
budgets shall be published. 
  Article 145. The banking system of the Republic of 
Belarus consists of the National Bank of the Republic of Belarus 
and other banks. The National Bank regulates credit relations 
and cash in circulation and determines the procedure of payments 
and has the exclusive right to issue money. 
<H5>  Section VIII. THE WORKINGS OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE </H5>
REPUBLIC OF BELARUS AND THE PROCEDURE OF ITS REVISION 
  Article 146. The constitution has supreme legal 
force. Laws and other instruments of state authorities shall be 
promulgated on the basis and in accordance with the Constitution 
of the Republic of Belarus. 
  In the event of a discrepancy between a law and the 
constitution, the constitution shall operate, and in the event 
of a discrepancy between an enforceable enactment and a law, the 
law shall operate. 
  Article 147. The question of a revision of and 
addendum to the constitution shall be considered by the Supreme 
Soviet on the initiative of no fewer than 150,000 citizens of 
the Republic of Belarus who are eligible to vote, no fewer than 
40 deputies of the Supreme Soviet, the president, or the 
Constitutional Court. 
  Article 148. A law on a revision of and addendum 
to the constitution may be adopted following two debates and 
approvals of the Supreme Soviet with an interval of no fewer 
than three months. 
  Revisions and addenda to the constitution shall not be made 
in a period of a state of emergency or also in the final six 
months of the term of the Supreme Soviet. 
  Article 149. The constitution, laws on revisions 
and addenda thereto and on the implementation of the 
constitution and the said laws, and enactments on an 
interpretation of the constitution shall be deemed adopted if no 
less than two-thirds of the elected deputies of the Supreme 
Soviet have voted for them. 
  Revisions and addenda to the constitution may be made via a 
referendum. A decision on a revision or addendum to the 
constitution by way of a referendum shall be deemed adopted if a 
majority of citizens on the electoral roll have voted for it. 
  [Signed] M. Grib, chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Republic of Belarus 
  15 March 1994 
  Minsk 

