Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 29 Jan (XINHUA) -- The State Council 
recently issued a circular on further strengthening macroscopic 
regulation and control over investments in fixed assets. 
  The circular notes: While China made new headway in reform, 
opening up, economic construction, and other areas last year, 
problems such as excessive growth of investment and increasingly 
larger size of construction projects, as well as sluggish 
improvement of investment patterns remained unresolved. Thus, 
leading cadres in all regions and departments must fully and 
correctly understand and implement the guidelines laid down by 
the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee; 
correctly handle the relationship among reform, development, and 
stability; and shift the focus of work to readjusting investment 
patterns and achieving higher returns, instead of being obsessed 
with fighting for investment money, launching new projects, and 
expanding construction size in disregard of objective 
conditions. During the course of building our socialist market 
economic system, we must have strict macroscopic regulation and 
control over investment in fixed assets. 
  The circular stresses that financial and material resources 
must be pooled together and used to ensure the needs of priority 
projects. It says: All regions and departments should now 
prioritize their construction projects, which were screened and 
approved last year, give priority to completing the major 
projects and ensuring the needs of major investment and 
unfinished projects. For those projects ordered last year to 
stop or be postponed, they must not be reinstated without 
authorization. Even infrastructure projects and capital 
industrial projects must proceed rationally according to the 
state policy that they must be rationally planned with all 
factors taken into consideration, that their efficiency must be 
heeded, and that they must not be launched unless they have the 
ability to do so. Resources should be pooled and used wherever 
they are needed most. Efforts must be made to prevent reckless 
and redundant constructions. State-set amounts of investment in 
fixed assets must be strictly followed and not exceeded. There 
shall be no additional allotments at various levels. Treasuries 
and banks at various levels may not allot funds or extend loans 
for nonbudgetary construction projects. Beginning early this 
year, governments, banks, and enterprises at various levels 
should draw up quarterly allotment plans and make sure that 
funds are available for priority state projects every month. 
Local authorities must ensure the amounts of self-raised funds 
for major state projects. It is strictly forbidden for bank 
loans and illegally raised funds to be regarded as sources of 
self-raised funds. Funds raised by local people's governments, 
relevant authorities, and enterprises must be used on priority 
state projects and major technological upgrading projects. All 
projects for which funds are not available must proceed more 
slowly, or even be discontinued or postponed with resolve. 
Central treasuries may not earmark any money for those projects 
for which self-raised funds are unavailable, and banks may not 
extend loans to them. 
  The circular states: New projects must be strictly screened, 
the number of construction projects must be curtailed, the 
management of screening and approving projects must be 
tightened, and projects must be properly planned. To prevent 
the launching of more construction, in principle no more new 
projects will be approved this year. For projects launched 
without preapproval, the relevant construction units and leaders 
will have their responsibilities investigated. Banks also may 
not support unauthorized projects through extending them loans 
on a piecemeal basis. From now on, new projects may not be 
launched unless they meet these three requirements: First, 
there shall not be costless investment. In other words, a new 
project may not be launched unless a certain percentage of 
capital has been ensured. Second, loans to be used as working 
funds may not be used for investment. Third, a new project must 
have sufficient working funds, and projects without working 
funds may not be launched. People's governments of all 
provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly under the 
central government's jurisdiction, and cities authorized to draw 
up independent development plans may not laterally decentralize 
[heng xiang fen san 2897 0686 0433 2414] their authority of 
approving new projects. Except for projects which state-class 
developmental zones have the right to approve as authorized by 
the State Council, and for projects which enterprises have the 
right to approve as prescribed by the "Regulations Governing the 
Change of Operating Mechanisms in State-Owned Industrial 
Enterprises," the authority of approving local projects must be 
in the hands of planning commissions (or planning and economic 
commissions) and economic commissions (or economic and trade 
commissions) under the local people's governments. While 
provincial and lower-level people's governments have the 
authority to approve projects, their authority may not exceed 
their capacity for making overall balance, much less should they 
delegate the authority to other lower-level departments. The 
State Planning Commission should work with other relevant 
departments and regions in drawing up special plans for hot-spot 
products [re dian chan pin 3583 7820 3934 0756] and projects. 
The locations for these projects should be well conceived and 
redundant construction projects must be avoided. From now on, 
projects must be approved on the basis of the state's 
intermediate and long-range plans. 
  The circular says: It is necessary to tighten control over 
the sources of capital and to be strict in the management of 
loans for investment in fixed assets. The people's banks must 
be strict in controlling the total amount of loans for fixed 
assets investment and in channeling investment to desired areas. 
As state-fixed assets loan plans are mandatory plans, the banks 
at all levels must implement them strictly without exception. 
Momentary organizations are not permitted to extend loans for 
fixed-assets investment by borrowing from other banks, nor are 
they allowed to use bank loans to supplement the shortages of 
self-raised funds. Nonbanking financial institutions are not 
permitted to grant loans for fixed assets investment without 
approval from higher authorities; nor are they allowed to extend 
loans for newly launched construction projects without the 
approval of the State Council and the State Planning Commission. 
All localities and departments must strictly implement the 
state-assigned securities issuance plan. In issuing bonds and 
shares, they must strictly abide by the state- stipulated 
examination and approval procedures. They shall not be allowed 
to arbitrarily expand the scale of bond issuance and of 
experimentation in the shareholding system and to raise capital 
through high-interest rates under the pretext of carrying out 
internal experimentation in the shareholding system. They must 
continue to strictly implement the regulations governing fund- 
raising management enacted by the State Council, and all illegal 
fund-raising activities shall be strictly prohibited. Financial 
departments must strengthen the management of extra budgetary 
funds and adopt specific measures to streamline and rectify the 
practice of using government funds for investment outside the 
plan by resorting to method of extending credit. In line with 
the unified plan of the people's bank, banks at all levels must 
continue stepping up the work of checking illegal borrowing. 
International commercial loan borrowing for construction 
projects (including commercial loans and export credit) must be 
done in strict compliance with the state plan on utilization of 
foreign capital. Such borrowing must be placed under mandatory 
planning, and no exception is permitted. 
  The circular stresses: It is necessary to strengthen the 
management of real estate development and construction as well 
as the management of development zone construction. Investment 
in real estate development and construction in all areas must be 
incorporated into the state fixed assets investment plan, and 
the scale of loan must also be incorporated into the state 
credit plan and fixed assets investment plan. Banks are not 
allowed to grant loans for real estate development and 
construction projects that are outside the plan. The focus of 
real estate development and construction is to coordinate with 
the construction of commercial housing to solve housing 
shortages being undertaken in the course of reform of the 
housing system. In carrying out the "live-in-peace project" 
this year, it is necessary to focus on the preparatory work and 
other related plans. The project should be carried out step by 
step in accordance with our financial capability, and the 
practice of rushing headlong into mass action should be avoided. 
Construction of new development zones will not be approved in 
principle this year. Resumption of construction of the 
development zones screened and canceled last year shall not be 
permitted. Tourism facilities, guesthouses, offices, and other 
projects whose construction is absolutely needed to support 
opening to the outside world must be reported for approval 
according to stipulated procedures. 
  The circular states: It is necessary to strengthen guidance 
for and standardized management of projects directly invested by 
foreign businessmen. It is necessary to strictly implement the 
State Council's stipulations on tightening management of foreign 
investment and actively encourage and guide foreign investors to 
invest in domestic infrastructure facility projects and basic 
industry projects. Where a state-owned enterprise sells its 
shares to overseas investors or forms a joint venture or a 
cooperative enterprise with a foreign investor with its 
remaining assets, the procedures regarding submitting the matter 
for approval must be strictly followed. The enterprise's assets 
will be assessed by a qualified assets assessment organization 
and will have to verified by a department for the administration 
of state-owned assets. The value of foreign investment in the 
form of materials shall also be verified by an intermediary 
notary organ acknowledged by both parties to the joint venture. 
It is not permitted to use bank loans to pay for the registered 
capital of foreign investors nor is the Chinese side allowed to 
serve as guarantor for foreign investment loans. The Chinese 
side is not allowed to resort to extending loans and issuing 
bonds or to other forms to guarantee the rate of returns for 
foreign investors who are party to a joint venture. When a 
foreign-invested project applies for overseas loans in the name 
of a joint venture, the loan must be incorporated into the state 
foreign debt plan if a domestic organization is required to 
serve as a guarantor or if assets are used as a mortgage. 
  The circular issues the following calls: It is necessary 
to strengthen leadership over macroeconomic regulation and 
control over investment. The people's governments of all 
provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly under the 
central government, and cities with provincial-level economic 
decision-making authority should have their vice governors (vice 
chairmen or vice mayors) assume personal responsibility over 
this work. The planning, financial, banking, and auditing 
departments should coordinate closely with one another in 
promptly studying solutions for major problems of fixed assets 
investment; they must make periodic checks to determine whether 
key projects are ensured and whether funds are in place, and to 
also find out the situation regarding the investment scale, 
investment examination and approval, and newly launched 
projects, and must promptly report to the relevant departments 
the results of their analyses and their suggestions for dealing 
with problems. The State Planning Commission must strengthen 
leadership, supervision, and checking regarding the work of 
exercising overall control over investment. 
  The circular points out: Strict control over the scale of 
fixed assets investment is crucial to the smooth progress of 
reform and the sustained and healthy growth of the national 
economy this year. Our important tasks this year are to seize 
the opportunities, deepen the reform, open up wider to the 
outside world, promote development, and maintain stability. All 
localities and departments must coordinate efforts and unite as 
one in handling well the relationship between reform and 
development on the one hand and stability on the other to ensure 
the national economy's sustained, rapid, and healthy development. 

