Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Abridged account of a report by K. Zatulin: "At the Gate </F>
Without a Fence"] 
  [Text] The lower house of the Russian Parliament 
yesterday passed in its first reading the draft federal law "On 
the Status of a Deputy of the Federation Council of the First 
Convocation and the Status of a Deputy of the State Duma of the 
First Convocation of the Federal Assembly of the Russian 
Federation." 
  Information had been presented prior to this the day 
before on parliamentary hearings in the CIS Committee on 
Russian-Georgian relations. A report was delivered by Deputy K. 
Zatulin, chairman of the committee. We publish his speech in 
abridged form. 
  You all know that Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin, president of 
the Russian Federation, paid an official visit on 3 February to 
the Republic of Georgia. And that the result of this visit was 
the signing of Friendship, Good-Neighbor, and Cooperation Treaty 
with the Republic of Georgia and a whole list of joint 
Russian-Georgian documents. 
  While welcoming, on the whole, the development of 
Russian-Georgian relations and the rapprochement between recent 
Union republics of the USSR, we have to mention that the treaty 
between Russia and Georgia signed on 3 February does not 
entirely correspond to the high standards required of so 
important a document both in terms of content and, which is far 
more serious, in terms of the consequences of the signing. 
  Certain articles of the treaty, primarily Articles 3 and 4, 
would, in the event of its ratification, signify Russia's 
unilateral commitments to arm the Georgian side, support its 
attempts by all means to secure its control over what are, in 
fact, lost areas, and cut short attempts to assist them from the 
territory of Russia in the event of an escalation of the 
military conflict. We cannot fail to note that in assuming 
commitments to Georgia in the Caucasus, which will be hard to 
fulfill even for Russia, we are losing the trust of other 
parties to the conflict and damaging our own mediating, 
peace-making mission. It seems to us that Russian diplomacy 
should be aspiring to a lowering of the level of military 
opposition, disarmament, and the imposition of an embargo on 
supplies of arms to the explosive region. Under conditions where 
Georgia, on the Georgian side's representatives' own admission 
at the hearings, suffered a devastating military defeat and the 
armed forces of Georgia number approximately 1,500 men 
constantly warring among themselves, we deny the capacity of the 
Georgian side for guaranteeing strict compliance with the 
provisions of the treaty on the nontransfer of arms, military 
equipment, and technology to third parties. 
  The members of the committee support the verbal statement of 
President of the Russian Federation Boris Nikolayevich Yeltsin 
on deferral of submittal for ratification by the Federal 
Assembly of the treaty signed on 3 February until there has been 
a settlement of the conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. But 
we simply cannot understand why prior to the commitment of 
Russian demarcation troops on the line of opposition along the 
Inguri River and prior to the submittal for ratification of the 
previous treaty between Russia and Georgia, which was signed in 
Moscow on 9 October 1993, Russia, in the person of its highest 
official, is signing a new treaty, which the president himself 
does not contemplate submitting for ratification. This treaty 
not only offends against the self-esteem of Georgia--the 
postponement of ratification--but is also causing rumblings 
among the mass of Russian citizens living in the North 
Caucasus.... I would like to say that the reason for our 
disquiet is not only the treaty and not so much the fact of the 
signing of a whole number of additional agreements as the fact 
that, having analyzed the text of these agreements, we have 
concluded that we are being put into the position of people who 
are guarding a gate where there is no fence. 
  A whole number of the agreements signed on 3 February, and 
there are many useful and necessary agreements among them, makes 
no provision for any ratification procedure. For example, the 
agreement on border troops, Article 33, contains, instead of a 
direct, unambiguous indication of the need for ratification, a 
quite evasive provision to the effect that this agreement will 
take effect on the day of the exchange of notification in 
writing of the parties' compliance with the intrastate 
procedures necessary for this agreement to take effect. 
  What this might signify I could explain in the example of 
the 
question of the location of military bases in the Republic of 
Georgia. We are talking about bases in Akhalkalak, in Aziani, 
and in Batumi, and the last base offers subsidiaries in Sukhumi 
and Gudauty, what is more. The Abkhaz side and the Supreme 
Council of Abkhazia have already declared that they will not 
permit and will not recognize any accords without their 
participation in respect to territory which they consider Abkhaz 
and which they control. We get the impression that the Georgian 
side is involving Russia's Armed Forces in the complex relations 
with the Abkhaz. 
  Summing up the question of the analysis of the treaty and 
the 
accords as a whole, I would like to mention the speculation to 
the effect that this treaty is one-sidedly to the benefit of 
Russia.... I would like to call attention to the fact that 
Russia's economic assistance to Georgia, signifying an increase 
in the intrastate debt, cannot be valued in absolute figures as 
yet, because we know neither the value of the property which 
will be transferred nor the cost of the lease of the military 
bases nor the cost of the arms with which we subsequently 
contemplate furnishing the Georgian Army and arming and 
equipping the Georgian Army [as published]. 
  As far as the realization of the military cooperation 
agreements is concerned--as a result of these agreements there 
will be a reduction in the military presence of 
Russian troops in Georgia, despite all the obfuscation on the 
part of certain analysts and representatives of the news media. 
The replacement of the division in Akhalkalak and Batumi by 
regiments cannot be called an increase in the military presence. 
  And, finally, the last point I would like to make in this 
connection: A military-strategic and political alliance with 
Georgia, which the committee supports in principle, is possible 
only on the basis of a solution of internal problems on the 
territory of the former Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic as a 
result of our guarantee not only to the Government of Georgia 
but to Abkhazia and South Ossetia also. 

