Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Address to the nation" by UNITA President Jonas Malheiro </F>
Savimbi in Huambo on 16 March -- recorded] 
  [Text] Dear Angolan people, compatriots, friends, and 
proven militants of our National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola [UNITA] party: 
  As divulged in our communique of 13 March, it was not 
possible to make this address on the occasion of the 28th 
anniversary of the creation of the UNITA Party. That was 
because the party leadership and the UNITA team to the Lusaka 
peace talks were in intensive consultation at the time [words 
indistinct] to make this address. 
  Before anything else, I would like to express our 
satisfaction with the visit to Huambo on 12 March by Alioune 
Blondin Beye, special representative of the UN secretary general 
in Angola. His first visit here was on 8 July of last year. 
His presence in Huambo has allowed the UNITA Party leadership 
to delve deeper into problems that are yet to be settled, clear 
some doubts, and help create a climate of greater trust. After 
three days of intensive work, the UNITA negotiating team 
returned to Lusaka with more open views and a wider mandate. 
This was so that those frameworks which have not been defined 
yet can be expanded and to help search for lasting peace for 
Angola as a whole. Such lasting peace must be based on accords 
to be signed and which must be respected, thereby ensuring that 
the specter of war does not return to darken the lives of the 
Angolan people. 
  In this message [words indistinct] UNITA militants inside 
and 
outside the country, I would like to reaffirm the spirit of 
(?Mangai), who created (?his) own space within the national 
context. UNITA represents the interests and aspirations of the 
poorer sections of the population. 
  After 28 years of resistance, which took on the [words 
indistinct] in different times and circumstances, we have been 
able to gather experience and trust. We have never stopped 
believing that some day our country would be totally free and 
that the Angolan people would be able to take their country's 
fate in their own hands. We have had to make immense sacrifices 
over the course of these 28 years. We have been in detention at 
times. We were detained and killed during the colonial period. 
We were detained and killed during the Russian-Cuban invasion 
of our country. As I make this address, I remember many of the 
martyrs of those times. Most important and most missed among 
them were UNITA Vice President Jeremias Kalandula Chitunda, 
UNITA Secretary General Mango Alicerces, and Engineer Elias 
Salupeto, UNITA representative in the Joint Political and 
Military Commission, CCPM. 
  There have also been traitors and treacherous ploys over the 
course of these 28 years. Nonetheless, UNITA remained calm, 
confident, and united. I would like to congratulate the party's 
militants and encourage them to continue our resistance, 
wherever they may be doing their duties, whether they be in the 
diplomatic, administrative, military, or political sectors. No 
one thought that our party would still be standing after the 
events of October and November 1992. Not only has it done so, 
it has also [words indistinct] confident, serene, and following 
its program for real democracy in the country that will allow 
all Angolans to participate in, contest, and criticize the 
regime in a constructive manner. 
  We have defeated the skepticism that had spread into our 
ranks at the time. Furthermore, we have built the determination 
and trust to continue our work with a view to occupying the 
place that is rightfully ours in history and in the world. It 
has always been the Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola's [MPLA] goal to destroy UNITA. In that way, over the 
years the MPLA has tried to create divisions, a so-called 
democratic UNITA, and parallel organizations. All those efforts 
have been in vain. The (?efforts) (?made) in Luanda to create 
another UNITA leadership instill no fear in us. They have 
happened before, they happen today, and they will happen 
tomorrow. Nonetheless, there is only one UNITA that can 
implement the program drawn up 28 years ago and which has not 
been [word indistinct] yet. 
  Our people are scattered throughout the country. Our roads 
are full of holes. Our homes have been destroyed. Civic sense 
has been destroyed. The black market [words indistinct] a lack 
of responsibility in the [words indistinct] and the salaries 
themselves. All this allows us to say that the goals we have 
set ourselves are very far from attainment. We still have 
fields to till and seeds to plant. 
  I would also like to take this opportunity to say that, 
within the general framework of the resolution of the Angolan 
problem, the UNITA leadership could never agree to independent 
UNITA deputies in the National Assembly. No UNITA deputy to the 
National Assembly today was elected on his or her own merit. 
All UNITA deputies were elected on a single list under the flag 
of the Black Cockerel. 
  Once the current conflict has been resolved, UNITA will turn 
up at the National Assembly with its 70 deputies intact. 
Obviously, there will be contacts with the government, with the 
leadership of the National Assembly, and with the courts in 
Luanda. UNITA will not agree to have dissidents as its deputies 
in the National Assembly. Whoever speaks out against the UNITA 
leadership and its program is promptly expelled from the party 
and is not entitled to talk on its behalf. 
  For a long time now, we have heard shouts, stupid remarks, 
talk of connivance, and hasty compromises, so we have arrived at 
the conclusion that the Portuguese proverb that dogs may bark, 
but the caravan will continue on its way, applies here. There 
can only be one program, one leadership, and one ideology within 
that party and they must represent, in the first analysis of the 
party's creation, in the context of the frustrations experienced 
by millions of Angolan people who also aspire to a dignified way 
of life. They, too, want the right to (?education), health 
care, work, and dignity. They want access to political posts on 
the basis of their capacity and competence. 
  There is not and there will not be in our country -- unless 
we want to imperil social equilibrium--castes and strata, so 
that some are eternally in power and others must eternally obey. 
We have an inclusive and global concept of our condition as 
Angolans. We do not look at race, ethnic background, or 
religious affiliation. We must make joint efforts to overcome 
the backwardness legated us by Portuguese colonialism. With our 
efforts and with international cooperation, we must strive to 
overcome the nefarious effects of this war that has been going 
on for more than 30 years. 
  Whatever the version put out by the regime, whatever the 
version of the international observers, ultimately God and men 
will correctly judge the real reasons which prompted the 
eruption of an even bloodier war after Angola had had its first 
multiparty elections. It is not enough for the regime to hold 
on to legality. It is not enough for the international community 
to hold on to the declaration of Madam Anstee. Facts are 
emerging daily and they prove that there were irregularities in 
Angola's first democratic multiparty elections. 
  However, in order to overcome a situation created by 
foreigners, and because Angolans are joined by the same feelings 
of unity and desire to work together, UNITA has decided to move 
beyond that critical stage. We must look to the future with 
hope because the current conflict can be resolved. It can come 
to an end. The tragedy that has beset the nation can be 
overcome. 
  I would also like to take this opportunity to say that UNITA 
has been deliberately misunderstood because what was intended 
then is what has become a fact in this country today. The press 
and the international community were ready to award victory to 
those they felt could serve alien interests best. God and the 
people know that this is not what the Angolan people feel. It 
takes years--perhaps five, perhaps 10, perhaps 20, perhaps 50. 
As I deliver this declaration to the Angolan people, I am moved 
by the profound conviction that the truth is bound to come out 
some day. The truth will emerge from Angola itself. It will 
come out of the mouths of the Angolan people. It will come out 
of the mouths of those who have lied. The matter belongs in the 
past now, but it has not been forgotten and that is because the 
UNITA leadership has decided to take a step forward. We [words 
indistinct] waiting for Angola, we do not want to be responsible 
for those who have connived in acts of historic irresponsibility 
that will lead to foreign intervention in our country, thereby 
permitting an even more ingrained neocolonization within the 
context of neodemocracy. 
  We want to assure all Angolan patriots, whether they be 
inside or outside the country, that all will be done to ensure 
that the Lusaka peace talks will be fruitful. It is no 
exaggeration to say that certain Portuguese Government officials 
were accomplices in the Bicesse Accord conspiracy and that today 
they are already voicing their skepticism and making 
discouraging remarks so that the Lusaka peace talks may not 
succeed. (?We, in) UNITA, will do everything to ensure that the 
Lusaka peace talks are successful. In addition to the pressing 
reasons of the need for peace in Angola and of the need for the 
Angolan family to come together again, there are two other 
weighty reasons in terms of our African philosophy for us to do 
so: the talks are being held in an African country, and the 
representative of the UN secretary general is also an African. 
We want to show the world that Africans can settle their 
problems without placing themselves in the hands of alien 
mediators. 
  Some Portuguese Government officials are already saying that 
the Lusaka peace talks are destined to fail. They continue to 
wage an intense campaign for other countries to sell weapons to 
the MPLA so that it can destroy UNITA militarily. We have 
always taken the care and followed the moral obligation to 
distinguish between Portuguese Government officials and the 
Portuguese people. We know that the Portuguese people have 
lately participated in a campaign to collect humanitarian aid 
for Angola. We want to thank that gesture because it is typical 
of the Portuguese people. They show solidarity with other 
peoples, notably with the Angolan people, with whom they share 
(?historic), cultural, linguistic, and (?blood) ties. 
  Nonetheless, we must say that there are those here and there 
who are trying to score political dividends out of that 
humanitarian gesture. It is no secret to anyone today that the 
current Portuguese Government is trying to encourage rivalries 
between the Portuguese people and Angolans of different skin 
hues living in that country. Such behavior is completely 
atypical of the Portuguese people. Once the scars of 
colonialism had dried, the Portuguese people were always able to 
enjoy open relations with the people of the Lusophone African 
countries. Neither did they look at race, religious faith, or 
background. 
  Today, though, doctors, engineers, and other skilled cadres 
who have not been able to fit in with the present order of witch 
hunts, detentions without trial, and other problems, and have 
sought refuge in Portugal, now see themselves reduced to working 
as manual laborers. They are shown no respect whatever for 
their studies, often done at Portuguese universities. Such 
feelings are alien to Portuguese culture and to Portuguese 
history and they can only stain those government officials who 
endorse such behavior. 
  There are still important organs of Portuguese sovereignty, 
with enough love for Portugal and for people of other countries, 
that can act against such behavior, which we regard as 
irrational and reprehensible. We place our trust with them. 
The great non-colonial Portugal of the past can then [words 
indistinct] to relate with Angolans of all opposition political 
parties, first and foremost among which is UNITA. 
  We would like to convey our gratitude to all organizations 
like the Portuguese Forum for Freedom and Democracy in Angola, 
the Portuguese Forum, and other organizations that have always 
sought balanced relations between the Portuguese people and the 
Angolan people. We are confident that all [word indistinct] 
schemes to make business, some of which is dirty business, will 
end up failing and the good Portuguese people will see them for 
what they are. 
  I would also like to take this opportunity to say that there 
is no link whatever between the South African and Angolan 
problems. As it is, in a not too distant past many used to link 
Namibian independence to the problems that UNITA would have, to 
survive. Namibia has achieved its independence and it has been 
encouraged to show hostility, but UNITA has continued its 
resistance regardless. What is more, it has done so without 
showing hostility toward Namibia and without needing Namibia. 
  South African Government officials are well aware that the 
only thing they are doing for Angola is to send thousands upon 
thousands of South African mercenaries to fight Angolan 
patriots. That is what is happening in Lunda Norte Province at 
this stage. Those South African mercenaries will be put on the 
run in Lunda Norte. Those who are able to do so will have to 
return to their fatherland [words indistinct] the areas 
controlled by UNITA. 
  Within the framework of the Lusaka Accords, the country will 
voluntarily be returned to government structures and 
institutions. This will happen in terms of accords, but never in 
the wake of the use of force, even if such force is used by 
mercenaries. 
  It is very fallacious of a Portuguese Government official to 
say that UNITA will disappear once the South African problem is 
settled. Instead, I am convinced that the ministerial posts 
occupied by such officials are going to disappear. No foreign 
affairs ministers can stay on in their posts forever. There 
have already been so many and there are bound to be others. 
UNITA will continue to exist, though, because it represents the 
Angolan people's aspirations. May it be so. 
  I would also like to comment on the calls that are 
constantly 
being made to UNITA and the government that we must reach an 
agreement as soon as possible. We want to thank the Angolan and 
Sao Tomean Catholic bishops for their recent peace call. Such 
calls are [word indistinct] and they carry profound moral 
values. We, in UNITA, are sensitive to such calls. Neither the 
Catholic Church nor other churches in Angola, nor civilian 
society, nor anybody else should ignore the tragedy that is 
destroying our country today. Everyone should look for peace 
[words indistinct] concerning the Lusaka peace talks, we have 
wished success to the UNITA team. 
  It must show a spirit of openness. It must try to clarify 
doubts and, above all, it must work to help clarify the legal 
and political framework in terms of which the Angolan opposition 
can claim its rights. To be in the opposition does not mean 
connivance with the regime, or the legitimacy of the party as an 
opposition party will be lost, nor does it mean that the 
opposition must have a consistently destructive approach. We 
believe that, given the conditions in which it was born, 
democracy in Angola needs the cooperation and help of all so 
that there can be a balance. If we fail to do so, we will be 
(?paving the way) for a one-party democracy. 
  Before anything else, we want to ask the representatives of 
the government to understand that democracy can only happen 
within a framework of tolerance. Police hunts, detentions 
without trial, encouraging cadres in other parties to rebel 
against their own leaders, and the illegal use of the media to 
depict people as the regime wishes, are actions that neither 
strengthen democracy nor can [words indistinct] whoever may have 
won, however that victory may have been achieved, should show 
generosity. Whoever has lost, never mind how, should show 
resignation and look for other ways to continue the struggle so 
that Angola can one day reemerge united in its desire to work, 
to have dignity, and to command respect among its people and 
from the international community. 
  We would also like to thank the international community for 
having taken note of the shortages facing the Angolan people. 
It has made extraordinary efforts to bring food, medicines, 
clothing, and comfort to the Angolan people. The Angolan people 
will never forget such gestures of great solidarity. 
  On behalf of the UNITA leadership, I would also like to 
reiterate our complete trust in UN Special Representative 
Alioune Blondin Beye, as an African, as an international 
official, and as a mediator. May our message convey to him our 
profound respect and our desire to cooperate. We would also 
like to reiterate our trust in the observers in Lusaka -- 
namely, the representatives of the United States, Portugal, and 
the Russian Federation. 
  The Portuguese ambassador has shown extraordinarily good 
manners and the kind of understanding that is typical of a true 
Portuguese citizen who defends, in addition to the institutions 
he represents, the need for peace in Angola and for good general 
coexistence among all people, so that Angola as a whole can 
cooperate with Portugal. 
  We would also like to convey our gratitude toward the 
government of President Frederick Chiluba. Over the course of 
the months that the Lusaka peace talks have been held, his 
participation in the process has been discreet but incisive. He 
has not been giving advice to all and sundry. 
  UNITA hereby undertakes that, once a clearer and more 
comprehensive framework has been found, we will not be leaving 
Lusaka without an accord. That will not be just for us to show 
our respect for that independent African nation. It is also for 
us to show that Zambia has played an important role in restoring 
harmony to life in Angola. The peace talks are to enter their 
most critical stage and it is very important that there should 
be more direct contacts between the negotiating teams of the 
government and UNITA. Though we are very grateful for the active 
roles that have been played by the mediator and the observers, 
ultimately it is with the MPLA that UNITA will have to coexist. 
It is inside Angola that we will have to coexist. The Angolan 
people will need to show (?much courage) to help our efforts. 
It is important that we create [word indistinct] lose fear. It 
is important that we devise formulas that strengthen pardon 
rather than amnesty. 
  Within this framework, I think it is absolutely 
contradictory 
that the government should still be holding the bodies of former 
UNITA officials, as well as women and children in its jails. 
Even if it all had to do with human and patriotic feelings, 
still you could not explain why the bodies of UNITA Vice 
President Jeremias Kalandula Chitunda and Engineer Elias 
Salupeto Pena should still be held by the government at a time 
when the peace talks are about to reach their end. 
  Furthermore, the media in Luanda and the world must help 
create a climate of understanding so that we can work to 
strengthen feelings of national solidarity. We have always 
backed Angola. Personally, I have on several occasions told 
UNITA militants, our armed forces, our sympathizers, and the 
Angolan people at large that I shall never leave Angola. I 
shall never go into exile. I shall never run away. I shall do 
my best to fulfill the tasks that the party's militants award me 
inside the country that saw my birth. Should God so desire and 
should God grant me life to do so, I shall do everything in my 
power to give my very best contribution. 
  I also deeply believe that man's destiny is in the hands of 
God. Let God make of me and of us all what He pleases. However, 
I shall never run away from Angola. Let the UNITA militants 
learn from these words that I shall stay because I have to stay. 
Let my opponents also detect in my words a profound conviction 
that any ploy to take me abroad will be useless. I shall never 
leave this land that has seen the deaths of my parents, my 
grandparents, and my nephews, often in tragic circumstances. I 
shall stay because it is my duty to do so. 
  I would also like to sincerely greet my colleagues in the 
movement's leadership, who have stayed put in their posts 
despite enticements, threats, uncertainties, obstacles, and 
shortcomings. All those who believe in the Black Cockerel flag 
-- whether they live under very precarious conditions like those 
in Jamba or under slightly better conditions -- should take it 
for granted that there will be a day when our party will finds 
itself in a better position. Then, we will all reflect about 
what we have gone through. Moreover, with an open mind, 
absolute understanding, and pardoning we will be able to look 
into the future with confidence. Nothing has been lost. Let us 
accept the prevailing conditions with the same [words 
indistinct] attitude that we have followed over the past 28 
years. We have said in the past that personal resentment 
hinders our sight because the finishing line is looming on the 
horizon. 
  Likewise, I wish to send my heartfelt condolences to all 
those who have lost their beloved ones over the past years and 
those who have been left homeless. Whenever possible, we will 
make their worries our own. We will share with them the little 
we have. Until peace is restored in our land once and for all, 
and until such time when men may live freely and safely, [words 
indistinct] with intelligence and capacity fulfill the tasks 
that have been assigned to them. 
  Now I wish to address the Angolan opposition political 
parties in general. UNITA acknowledges that it has made 
mistakes in dealing with the question of opposition. UNITA 
acknowledges that when the president of the Republic, who is the 
chairman of the MPLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola], created a forum to meet the opposition parties, UNITA 
could have taken part provided that the atmosphere prevailing 
then did not make us feel suspicious and distrustful. Now that 
all that has been overcome, we are in a position to share 
experiences, instead of frustrations, knowledge, instead of 
resentment so that there should be in Angola a genuine 
opposition that could serve as a yardstick to balance the [words 
indistinct]. 
  There is no democracy at all when the regime tries to bribe 
opposition members. There can only be a future to the 
opposition if at this final juncture the regime clearly defines 
the framework within which we can evolve, and give our 
contribution so that there is real democracy and a state of law 
in Angola. 
  Many of you were prey to the regime's arbitrary attitude. 
Let us not repeat the same mistakes. UNITA is willing to make 
a concerted effort and to enter into full-fledged consultations 
so that Angola may one day experience an atmosphere of trust and 
freedom in a country that we love so much, and in which we can 
move in and out at will. This applies for those who wish to 
move in and out. For those like myself who want to stay [words 
indistinct] our mountains, valleys, rivers [words indistinct] so 
that Angola may be a fatherland that embraces all its sons. 
  Rulers ought to be sufficiently wise to avoid being selfish 
on matters of public interest. Only Angolans who have been 
reunited can make Angola a meaningful country at home and 
abroad. Once we respect each other at home, and are united when 
it comes to mutual respect, pardoning, and trust, we will also 
be respected by the outside world because there will be no 
factions or divisions, and because our domestic problems will be 
resolved by ourselves. 
  It could be that the few years since we have been 
independent 
are not long enough for us to be able to be fully experienced in 
political and administrative matters. Like I said in my last 
address to the nation, the Portuguese Government never allowed 
Angolans to actively participate in our country's political 
affairs [words indistinct] colonial past. Yet, [words 
indistinct] an atrocious suffering, we have been forced to 
create [words indistinct] to accept dialogue [words indistinct] 
as the only way of resolving our differences which should not 
have been the reason for us to take up arms. The current 
generation of rulers have a major responsibility of not creating 
a culture of violence. Instead, they should create a culture of 
tolerance through which we will all find our own place. 
Accordingly, UNITA is ready to cooperate. 
  Angolan men and women, patriots and friends, and tested 
militants in our party, the future is possible, peace is in 
sight, and it is our duty to understand each other. Only thus 
will we be able to speak of a wealthy Angola. May God bless you 
all and protect our land. 

