Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release from the UK Department of the Environment: </F>
"Air Quality Standards For Benzene Recommended"] 
  [Text] An air quality standard has been recommended for 
benzene in the United Kingdom and daily monitoring of levels of 
benzene in air is to be made available to the public. 
  The recommendation has been made by the Government's 
independent Expert Panel on Air Quality Standards, chaired by 
Professor Anthony Seaton, Aberdeen University. The Panel have 
assessed available health and air quality data on benzene and 
have recommended: 
  "An air quality standard for benzene in the United Kingdom 
of 
5ppb [parts per billion] as a running annual average. We also 
recommend that this standard be reduced to the lower level of 1 
ppb running annual average, and that the Government set a target 
date by which this be achieved. 
  These recommendations are intended to reduce the levels of 
exposure of the population to benzene such that ambient air 
pollution is no longer the main source of individual exposure, 
even for non-smokers. It is intended that techniques for 
monitoring the standard be consistent with those of the 
Department of the Environment's Enhanced Urban Network." 
  Commenting on the recommendation, Environment Minister 
Robert 
Atkins said: "I am grateful for the Panel's work. It provides an 
essential yardstick by which the Government's policies on air 
pollution can be judged. The Government will consider the 
Panel's recommendations on benzene very carefully, and looks 
forward to receiving its proposals on standards for other 
pollutants in due course.'' 
  "Now that the work of the Panel is beginning to bear fruit, 
I 
propose shortly to publish a consultation paper which will 
discuss how air quality standards should operate and ways in 
which they can be achieved. The Government will consider how the 
recommended Standard could be used in this context and over what 
time scale the target Standard could be met." 
<H5>  The Minister Added: </H5>
  "I am pleased to announce today that my Department will 
shortly provide daily information on levels of benzene in air to 
the public. This information will come from our new Enhanced 
Urban Monitoring Network and will be included as part of the air 
quality bulletin service available on Ceefax, Teletext and 
Freephone." 
<H5>  Notes to Editors </H5>
  Benzene is an organic chemical which is known to cause 
cancer 
in humans. The main source of atmospheric benzene in the UK is 
petrol vehicle exhausts (78 percent in 1991). 
  The Expert Panel on Air Quality Standards was established 
following the Government's commitment in the 1990 White Paper 
"This Common Inheritance" to set up a Panel to recommend air 
quality standards for the United Kingdom. It is chaired by 
Professor Anthony Seaton, Head of Environmental and Occupational 
Medicine at the Aberdeen University Medical School and members 
include medical and air pollution experts. 
  The report is the first in a series which will make 
recommendations for other pollutants suggested to the Panel by 
the Government. Recommendations on ozone, carbon monoxide, 1,3 
butadiene, nitrogen dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and particulates 
are expected in due course. 
  As part of the Government's 4 million pounds per annum 
national air pollution monitoring network, DOE is establishing a 
network of 12 sites around the country where continuous 
monitoring of benzene (and up to 26 other organic chemical 
pollutant gases) will take place. The first 7 of these sites are 
in operation at Belfast, Birmingham, Cardiff, Edinburgh London 
Bloomsbury, London Eltham and Middlesbrough. Daily information 
on benzene levels will shortly be made available to the public 
via the Department of the Environment's air quality bulletin 
service (Freephone 0800-556677, Ceefax Page 404 and Teletext 
Page 187). 
  The report is available from HMSO, ISBN 0-11-752859-5, 
priced 
5.95 pounds. 
  Press Enquiries:071 276 0929; (Out of Hours:071 873 1966); 
Public Enquiry Office:071 276 0929 

