BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, [no dateline as received] -- Another round of 
interstate negotiations between Ukraine and Russia on the issue 
of Black Sea Fleet division is concluding on 9 June. On the 
second day of the meeting, the sides commenced discussion on the 
division of the Black Sea Fleet's shore infrastructure. The 
sides decided on the division of combat ships, boats, 
special-purpose vessels, and auxiliary craft specifically, 
"according to the pennants principle" [za vympelamy]. 
  Interviewed by a UNIAN correspondent, Ukrainian navy 
commander Volodymyr Bezkorovaynyy has explained that the ship 
repair works, bases, armament depots, etc., in particular, 
belong to the shore infrastructure. In the vice admiral's 
words, "every type of missile armaments for Black Sea Fleet 
ships, not to mention artillery; mines; torpedoes; 
anti-submarine armaments; hydrographic, navigational, and radio 
equipment; and chemical weapons," requires a separate 
maintenance facility." According to Volodymyr Bezkorovaynyy, up 
to 30 Black Sea Fleet facilities are quite unique. The vice 
admiral's opinion is that "neither side can do without them, and 
they should only be used jointly." 
  Volodymyr Bezkorovaynyy says some of the Russian 
delegation's 
members are attempting to reduce the issue of separating the 
Russian and Ukrainian navies to a merely geographic 
interpretation of the problem. He says: "It indeed is possible 
for the moorings of separate ships to be arranged in different 
harbors. The separation of the forces, however, has to take 
account of jointly using a whole number of Black Sea Fleet 
facilities, regardless of who owns or rents them." 
  Talking to journalists, Russian Ambassador Yuriy Dubinin, 
the 
head of the Russian delegation, has said he hoped the division 
of the fleet might be over by the autumn. He emphasized that 
the talks were to conclude by signing one document with 
appendices, rather than separate ones on the ships and the 
infrastructure. "The result of this will be that the Black Sea 
Fleet will acquire a new quality without suffering the loss of 
those needed by it." He believes that the problem of Black Sea 
Fleet division is mainly psychological. 
  Yuriy Dubinin confirmed that he understood the notion of 
"separating the fleets" as having the main bases of the Russian 
Navy and those of the Ukrainian Navy at a certain distance from 
each other. 
  The head of the Russian delegation said he would offer the 
Ukrainian side to continue working on documents relating to 
fleet division in Moscow. 

