BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of letter sent by Cuban President Fidel Castro to </F>
Camilo Cienfuegos contingent construction workers; date not 
given -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] Dear Comrades: I deeply regret having been unable to 
be with you in the ceremony held on 4 April when you completed 
the Jiguey-Romano-Cayo Cruz rockfill embankment project, but 
other work activities that could have not been postponed 
prevented my being there with you. 
  I wanted to convey to you now, however, that I felt great 
satisfaction and joy when I learned that you have successfully 
concluded that very important project. 
  I have been continuously informed on the development of the 
work by Comrade [Politburo member Julian] Rizo and, more 
recently, by the reports published in our press. 
  The figures clearly and eloquently speak of the deed you 
have 
accomplished: More than 270,000 truckloads of various materials 
were used; almost 2 million cubic meters of rock were dumped 
into the sea; over 43 km of highway were built; and all that was 
completed in just 54 months and 18 days of intensive and 
unselfish work under very difficult conditions. 
  Such achievements are possible only where there are groups 
of 
workers like those of that contingent, men and women with the 
same resolution and will to work that you have demonstrated. It 
is no secret to you that the current circumstances in the 
country give a strategic significance to the effort we must make 
to create, at a more accelerated rate, the minimal structure 
that will help us increase our tourist capacity and enhance the 
quality of service in that sphere. 
  The rockfill embankment you have just completed is a 
concrete 
contribution to that priority effort, which is the same as 
saying that it is a contribution to the historic battle we are 
fighting today in defense of our independence, of national 
identity, of the future of the fatherland, of the Revolution, 
and of socialism. 
  I am pleased to know that we can count on such a group of 
hard workers as you are, especially now that most of the people 
are waging a heroic battle on all fronts to overcome this 
special period. You have played a leading role in another heroic 
deed, showing once more the spirit of fight and the 
revolutionary awareness that makes us increasingly stronger and 
more invincible. 
  I wholeheartedly congratulate you and thank you on behalf of 
the Cuban people for the contribution you have made. I also urge 
you to continue to be the pride of our working class, especially 
of the construction workers. 
  [Signed] Affectionately, Fidel Castro. 

