BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Tokyo FNN Television Network in 
Japanese at 2230 GMT on 14 May in its 75-minute "FNN News 2001" 
talk show carries a 33-minute live interview with Yuichi 
Ichikawa, acting Komeito Chairman. The program is moderated by 
Yuji Kuroiwa and Megumi Sekito. Keio University professor 
Yoshiaki Kobayashi, a regular guest on the program, and 
commentator Yoshimi Ishikawa also take part. 
  The interview with Ichikawa begins at 2315 GMT. Moderator 
Kuroiwa reviews recent political turmoil caused by the secession 
of the Social Democratic Party of Japan (SDPJ) from the 
coalition following the formation by its partners of the Kaishin 
parliamentary group and then asks why Komeito did not join 
Kaishin. 
  Ichikawa says: "Frankly speaking, our party was not asked to 
join the group." 
  He explains how the group was formed, noting that "although 
the Kaishin group was established, it is not functioning well." 
  He adds: "Komeito will see how the situation develops, and 
we hope the SDPJ will come back to the coalition," saying no one 
wanted to see further discord between the coalition and the SDPJ. 
  Ichikawa is asked to comment on the resignation of Shinseito 
(Japan Renewal Party) member Nagano as justice minister to take 
responsibility for his careless remarks on the Nanjing Massacre. 
  He says: "I think within Shinseito, which is a breakaway of 
the Liberal Democratic Party, there are some members who share 
Nagano's view. However, that does not mean Nagano's remarks 
represent Shinseito's view." 
  He is also asked about Komeito's policy toward North Korea. 
  Ichikawa says: "Our party has three principles. First, the 
issue should be solved through tenacious negotiation between 
North Korea, South Korea, China, and the United States. Second, 
Japan should follow the United Nations, which will probably make 
a decision if negotiations end in failure. 
  "However, as the issue closely concerns Japan's security, it 
is not something to be left to a United Nations' decision or 
U.S. action." 
  He says that if the United Nations should fail to adopt a 
resolution, "Japan should act in close cooperation with South 
Korea and the United States. This our party's third principle." 
  Ichikawa discusses current relations between Komeito and 
religious group Soka-Gakkai, a major supporter of the party, 
saying the group has not influenced party policy. He says 
Komeito has not violated the principle of the separation of 
religion and politics. 
  Asked about the possibility of holding a general election 
under the current electoral system, Ichikawa says: "This would 
not only break the new electoral system but would set back the 
effects of the reforming Political Funds Law designed to prevent 
political corruption." 
  He says: "We should never hold elections under the current 
system" because it would undermine all political reform efforts 
so far. 

