Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> Yamaguchi's Attractions as an Industrial Prefecture </F>
  [Text] Yamaguchi, The Healthy Prefecture 
  I think it would be safe to say that Yamaguchi prefecture 
reflects Japan in miniature. That is, Yamaguchi is a compact 
combination of all the elements found throughout Japan. It has 
mountains, forests, and seas, including the Japan Sea and the 
Inland Sea. It has both beach and ski resorts. It has farms as 
well as fishing villages and fishery combines. It possesses 
various industries in all fields, ranging from textiles, iron 
and steel, chemicals, and petroleum, to electrical machinery, 
machines, automobiles, and semiconductors. 
  The scale of the prefecture is also about medium among all 
the prefectures and metropolitan areas, with a population of 
1,560,000, ranking 25th in the nation. The total production in 
the prefecture is &yen;4,467 billion, ranking 23rd in the nation. 
  The living environment of Yamaguchi Prefecture is especially 
outstanding. It is a world far distant from the urban commuter 
hell, and daily life is filled with a beauty of nature that 
cannot be experienced in the big cities. For example, it takes 
only three minutes to walk from my house to the river where 
fireflies abound, and whichever town or city you visit in the 
prefecture, the amount of green that one sees is completely 
different than in Tokyo or Osaka. The roads in the prefecture 
are in excellent condition,and traffic congestion is rare, so it 
takes about one hour to travel from the capital, Yamaguchi city, 
to any location in the prefecture, and everywhere one can easily 
get in touch with nature. 
  As everyone knows, the Meiji Restoration, which constituted 
the beginning of modern Japan had its origins in Yamaguchi. Even 
now, the remains of the warriors of the Choshu clan are found in 
many locations throughout the prefecture, beginning with Hagi, 
and one can sense in daily conversations that the sense of pride 
of the Choshu warrior resides in the consciousness of the 
prefecture's citizens. 
  Thus one has the opportunity to come in frequent contact 
with 
good points of Japan and her people that cannot be sensed in 
Tokyo. 
  In every Japanese industry from now on, no matter in which 
field, display of creativity will be of major importance, and 
the source of this creativity is people. Such people will first 
be able to display their creativity if they are placed in a 
living environment such as that of Yamaguchi, which abounds in 
``prosperity and riches.'' 
  Yamaguchi, The Industrial Prefecture. 
  Yamaguchi has followed the typical pattern of growth of 
industry in modern Japan up to the present time. During the 
policy of industrial growth of the Meiji Period, the first 
cement plants were constructed. Before the war, there was a navy 
depot, and the prefecture was a base for supplying the military 
in shipbuilding, coal, and fuel oil production. After the war, 
the prefecture, being on the western end of Honshu in the 
Pacific Belt Zone, contributed greatly to the economic growth of 
our country, forming a large coastal complex centered in the 
Shunan area, and served as a major base for our country's 
chemical and heavy industries. 
  In 1964, the Shunan Region was designated as a special zone 
for establishing industry, and Yamaguchi Prefecture, along with 
the Ube and Onoda regions, where cement manufacturing and 
chemical industries have flourished, and Shimonoseki, where 
shipbuilding has predominated, have taken the lead in the growth 
pattern for Japan's economy, and has firmly established the 
image of an industrial prefecture. During the first and second 
oil shocks, it was severely impacted, and much time was needed 
for recovery. In recent years, in order to raise the level of 
industrial structure, it has made great efforts to attract 
processing and assembly industries and the most modern of plants 
are now in operation producing semiconductors, automobiles, and 
the like. 
  However, as before, it still relies greatly on chemical and 
heavy industries such as chemicals, steel and oil, and has 
tended to lag behind in transforming its industrial structure. 
The weight of industrial shipments in the country has dropped 
from two percent at the time of the second oil shock to 
currently about 1.5 percent. Consequently, it is very desirable 
for Yamaguchi to regain its authority as an industrial 
prefecture by raising further the level of its industrial 
infrastructure. 
  Towards Establishing Yamaguchi as a Technology Prefecture 
  In our view, the key to restoring authority to Yamaguchi as 
an industrial center lies in technology. Since receiving 
acceptance of the plan for a technopolis in Ube in 1984, an 
all-out effort has been under way to develop high-level 
technology and industry based on this plan and at present, on 
the basis of the second phase of the development plan approved 
for 1992, we are establishing Ube New City as a core strategic 
base. Even the Fourth Long Range Prospectus for Development of 
the Prefecture, compiled in 1988, called for plans for a 
high-technology belt, and assigned first priority to making 
technology the nucleus of development of the prefecture. Of 
special note as one implementation of the development plans for 
the prefecture, we must cite the establishment of the Japan 
Ultra-High Temperature Materials Research Institute (JUTEMI) and 
Japan Ultra-High Temperature Materials Center (JUTEM). 
  The center and the institute received funding for a 
Mechanism 
for Development of New Energy and Industrial Technology based on 
the Improvement of R&amp;D Infrastructure Law and began 
operation in 
April 1992 receiving funding also from regional public 
corporations in Yamaguchi and Gifu prefectures and from private 
corporations. They have attracted a world authority in this 
field, professor emeritus Ryohei Tanaka of the Tokyo Institute 
of Technology. They offer outstanding, world-class test 
environments for studying new materials under ultra high 
temperatures. 
  Our mission is to have it grow as a focal point for 
research, 
emanating from Yamaguchi, extending out to the world at large. 
While we have made substantial progress in developing the 
center, general awareness of it is low, so we are concentrating 
on seeing just how to publicize it and plan for increasing its 
utilization. In order to establish and cultivate sophisticated 
urban service industries that will contribute to development of 
a high-level industrial infrastructure, we were authorized to 
develop a ``brain center'' concept in June 1992, and we are 
currently engaged in implementing the plan. Also, in order to 
place a major emphasis on cultivating local human resources in 
software, we are constructing an optoelectronics software park, 
pursuant to the regional software law 
  This is the tenth year since Yamaguchi was designated by the 
Technopolis Law. 
  In March of this year, we formulated a basic plan for 
technology development for the prefecture, with a view towards 
the year 2000 (the Intertech Yamaguchi Plan), based on the 
realization that technology-centered industrial development will 
reach its second stage, which will be a large step forward. 
  According to this scheme, we will establish a concrete base 
for developing technology in the hardware area, and a creative 
core technology for the prefecture in the software area. We are 
thus aiming at raising the level of technology in Yamaguchi 
prefecture as a whole, by promoting technology exchange that 
focuses on the industry-wide dimension, using this as leverage 
to establish a high-level industrial infrastructure. We also 
wish to create long-term employment opportunities, emphasizing 
our young people in particular. 
  We are just now beginning to evaluate, on the basis of this 
conception, how we should basically provide for and complete the 
existing industrial technology centers in the prefecture in 
order to create a core technology base for the prefecture. 
  At the same time, we are making great efforts to promote the 
science and engineering that form the foundations for industrial 
technology. The Yamaguchi Prefecture Council for the Promotion 
of Science and Technology, whose members include Dr. Heisuke 
Hironaka of our prefecture, is currently formulating a policy 
for promotion of science and technology in the prefecture. We 
have established a regional foundation for the promotion of 
science and technology and using this as a basic source we have 
established a prize for the promotion of science and technology 
and are also vigorously supporting basic scientific R&amp;D. We 
are 
also fully aware that one major issue is to determine just how 
we can, through exchanges among the corporations, skilfully 
utilize the very high level of accomplishments in technology and 
technical personnel possessed by the large corporations in our 
prefecture in order to raise the levels of small businesses. 
Currently, we are providing various kinds of support emphasizing 
mainly technology development projects, in such places as the 
Shunan Regional and Local Industrial Promotion Center, and the 
Yamaguchi-Bofu Center for Promotion of Industrial Arts and Local 
Industries. 
  In particular, in order to form a high quality technology 
complex consisting of regional small businesses with high 
technical sophistication, to support them in venturing into new 
fields, we are in the process of implementing as a management 
resource the Plan for the Activation of the Shunan Regional 
Small Business Complex, which was approved on 31 March of this 
year. 
  We are deeply involved in a project for constructing of a 
town built of new materials aimed at producing an environment 
that will make it easy for machine parts manufacturers that 
provide technical support to industries to manifest their 
creativity. and in a project to construct large-scale, high 
standard industrial parks that are appropriate to industrial 
activity in this age of technology. In this fashion, we are 
striving hard to establish Yamaguchi as a Technology Prefecture 
and in Yamaguchi, we have the Engineering Department of 
Yamaguchi University which boasts a the largest enrollment of 
new students in the Chuubu-Shikoku area numbering 640. Soon the 
Yamaguchi Junior College Branch of The Science University of 
Tokyo will become a four-year institution. We also have 
educational institutions such as the industrial high schools in 
Ube and Tokuyama, which are very well equipped for technology 
education. By aggressively strengthening collaboration among 
industry, government, and academia we wish to promote the 
development of industry based on these technologies. 

