CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Valeriy Georgiyevich Shelkovnikov, chairman of </F>
"Rosaeronavigatsiya," the Commission for Air Traffic Control: 
"The Frontier of Reliability"] 
  [Text] We heard this name for the first time in 1992. 
Some people viewed the appearance of "Rosaeronavigatsiya" with 
doubt, but others expressed hope that there would be positive 
changes and that order would be brought to Russia's airways, as 
well as to the UVD [Air Traffic Control--ATC] Service itself. 
For many people these hopes were linked with the name of Valeriy 
Georgiyevich Shelkovnikov, the chairman of the Commission for 
Air Traffic Control. Employees of the capital's ATC Service had 
recommended him for this post. Persons who have been in civil 
aviation for more than a year know V.G. Shelkovnikov well. He 
worked in polar aviation, supervised the group testing "Start," 
the first automated system, and headed the TsUVD and GlavUVD MGA 
[Air Traffic Control Central Administration and Air Traffic 
Control Main Administration of the Ministry of Civil Aviation]. 
He is the president of the International Fund for Aviation 
Safety. And now he is once again in the ATC Service. The 
journal's editorial staff asked V.G. Shelkovnikov to tell us 
about the commission he heads and problems in organizing and 
controlling the traffic on Russia's air routes. 
  The creation of "Rosaeronavigatsiya," the Commission for Air 
Traffic Control, was a logical and natural step taken by the 
Russian Federation Government to improve the system for airspace 
use and air traffic control. I will not list all the tasks faced 
by the commission and its functions. I will specify only the 
main directions of its activity. 
  They include developing and introducing a system for 
airspace 
use and supervising adherence to it; organizing the airspace, 
making it available for use, and controlling air traffic; and 
coordinating the activity of ministries , departments, and 
airspace users, as well as interacting with international 
organizations on matters within the commission's competence. 
  Having worked for nearly 30 years in the ATC Service, I know 
all its internal and external problems firsthand and I am very 
familiar with its development. 
  Back in 1921, the Russian Government issued a decree on air 
travel. Even then they had to bring order to the airspace for 
the Sikorskiy, Tupolev, Polikarpov, and all kinds of Fokkers and 
Junkers airplanes to fly safely. But years went by before the 
Unified ATC System was formed in the country. 
  In 1960, the USSR Council of Ministers issued a decree "On 
establishment of a Unified State System for Automated Control of 
Air Traffic" which was to be implemented in three stages. 
However, only the first part of the work--the improvement of 
individual technical facilities--was carried out over the next 4 
years. 
  A draft of basic ATC regulations for the country and a 
preliminary draft for the organization by stages of the Unified 
State System for Air Traffic Control were worked out in the 
mid-1960's. But no further action was taken on these drafts. 
  By the beginning of 1970, the ATC system that existed was in 
such condition that a specially formed commission consisting of 
representatives from all the ministries and departments 
concerned issued a categorical statement: unless organizational 
and technical measures are taken without delay the ATC system 
can expect an extremely severe crisis, and the Unified State ATC 
System must be established over the next 3 years. Alas, after 3 
years civil aviation did not have a well-organized ATC Service, 
just the CPSU Central Committee and USSR Council of Ministers 
decree approving proposals by the Ministry of Defense and the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation to establish a Unified ATC System for 
civil and military aircraft in the 1973-1980 period. More than 
10 years passed before this system was established. It belonged 
to two departments--the Air Forces and the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation. This was its main drawback, and unfortunately, it was 
not the only one. The ATC system that was established was not 
unified, but combined. 
  Structurally and functionally, the system was unjustifiably 
complicated. The same may be said of the territorial and 
departmental division of the airspace. The system's technical 
level left much to be desired. In addition to everything else, 
it was very cumbersome--a great deal of work would be required 
to reorganize it in a critical situation. 
  There were other drawbacks as well. Long before work had 
been 
completed on formation of the Unified ATC System, it became 
clear that it was not meeting the essential requirements and 
needed considerable improvement. The collisions by aircraft 
which resulted in the loss of life and equipment each year were 
eloquent testimony of this. From 1974 to 1985, there were 19 
collisions between aircraft in flight. 
  The specialists continued to insist that the Unified ATC 
System become really unified and that it should be a state 
system. This question, as well as the question of technical 
improvement of the ATC Service, was raised repeatedly at various 
levels beginning in 1980, but the decisions needed were not made. 
  The political and economic changes which began in the USSR 
made the functioning of the services in organizing and 
controlling air traffic even more complicated. Air traffic 
control had to be adapted to the new realities, particularly to 
the existence of dozens of independent air transport firms and 
airlines. A problem arose in the training of specialists for the 
ATC Service: as a result of the collapse of the USSR, the 
principal centers training air traffic controllers turned out to 
be outside Russia--in Riga and Kirovograd. As before, the ATC 
Service continues to be inadequately provided with technical 
equipment. More than 40 percent of the equipment in use is now 
worn out. This figure will be doubled in about 5 years. I do not 
think I have to say what this will mean for Russian aviation as 
a whole. To all this we have to add the fact that there are 
numerous budgetary--and not only budgetary--enterprises and 
organizations that are going through these difficult times, with 
chaos in the economy, inflation, and galloping price increases... 
  The country's airspace is divided into eight zones today. 
The 
total length of airways in Russia is 600,000 kilometers; there 
are 125,000 kilometers of international airways and 300,000 
kilometers in the upper airspace. There are more than 2,500 
airports, including 400 main airports and 29 international 
airports. About 500 airports are equipped with technical and 
flight support facilities. Only 12 of the 132 rayon ATC centers 
are equipped with secondary radar facilities. Only the two 
integrated ATC rayons--Moscow and Rostov--have rayon automated 
ATC systems. The Moscow Air Traffic Zone and the rayons for 
another 11 airports have automatic airport ATC systems with a 
varying degree of automation. Eighteen Russian airports meet 
ICAO [International Civil Aviation Organization] Category I 
requirements and six airports meet Category II requirements. 
  The remaining ATC rayons and airports have mostly obsolete 
equipment and do not meet ICAO requirements. Naturally, this has 
a negative effect on the quality of support for flights in 
Russian airspace and does not enable us to fully provide for the 
needs of foreign airlines interested in flights over our 
territory. 
  But this is not the only problem. Unfortunately, I have to 
state that the level of our air traffic safety is declining. In 
1990 it was nearly 1.5 times lower than the average level of 
countries in the ICAO and three to four times lower than the 
level of air traffic safety in the United States. Unless steps 
are taken, the level of air traffic safety in Russia by the year 
2000 will be four times lower than the average level in ICAO 
countries and six times lower than in developed countries. 
  Well, there is one more fact that is not very pleasant. The 
annual economic losses incurred by airspace users because of 
deficiencies in our ATC system add up to about 1.2 billion 
rubles and no less than 70 million American dollars. Inefficient 
consumption of aviation fuel is reaching nearly 1 million metric 
tons. 
  So the newly formed Commission for Air Traffic Control, 
"Rosaeronavigatsiya," has to resolve a considerable number of 
complex and important problems. But one's hands accomplish what 
intimidates the eye, as they say. In April last year, the 
Russian Government issued the Decree "On modernizing the Unified 
System for Organizing Air Traffic in the Russian Federation." In 
addition, there is an order from the Russian minister of 
transportation separating the subunits engaged in air traffic 
control and the operation of electronic and communications 
equipment from those civil aviation enterprises that are being 
converted to shareholding and privatized. The measures 
stipulated by these documents are aimed primarily at stopping 
the ATC Service's slide into a deep crisis and at creating 
prerequisites for the organization of state enterprises which 
organize and control air traffic based on ATC services which 
have been separated from the structures of airports and 
airlines. Later on, these organizations will be united in the 
Russian system for airspace use and air traffic control. 
"Krasnoyarskaeronavigatsiya," the Moscow and Rostov AUVD 
[Automated ATC] centers, "Tyumenaeronavigatsiya," and other 
enterprises have already joined the "Rosaeronavigatsiya" system 
as independent structures. 
  It is planned--and this is particularly important--to 
implement the principle of state regulation of activity 
associated with airspace use and in the technical field, the use 
of the latest achievements of science and technology, including 
advanced space equipment and technology. 
  The Program for Organization of Air Traffic in the Russian 
Federation Up to the Year 2005 has also been drafted. The 
program takes into account the plans for modernizing the 
existing system which are already being implemented, as well as 
the plans developed by the international GATCC consortium and 
the French Thompson-CSF firm. Everything set forth in the 
program has been coordinated with the corresponding programs in 
the ICAO European region and is aimed at interaction and 
integration with foreign systems for air traffic organization 
based on unified standards, technologies, and technical 
facilities. 
  In 10 or 11 years, the domestic system for OVD [air traffic 
organization] will be provided with new equipment of higher 
quality. Satellite systems for communications, navigation, and 
observation will be in active use; they will provide support for 
flights by "looking" at the lowest altitudes and in the rayons 
hardest to reach. Adaptive automated ATC systems with elements 
of artificial intelligence; digital flight control and 
navigation complexes for aircraft which make it possible to fly 
automatically from takeoff to landing; highly accurate 
interrogating secondary radar; aircraft landing systems in the 
centimetric-wave band; aircraft collision warning systems; and a 
great deal more which we can only dream about today will make 
their appearance. 
  Work is already under way to implement the first part of 
this 
program. Over the next 2 years, we will modernize the 
organizational and functional structure and the financing 
mechanism to provide for the operation and development of air 
traffic organization, as well as technical equipment of 
international airways; introduce resource-saving technologies in 
air traffic control; and carry out scientific testing of 
elements in the future system--primarily satellite 
communications and navigation facilities. We will also have to 
resolve the problem of training specialists for our service. A 
world-class ATC operations simulation center will be established 
in Moscow and an ATC training center will be established in 
Krasnoyarsk. 
  The program's second stage provides for creation of 
technical 
infrastructure, based on satellite communications and navigation 
facilities, capable of unimpeded functional and territorial 
expansion and rapid increase in the throughput system where this 
is necessary. The air traffic organization system will acquire 
on-board and ground-based facilities to ensure flight safety and 
regularity and reduce the inefficient uses of airspace. 
  In the year 2001, implementation of the third part of the 
program will become a reality: the requirements of airspace 
users for OVD services will be fully met and our system will be 
integrated with the regional system of Western Europe. After the 
year 2005, we will be able to speak about integrating the 
Russian system for air traffic organization with the world air 
navigation infrastructure. 
  Thus far I have spoken about the work planned for the 
future. 
But we have quite a few daily tasks which are no less important 
than those incorporated in the long-term programs. For example, 
we attach a great deal of importance to the expansion of airways 
and their straightening. The latter is especially important, 
because it enables us to reduce flight time and save fuel. We 
are devoting our main attention today to the international 
routes, and that is understandable, since by expanding them and 
bringing our technical equipment up to date, we are attracting 
foreign shippers and hence an influx of capital and foreign 
exchange. 
  It must be said that the managers in local areas, meaning 
the 
heads of administrations in various rayons and krays, are giving 
us all kinds of support, because they realize that in the final 
analysis, increasing the activity of foreign air shippers will 
have a positive effect on the economic development of their 
regions. 
  We are also collaborating actively with foreign partners. 
They in turn are showing interest in cooperation with us, for 
the shortest route to countries of the Asia-Pacific region for 
many Western airlines is through Russia's territory. Last year 
more than 10 new international airways were opened in the Far 
East alone. An international air route from Western Europe to 
Tokyo which will be 400 kilometers shorter than the current 
Trans-Siberian mainlines is now being developed. Financing and 
modernization of ATC air navigation facilities on this airway, 
as well as the designing, construction, and equipment of control 
towers with technical facilities, are being arranged with the 
help of domestic and foreign firms. 
  We have held talks with American firms such as Delta and 
Alaska [Airlines] and Booz, Allen and Hamilton, and with 
representatives of the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency [sic]. We are 
coordinating new international air routes and the conditions for 
their use with them. We are not refusing economic assistance 
from our American partners. Thus, the U.S. Trade and Development 
Agency has provided a grant to establish the technical and 
economic feasibility to build a simulation complex to train air 
traffic controllers and modernize the ATC system in the Far East. 
  One journal article is not sufficient to describe all 
aspects 
of the Commission for Air Traffic Control. But I hope I have 
succeeded in throwing light on the main objective of 
"Rosaeronavigatsiya"--to build a system for organizing air 
traffic that aircraft crews and passengers flying in Russia's 
airspace will associate with concepts such as reliability and 
safety. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Grazhdanskaya aviatsiya", 1994 

