BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 27 (CNA) -- The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs Friday [27 May] declined comment on the US decision to 
renew most-favored-nation (MFN) trade privileges to Mainland 
China. 
  "It is our established policy not to get involved in 
Washington-Beijing relations," the ministry said in a news 
release. "We, therefore, will not comment on the MFN issue." 
  Nevertheless, the ministry said it hopes the United States 
will not reduce its concern about human rights conditions on the 
mainland even though president Bill Clinton has decided to sever 
the link between trade and human rights. 
  The ministry further said it believes Mainland China's 
sustained economic development and growing trade with the 
outside world will help boost social and political reforms in 
the Asia-Pacific region. 
  Meanwhile, the Board of Foreign Trade (BOFT) said the US 
renewal of MFN trade privileges to the mainland will not affect 
Taiwan's exports to the American market. 
  Tsai Lien-sheng, a BOFT department director, said computers 
and electronic products are Taiwan's main exports to the US, 
while labor-intensive goods, such as toys, footwear and 
textiles, form the bulk of mainland exports to that market. 
  "With different product structures, Taiwan has nothing to 
lose in the US decision to renew Mainland China's MFN status," 
Tsai noted. 
  He added Taiwan manufacturers should continue developing 
high 
value-added products and upgrading production technology in 
order to maintain their niches in the US market. 
  The Chinese National Federation of Industries, one of the 
largest trade associations here, said it welcomes the US renewal 
of MFN privileges for the mainland. 
  "Taiwan-owned companies on the mainland will benefit from 
such a decision," the federation said. The US remains the most 
important market for products produced by mainland-based Taiwan 
firms, including toys, garments, bicycles and consumer 
electronics. 
  Clinton announced Thursday he will renew Mainland China's 
MFN 
trade status even though Beijing still commits serious human 
rights abuses. MFN is accorded the vast majority of US trading 
partners and allows them to sell goods in the US at the lowest 
possible tariff rate. 

