Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H3>  Eliminate Duplicate Research Through Rationalization and 
Specialization by Field </H3>
  To strengthen basic, creative research, the Agency of 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) of the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI) has begun to restructure 
Government Industrial Research Institutes located in regional 
areas. The plan is to change from the conventional multifaceted 
research and development program to specialization by field 
founded on regional characteristics. AIST initiated a 
large-scale restructuring in January of this year by 
reorganizing its Tsukuba laboratories. This undertaking will 
spread to other regions. The objectives are to eliminate 
duplicate research as much as possible throughout AIST, to 
rationalize research activities while advancing the priority 
allocation of research appropriations, and to further strengthen 
basic, creative research. 
  According to AIST, the plan is to establish future research 
pillars for specialized fields by having Hokkaido GIRI use the 
research resources at its Microgravity Laboratory and perform 
research on cold region biotechnology; Tohoku GIRI, research 
metals; Nagoya GIRI, fine ceramics; Osaka GIRI, functional 
materials; Chugoku GIRI, ocean environment research; Shikoku 
GIRI, marine resources; and Kyushu GIRI, natural resources. 
  Each region has unique characteristics and an established 
research base. For example, in Kamisunagawa, Hokkaido, the 
invention of materials for use in a microgravity environment is 
being tackled based at the only microgravity research facility 
in Japan. Also, in the Chugoku region, the closed marine region 
of Japan's Inland Sea is used for research on marine 
environments. In Kyushu, natural resources like coal and clay 
are used to advance research on environmentally friendly 
materials. 
  AIST will revise its administrative rules and change the 
name 
``Government Industrial Research Institute'' to ``Government 
Industrial Research Laboratory,'' effective October 1 of this 
year. It was decided that the change to an appropriate name was 
important given the true state of research. With the shift 
towards basic, creative research, in addition to advancing 
multifaceted research, for instance, in biotechnology, new 
materials, and mechatronics, specialization in specific fields 
was planned for each research laboratory. 
  This restructuring will not take place over a short period 
of 
time, but will proceed over the next five to 10 years at AIST. 
The policy is to further the appointment, placement, and 
transfer of researchers, and the provision of facilities. 

