Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] There are perspectives for certain sectors of the 
national economy to begin recovering in 1994. This was stated by 
Politburo member Carlos Lage during a visit to Ciego de Avila. 
[Words indistinct] has demonstrated its capability to resist and 
its conviction to maintain the principles of socialism. 
  [Being Lage recording] I believe that the perspectives have 
to be seen not only in the context of one year but in the next 
few years. I believe the country has all the possibilities so 
that [words indistinct] begin and develop in the next few years. 
It will be -- I would add -- a slow recovery. It will be a step 
by step recovery. 
  The difficulties are great and the resource limitations are 
severe and will continue in 1994. The resources for 1994 are 
closely tied to the result of the last harvest, which was 4.27 
million tons of sugar, and these resources seriously affect the 
preparation of the resources with which the economy has to 
operate in 1994. Therefore, we have to be aware that this is 
also going to be a very difficult year, a year filled with many 
difficulties. However, we think that this year certain 
activities of the economy might begin to experience a better 
situation. 
  Of course, in the conditions our country lives, we have to 
to 
make all these projections keeping in mind that there are 
factors we cannot control, which are not dependent on our 
possibilities. After losing our highly stable foreign economic 
relations, we are dependent on sugar and oil world market 
prices. The conditions of the blockade give our economy very few 
opportunities to protect itself from price factors. 
  Keeping in mind the conditions in which we are beginning 
this 
year, we believe that certain activities might begin to recover, 
such as the sugar industry. I believe that we will overcome the 
special period being more efficient, more aware of the 
conservation of resources, and with more rationality. [end 
recording] 

