BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Lin Sha (2651 3097): "Causes of, and </F>
Countermeasures Against, Losses in State-Owned Enterprises"] 
  [Text] State-owned enterprises are a leading force in 
China's national economy and the main source of national 
revenue. The losses made by some state-owned enterprises over a 
long period of time is a hot topic of general concern to the 
public. Thoroughly studying the causes of the serious losses 
and formulating strong and steady countermeasures to curb losses 
and increase profits have become very immediate tasks. 
<H5>  I. It Is Necessary To Thoroughly Analyze the Causes of </H5>
Losses Made By State-Owned Enterprises 
  There are many reasons why state-owned enterprises make 
losses and these are roughly as follows: 
  1. The Policy Factor. 
  At present, some state-owned enterprise losses are 
caused by the as yet unstraightened cost relationships and the 
rather low prices fixed by the government for their 
products. Across the country, the industries on which 
losses are concentrated, such as the coal and oil industries, 
are mainly affected by the policy factor and their losses are 
comparatively great. What these industries produce have a 
bearing on all trades and industries and tens of thousands of 
households. They are important bulk materials and the State 
adopts a particularly prudent attitude toward their prices. 
However, given the fact that 90 percent of consumer goods and 
70 percent of the means of production have already had their 
price controls lifted, the fact that their prices are 
continually rising and the low transfer prices of the products 
whose prices are fixed by the government, it is unavoidable that 
these enterprises make losses because they "buy at high prices, 
sell at low prices, and are pressed at both ends." 
  2. The irrational factors left over from the traditional 
structure. 
  Although the "Regulations on Changing the Management 
Mechanism of Industrial Enterprises Owned by the Whole People" 
have been promulgated, rather serious problems still exist in 
the management mechanism of state-owned enterprises. First, 
they have not all had their decisionmaking rights guaranteed. 
State-owned enterprises have not had government administration 
separated from enterprise management and government supervisory 
departments still exercise too much, and too rigid, control over 
them with the result that their initiative for production and 
management is greatly affected and they cannot proceed smoothly 
in acquiring new equipment and producing new generations of 
products. Second, the enterprise management responsibility 
mechanism is unsound. Although enterprises have some 
responsibilities for production and management, their property 
rights relationships have not been thoroughly settled. This 
determines that they can continue to use the state's "iron bowl" 
and they still do not assume responsibility for management risks 
or even for bankruptcy. Third, the enterprise interest 
mechanism is insufficient. There has not been much change in 
the situation which has been formed for a long time whereby "the 
government manages enterprises and the enterprises manage 
society" and enterprises' burden from society is still rather 
heavy. 
  As the planned economy is changing to a market economy, 
some contradictions which accumulated over the years under the 
old structure have gradually been exposed, causing many 
state-owned enterprises to shoulder too heavy a burden, lack 
stamina for development, be incapable of adjusting to market 
changes, and to get bogged down in losses. First, their 
financial and debt burdens are heavy. According to 
statistics from Hebei Province, as of the end of 1992, the 
long-term borrowings by the economically independent industrial 
enterprises at and above the township level across the province 
had reached 30 billion yuan. Special loans to the industrial 
enterprises within the budget totaled 18 billion yuan, of which 
medium-term outstanding loans stood at 3.9 billion yuan and 
losses not yet made good came to 1.7 billion yuan plus 3.7 
billion yuan in hidden losses [qian kui 3383 5719]. 
Second, enterprises are overstaffed and shoulder a heavy 
burden. Ordinary state-owned enterprises have 
approximately 20 to 30 percent redundant staff. Since the 
current social security system is unsound, it is difficult to 
place them in society. Moreover, there is a high percentage of 
retired personnel. The retired personnel in ordinary 
state-owned enterprises account for 20 percent or more of their 
total staff and workers and those in some enterprises even 
account for 50 percent. At present, the yearly public insurance 
expenditure for state-owned enterprises across the country comes 
to 30 billion yuan. Third, machinery is outdated, 
technology and expertise are backward, and consumption is 
high. The current loss-making enterprises are mostly 
China's key enterprises. Under the old planned economic 
structure, their profits were all turned over to the State, 
their depreciation rates were low, and they were unable to carry 
out major technological transformation. As a result, they are 
backward in technology and equipment, their products are poor in 
quality and highly priced, and they have lost competitiveness. 
  3. The economic operation factor. 
  Since last year, China's industrial output and fixed 
assets investments have increased by too much, the restriction 
of the factors of production has further been consolidated and 
the restriction of resources has become increasingly salient. 
This is firstly reflected by the short supply of energy 
resources and raw and semifinished materials and their 
continually rising costs. The state has readjusted the 
prices of coal, crude oil, electricity, and transportation and 
has twice increased the interest rates for bank loans and 
increased the wages of staff and workers. The enterprises 
themselves have had difficulty digesting these factors of 
increasing expenditures and decreasing profits, which have 
pushed costs up considerably and so some profit-making 
enterprises have begun to make losses or increase their losses. 
According to an estimate by Hebei Province, industrial 
enterprises at and above the township level across the province 
had to pay an additional 760 million yuan, representing 88.4 
percent of the new losses, as a result of the rising costs of 
raw and semifinished materials, electricity, and transportation, 
as well as the increased wages of staff and workers. As price 
controls on crude fuels are being lifted and oil and grain 
prices are being increased this year, this will push costs up 
further. Second, the grim financial situation, fund 
shortages, the resurgent "debt chain," and the increase of funds 
in arrears have both aggravated the contradictions of fund 
shortages and increased the interest burden of enterprises. 
Moreover, the proportion of debt owed by loss-making 
enterprises is high and banks do not grant loans under normal 
circumstances. Therefore, some enterprises have reduced 
production somewhat, reduced production by half, or even 
suspended production. Furthermore, enterprise circulating funds 
are mainly borrowed from banks and the funds owned by 
enterprises are seriously insufficient, so they operate with 
debt in arrears and shoulder too great a burden. 
  4. New problems arising amid reform and opening up. 
  Implementation of the new fiscal and accounting systems 
and the new taxation system causes some profit-making 
enterprises to make losses or incur heavier losses. These 
are new circumstances arising amid reform and opening up. The 
new reformed accounting system which uses new accounting methods 
such as: Calculating the reserves for bad debts; speeding up 
depreciation, including current expenses in current profits and 
losses; and which is intended to increase the operational funds 
of enterprises and enhance their stamina for development are 
completely necessary for the long-term development of 
enterprises. However, this has also increased their costs and 
this, coupled with the exposure of hidden losses, has caused the 
lowering of book profits and increased losses. According to 
Shandong statistics, as a result of implementing the new fiscal 
and accounting system, in 1993, local state-owned industrial 
enterprises within the province's budget had a decrease in book 
profits of 1.326 billion yuan and additional losses of 500 
million yuan, with 250 new loss-making enterprises emerging. On 
the whole, the implementation of the new taxation system does 
not increase the burden on enterprises but, due to changes in 
the tax structure and the taxable categories, the tax burden on 
some enterprises will increase and their losses will also 
increase. 5. The enterprise internal management factor. 
  The fact that some enterprises make profits and others make 
losses given the same external environment shows that they are 
not all worthless. Most loss-making enterprises have made this 
or that policy mistake and have varying degrees of improper 
operation and management as well as other problems. These are 
operational losses. At present, it is generally true that 
operational factors affect the enterprise profits. This is 
mainly reflected by the following: First, enterprises lack 
strict scientific management of their production and operation, 
do not have a fixed work force, do not calculate materials 
consumption, do not have quality inspection, do not give clear 
awards and punishments, the utilization rates of their capital, 
equipment, and manpower are low, and their waste is serious. 
Second, blindness sometimes exists in certain aspects of 
management decisionmaking. Without seizing the opportunity for 
development, they often do not resolutely and scientifically 
adapt to the unpredictably changing market demands. They either 
hesitate and initiate projects too late or engage in precipitate 
and indiscriminate production. Third, the leaders of some 
loss-making enterprises engage in short-term behavior. During 
their terms of office, they hold views of temporary management 
and lopsidedly satisfy the immediate interests of staff and 
workers and are not willing to make great efforts at 
technological transformation and at producing new generations of 
products. Some even hide themselves under the protective 
umbrella of the state's "policy-permitted losses." They hold an 
indifferent attitude toward losses, feel no pressure, and are 
without motivation. The leaders of some enterprises have their 
incomes increased rather than decreased. Precisely due to the 
weaknesses in the enterprise management mechanism, these 
negative ideas and acts are produced. In the absence of 
effective restrictive measures, it is not easy for these 
loss-making enterprises to curb losses and increase profits on 
their own initiative. 
  It should be pointed out that enterprises used to make 
comparatively small losses under the planned economic structure 
because the state covered their hidden losses with large 
subsidies and by supplying cheap raw and semifinished materials. 
As they are changing to a socialist market economy, it is a 
normal phenomenon and conforms to objective economic laws that 
loss-making enterprises exist. They are both the direct 
result of the competition between enterprises and a 
characteristic in the course of readjusting the industrial 
structure. At present, China is in a crucial period where the 
old structure is changing to a new one. Following the 
introduction of a series of important reform measures, such as 
readjusting the prices of some means of production, increasing 
the interest rates for bank loans, and readjusting the original 
industrial structure which is seriously irrational, it is 
unavoidable that loss-making enterprises will increase. 
  But we should see that of the many factors that 
contribute to the serious losses currently incurred by 
state-owned enterprises, the factor of normal losses and the 
factor of abnormal losses coexist, intertwine with each other, 
and should be analyzed in a scientific way. In this way, we 
should find the specific reasons why China's enterprises do not 
achieve high economic efficiency and then find the solution. 
<H5>  II. Resolve the Problem of Losses Incurred by State-Owned </H5>
Enterprises Through Reform 
  We should establish a socialist market economic structure so 
that there will be new historical conditions for the thorough 
resolution of the long-term problem of state-owned enterprises' 
achieving low economic efficiency. However, the market economic 
structure has to be established through reform and continuously 
improved. Therefore, only by further deepening reform can we 
once and for all resolve the problem of serious losses incurred 
by state-owned enterprises. 
  1. Deepening reform and changing the mechanism are the key 
to curbing losses and increasing profits. 
  Loss-making enterprises are the necessary cost to be paid 
for 
social and economic development. The point now is that losses 
have not become a driving force for the readjustment of the 
industrial structure and of the product mix and are not able to 
promote the flow and restructuring of assets. Although many 
state-owned enterprises make losses for years while the state no 
longer grants them subsidies, yet their losses are normally 
registered in the account book and some losses are, in practice, 
compensated for through increased loans. Fundamentally 
speaking, this practice whereby enterprises appear to assume 
responsibility for their performance but, in fact, do not assume 
any responsibility is caused by China's current enterprise 
system. The background to the unseparated government 
administration and enterprise management, which has long 
prevented state-owned enterprises from eradicating losses, is 
that government administration and capital are unseparated, 
namely that the government's function of social and economic 
management is not separated from the function of the owner of 
state assets. The background to the difficulty in guaranteeing 
enterprises' decisionmaking rights is the undefined property 
rights system. The background to the unsound self-restricting 
mechanism of enterprises is that there is no strict property 
rights restriction. Behind enterprise nonstandard behavior is 
the fact that enterprise owners are absent from management. We 
can say that all of the deep- seated problems regarding 
state-owned enterprise losses are directly related to the 
current enterprise system and its property rights relationship. 
Therefore, the key to curbing losses is to straighten out 
property rights relationships, establish the property rights of 
enterprise legal entities, change the management mechanism of 
state- owned enterprises, establish a modern enterprise system 
in which the "property rights as well as the rights and 
responsibilities of enterprises are clearly defined, government 
administration and enterprise management are separated, and 
scientific management is established," so that enterprises can 
become independent legal entities which operate independently 
and assume sole responsibility for profits and losses, receive 
economic interests, and assume responsibility for management 
risks. This is the market economy's essential demand on 
enterprises. Only by having enterprises operate independently 
and assume sole responsibility for profits and losses, can they 
become qualified competitors in the market, can they actively 
respond to market signals, and can effective market competition 
be established. 
  After we have defined property rights and thoroughly 
separated government administration and enterprise management, 
the functions of the government as the administrator of society 
and as the asset owner are separated and the control and 
management of state-owned assets are separated. The reaminder 
are only operational losses and thus the fittest will survive. 
When enterprises make losses, they should have their legal 
entities' assets reduced, whether they are purely state-owned 
enterprises or joint-stock enterprises which own state-owned 
assets. If an enterprise makes losses for a long time and its 
funds are insufficient to repay its debts, it should be declared 
bankrupt according to the provisions of the "Bankruptcy Law" and 
its managers and all its staff and workers will suffer losses 
such as losing their jobs. In the meantime, it is also 
necessary to remove all obstacles to property rights entering 
the market and establish a sound mechanism for asset 
restructuring. We cannot just compel loss-making enterprises to 
curb losses and increase profits but we must also enable 
enterprises which always make losses to have repeated 
opportunities for development. 
  2. Creating a fine external environment is the precondition 
for curbing losses and increasing profits. 
  The government should have a great determination to 
thoroughly change its functions, properly manage its own 
affairs, and delegate those functions which they should not 
retain. This is a big question regarding how the 
superstructure suits the economic foundation and promotes 
economic development. If no substantive progress is made in 
this respect, it is difficult to deepen reform or to curb losses 
and increase profits. To be specific, first, the 
government needs to exercise proper macroeconomic regulation and 
control and prevent great fluctuations in economic growth. 
It should, for example, properly control the scale of 
investment in fixed assets, otherwise it will disrupt the 
balance between the credit, financial, foreign exchange, and 
materials systems, causing a grim financial situation and 
mounting inflationary pressure. If so, industrial enterprises 
will have difficulty in maintaining normal production, let alone 
improving returns. Second, it is necessary to improve 
social service and change it to a reality wherein the government 
attends to society. Only by paying close attention to 
amplifying the social security system and to establishing the 
reemployment mechanism, removing various unequal policy 
environments as soon as possible, and surrendering the current 
enterprise function of attending to society back to the 
government can we make state-owned enterprises lay down their 
burden and develop without a burden. Third, the 
government should strengthen guidance for industrial 
policies. It is necessary to readjust the product mix with 
industrial policies so as to reduce the great losses arising 
from structural contradictions. 
  Moreover, we should formulate loss-curbing policies under 
the guidance of industrial policies and should support 
loss-making enterprises which engage in new industries, 
promoting the upgrading of their management and technology and 
equipment so that they can curb losses and increase profits. As 
for those loss-making enterprises engaged in sunset industries, 
we should switch them to other lines of production or declare 
them bankrupt. Fourth, it is necessary to actively and 
steadily proceed with price reform. Deepen price reform, 
remove price controls on all products that can enter the 
competitive market, subject their prices to the market, and 
prevent the government from interfering in the formation of 
their prices, so that the enterprises which produce and deal in 
these products can really become the main body of the market, 
creating conditions for enterprises to participate in fair 
competition. 
  3. Paying attention to the internal factors is the starting 
point for curbing losses and increasing profits, 
  The more important thing for enterprises is to 
thoroughly change the old habit of "waiting for, relying on, and 
asking from" the government and banks. Instead, they should 
look inward and make internal improvements. First, change the 
concepts and foster a strong market awareness. They should 
be in the forefront of market competition, organize production 
in keeping with market needs, quicken the pace of producing new 
generations of products, and make efforts to do better than 
others regarding product variety and quality and in new 
generations of products." Second, attach importance to 
product quality. Quality is the lifeblood of enterprises. 
They should foster the idea of putting quality first, 
vigorously proceed with and improve total quality control, 
establish a quality assurance system, and pay close attention to 
quality in various aspects. Third, strengthen enterprise 
internal management. As enterprises are having greater and 
greater decisionmaking rights, they should pay more attention to 
"strictness" and strengthen management. Their point is to 
strengthen the fundamental work of enterprise management and, 
particularly, to strengthen cost management, field management, 
equipment management, and group development, at the same time 
enforcing strict labor and processing discipline. Fourth, 
vigorously promote the technological progress of 
enterprises. In a period of speedy economic development, 
it is more necessary to rely on scientific and technological 
progress in order to curb losses and increase profits. By 
adopting new technologies, new techniques, new equipment, and 
new materials and enhancing the utilization rates of energy 
resources and raw materials, we miust insist on the road of 
mainly expanding the technological contents. Fifth, 
mobilize the masses and make concerted efforts to resolve the 
difficulties. It is necessary to bring into play the 
initiative and creativity of staff and workers and enhance their 
sense of assuming sole responsibility for profits and losses. 
It is necessary to adopt practical measures, such as 
stimulating staff and workers to put forward ideas and proposals 
and starting double-increases and double-savings [shuang zeng 
shuang jie 7175 1073 7175 4634] activities to really curb losses 
and increase profits. 
  4. Strengthen leadership is the necessary condition for 
curbing losses and increasing profits. 
  At the changeover of the old and new structures and with the 
unsound internal management mechanism of enterprises and the 
nonstraightened external environment, it is difficult to some 
extent to merely rely on an enterprise's own strength to improve 
its performance. Governments and supervisory departments at all 
levels should strengthen leadership of the work of curbing 
losses and increasing profits. First, establish the 
target responsibility system and further strengthen the 
mechanism of assuming responsibility for losses. It is 
necessary to delegate the target of curbing losses and 
increasing profits to enterprises, workshops, groups, and 
individuals and link the interests of staff and workers with the 
reduction and curbing of losses. Second, adopt specific 
loss-curbing policies. It is necessary to list the names 
of big loss-making units in the locality or in the trade, 
analyze the causes of losses in turn, put forward solutions, and 
set a time limit for them to curb or reduce losses. For those 
enterprises which have made losses over a long period of time 
and which are hopeless at curbing their losses, we should 
resolutely shut them down, suspend their operations, amalgamate 
them with other enterprises, or switch them to the manufacture 
of other products. Third, continue to pool and use the 
loss-curbing funds already established and help loss-making 
enterprises to curb losses and increase profits. In recent 
years, most places have set up special funds for curbing losses, 
supported and reinforced enterprise "blood-making" functions, 
and have obtained remarkable achievements. In the circumstances, 
the state should set aside some money to set up the loss-curbing 
funds and join hands with them in various provinces to curb 
enterprise losses. 

