Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ren Xingzhou (0117 5281 3166): "How To View This </F>
Year's Commodity Price Trends"] 
  [Text] Prices are the barometers of supply-demand 
relationships in the market. Whether or not market prices are 
stable affects the basic livelihood and immediate interests of 
the masses and also affects the stability of the economy and 
society. 
  Having now entered 1994, our country's economic development 
is to be maintained at quite a high speed. We are also entering 
a stage when the reforms will be engaged in some major assaults 
and will be meeting some obstacles, thus their strengths must 
also be appropriately increased. Facing the new situation of 
reform and development, what changes will the price situation 
see? What effects will the newly-instituted reform measures 
have on prices? This is one of the major hot topics to which 
people in all circles of society are paying close attention. 
Thus there is a need to carry out an objective and rational 
analysis. 
<H3>  1993: A Quite Large Increase in Prices But the Growth in 
People's Income Was Greater </H3>
  In all fairness, it must be stated that over the last 15 
years of reform, deep changes have occurred in the level of 
people's material lives and there has been quite a large 
increase in people's average incomes. However, at the same 
time, they have indeed witnessed an upward movement in prices. 
If people saw the price raises from the angle of hoping for 
high income and low prices, the results would have been mentally 
unsettling. 
  If we take 1993, the year just passed, as an example, 
beginning from the first quarter the price index was maintained 
at a quite high level and subsequently there were monthly 
increases. After March, the growth was double digit. In the 
month with the highest growth (August), prices were 15.1 percent 
up on the same period in the previous year, while in September, 
there was a fall-back in the growth figure as compared with 
August. Over the period January to September, the price index 
rose 12.1 percent as compared to the same period in 1992. This 
was particularly so with market prices and the prices of 
foodstuffs, clothing, and other industrial consumer goods and 
services also saw an overall rise. Over the period January to 
September, these saw increases of 18.1, 13.6, and 39.3 percent 
respectively. As these three types of commodities are essential 
in the people's lives, consumption elasticity is quite small and 
thus the effects of the price raises on people's lives was quite 
large. The feelings of the people regarding these price rises 
were also very intense. Because of these price raises, the 
household cost of living price index for the period January to 
September was 14.5 percent up. Although this increase did not 
exceed the people's capacity to bear increases, some of the new 
income they obtained was eaten up by price increases. It is 
understandable that the people were mentally unsettled by this. 
  Why were there such large increases in the price index last 
year? According to analyses by experts and authoritative 
departments, they were, overall, the result of the following 
factors: 
  First, there was an overly high rate of growth in the scale 
of investment in fixed assets throughout the society and this 
promoted price increases. On the one hand, seen from the law of 
supply and demand, demand exceeding supply will inevitably 
result in price rises. At present, while our country's capacity 
to supply the means of production has been increased through 
many years of reform, overall, it is still limited. Thus, the 
dramatic increase in the scale of fixed asset investment last 
year spurred increases in the prices of the means of production. 
The increases in the prices of the means of production meant 
that the costs of the enterprises providing the means of 
consumption rose and this inevitably produced increases in the 
prices of the means of consumption. In another respect, of the 
investment in fixed assets, a proportion (about 30 to 40 
percent) is, as wages, changed into people's income. The 
greater the scale of investment in fixed assets, the greater 
this amount of income and this will give rise to price raises 
from the consumer demand angle. 
  Second, last year, many price reform measures were put into 
effect and these also spurred a rise in the overall level of 
prices. For example, in the first half of last year, the 
government controlled sales prices for grain and oil were freed 
and the prices of basic raw materials such as steel, coal, and 
crude oil were either freed or greatly readjusted. The prices 
of housing, gas, water, electricity, and other services were 
raised, service charges were readjusted, and so on. These price 
reform measures also pushed the overall level of prices upwards. 
However, basically, the reform of prices is intended to more 
effectively reform the price system and price formation 
mechanisms and, seen from the long term viewpoint, it is 
extremely necessary. 
  Third, the delayed effects of the price reforms in 1992 also 
had an effect on prices in 1993 and, by habit, these are 
referred to as "protruding tail" [qiao wei 5062 1442] effects. 
For example, if the price adjustments started in April last 
year, the effects on the price index would continue until April 
this year. According to estimates, the influence of the 
"protruding tail" effect on the price index was about 4 
percentage points. In addition, the fall in exchange rates and 
other factors also affected prices. 
  In the many factors which pushed prices upward, there were 
also psychological factors on both the producer and consumer 
sides. For example, beginning in the last part of October last 
year, an increase in grain prices swept from the south to the 
north. To a great degree, this was the result of psychological 
factors. It was mainly due to the fact that some producers 
anticipated that the grain price would increase this year and 
were unwilling to sell grain. Some grain operational 
departments and some consumers were also afraid that the grain 
prices would increase this year and, as a result, they made 
panic purchases of grain. These factors obviously induced a 
rise in the price of grain. Some people also thought that 
home-use electrical appliances and other commodities would also 
rise in price and in some areas the phenomenon of panic 
purchasing of electrical home appliances appeared. According to 
general expectations, in years with bumper grain harvests, the 
market supply-demand contradiction will be alleviated and grain 
prices should not increase. However, last year, the situation 
was the reverse. This shows that the psychological immaturity 
of the consumers can give rise to an increase in prices. 
  Summing up the above, there was indeed a great increase in 
prices last year. This is a fact. However, in examining the 
issue of prices, we must look from an overall viewpoint. That 
is to say, we should not only look at the degree to which the 
price index has risen but also look at how much people's incomes 
have risen. In economics, there is the term "demand-driven" 
inflation. That is to say, when people's income grows too 
swiftly, it can form real demand for the means of consumption 
(or, purchasing power). When this demand is greater than 
supply, it will push up prices. Seen from the situation last 
year, the growth in people's income was quite swift. From 
January to September, the average monthly income was 29.4 
percent up. Excluding price rise factors, the actual increase 
was 12.7 percent. This quite rapid increase in income induced a 
rise in the prices of consumer products, especially foodstuffs 
and industrial consumer products and services. Of course, this 
is not to say that some people's actual standard of living did 
not decline as a result of the rise in their income being less 
than the increase in the level of prices. This problem should 
be dealt with through social security and other avenues. 
<H3>  1994: The Pressure of Inflation Will Still Exist But the 
Price Situation Does Not Look Too Pessimistic </H3>
  According to the analyses by relevant departments, we should 
not show unguarded optimism in respect of the price situation in 
1994 but neither need we be too pessimistic. Seen from the 
angle of consumers, it would be best to view price raises with a 
normal attitude. 
  Seen in terms of the inflationary pressure: 1. The 
investment expansion impulse will continue to exist. Beginning 
from the second half of last year, although the macroeconomic 
regulatory and control measures had begun to see some effect, 
the scale of budgeted social fixed-asset investment for the year 
still grew over 46 percent. In accordance with this year's 
policy of accelerated development and the spirit of the central 
economic work conference, the scale of fixed asset investment 
will be maintained at a quite high level. In addition, the 
scale of local extra-budgetary investment will be quite large 
and it will be difficult to control this. Such factors will put 
great pressure on market prices this year. 2. It is necessary 
to consider that the wage reforms in state organs and 
institutional units and the rise in enterprise wages which this 
will induce, will provide a great increase in the level of 
people's income. If this newly-increased income is put into the 
market, it will result in a rise in the prices of consumer 
goods. 3. The price reform measures which were put into effect 
last year will continue to have a "protruding tail" effect on 
prices this year. In addition, some new price readjustment 
measures will be introduced this year. These will also have an 
effect on market prices. 4. The prices of over 85 percent of 
the means of production and over 95 percent of the means of 
consumption have already been freed. The difficulty of 
supervising these prices has grown and, when supply and demand 
contradictions suddenly appear, it is easy for price raises to 
result. 5. Seen from the consumer mentality angle, the 
expectation of price raises is quite strong. When supply-demand 
contradictions appear, the powerful fluctuations in consumer 
psychology will exacerbate the price raises. These various 
factors show that in respect of the price situation, we cannot 
be too optimistic. It was also this which led the central 
economic work conference to put forward the requirement that 
this year, the rise in the price index should be kept to 10 
percent. 
  However, on this basis we cannot have a pessimistic view of 
the price situation this year because, on the basis of the 
initial results achieved last year in macroeconomic regulation 
and control, this year the state will implement appropriate 
regulatory and control measures in respect of fixed assets 
investment. Under the precondition of maintaining a certain 
scale, it is necessary to avoid the occurrence of super-normal 
growth and to engage in appropriate regulation and control of 
the investment structure. This is one aspect which will be 
beneficial in dealing with inflation. In another respect, 
through the more than 10 years of reform, there has been a great 
increase in the supply of commodities, goods, and materials in 
the market. For example, in respect of grain and nonstaple 
foodstuffs which are very important for people's livelihood, 
supply can basically be guaranteed and the people's needs can be 
satisfied. Seen in terms of home-use electrical appliances and 
daily-use consumer goods, generally speaking, the supply of 
goods is sufficient. For some commodities, supply exceeds 
demand and it is a buyers market. In addition, production is 
still developing and, in such a situation, the prices of these 
commodities will not see great increases. Further, seen in 
terms of income, this year the wages of public servants are 
being reformed and enterprise wages are being increased on the 
basis of improved performance. These aspects will all increase 
people's real capacity to deal with the price raises. In 
respect of prices subsequent to freeing, the state will 
implement corresponding supervisory and management measures to 
avoid loss of control. Following the setting up of price 
regulation funds for grain and other major commodities, and the 
establishment of specialized reserve systems, the state's 
capacity to regulate supply and demand, keep prices down, and 
stabilize the market will be further strengthened. 
<H3>  Implementation of the Many Reform Measures Will Result in 
Some Changes in Prices But Will Not Affect People's Daily Lives </H3>
  Another hot topic of concern to people at present is the 
worry that the various reform measures which have already been 
initiated this year will promote a rise in prices. For example, 
the implementation of the consumption tax and value added tax 
[VAT] has led to some misunderstandings and some people believe 
that as soon as these two taxes are levied, prices will 
certainly rise. Actually, the Ministry of Finance and the State 
Bureau of Taxation have already explained these issues through 
various media. Generally speaking, the implementation of these 
measures will not induce overall price raises. This is 
particularly so of VAT because, following the reform of the tax 
system, tax types and tax rates will also see changes and for 
the majority of enterprises the overall tax burden will decline. 
Seen from the angle of consumption products, while the present 
levying is a supra-price tax, it is not just a tax levied on top 
of the original price. Rather, it involves a change in the 
formation of the original price. Seen in terms of the final 
price of consumer products, there should be no change as a 
result of the reform of the tax system. The levying of a 
consumption tax on a small number of commodities is very 
necessary. This manifests the state's guidance of production and 
is also positive guidance for consumers. Further, these 
products are not things which people need for their livelihood. 
Thus, even if prices change, this will not affect people's 
daily lives. In other countries, it is very common for special 
consumption taxes to be levied on some commodities. Such taxes 
give effect to the role of the state's regulatory and control 
measures. 
  The merger of exchange rates carried out at the beginning of 
the year also gave rise to various concerns and there were fears 
that the resulting devaluation of the renminbi would lead to 
price increases. Of course, the merger of exchange rates will 
have some effects on prices. For example, the cost of imported 
products will rise and the price of imported color televisions, 
refrigerators, and so on will, after conversion to renminbi, 
also see an increase. However, at the same time, tax rates will 
come down and tariffs and imported commodity and raw materials 
taxes will fall. Thus, prices will not increase by too much or 
too wildly. Therefore, people can adopt a cool and normal 
attitude to the reform measures which have been implemented. In 
fact, prior to the implementation of various reform measures, 
the state has already considered the effects of the reforms on 
prices raises and adopted corresponding measures. It is 
believed that during the reforms and opening up, the consumer 
psychology of the broad masses of people will gradually move 
towards maturity. 

