BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat at the opening </F>
session of the OAU summit conference in Tunis -- live] 
  [Excerpts] Your excellency, Brother Chairman; Your 
excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, on this occasion, the 
convening of the 30th session of the OAU summit conference on 
the green land of Tunisia, I address you from heart to heart, in 
my own name, on behalf of my brothers, the members of the PLO 
Executive Committee and the government of the Palestinian 
national authority, and on behalf of our Palestinian people. 
The warmest greetings and best wishes for success for the 
proceedings of your respected summit. [passage omitted] 
  Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. [passage omitted] 
We 
are facing some problems, which are slightly hampering the tasks 
of our Palestinian National Authority. This is due to the very 
slow implementation on the ground of what had been agreed upon, 
in addition to the procrastination of some of the states which 
promised funds in handing out these funds, even though they 
committed themselves to and agreed upon such amounts during 
their successive meetings to enable the government of the 
Palestinian National Authority to create its bodies and 
institutions, to embark upon the construction process of our 
national economy, and our public facilities, which are totally 
destroyed -- totally destroyed -- due to the Israeli occupation. 
Yes, totally destroyed due to the Israeli occupation. 
  We have to start our reconstruction work among the rubble 
left behind by the occupation. This situation has gone as far 
as starvation in Gaza, which is witnessing the highest 
population density in the world. [passage omitted] 
  Yes, Your excellences, heads of state; it is a destroyed 
infrastructure. This situation does not only hinder the 
National Authority Government from shouldering its 
responsibilities, it also frustrates the hopes our people pin on 
the peace process and the future of coexistence and cooperation 
in the region. It will also weaken the ongoing efforts we are 
making with all the brothers and friends aimed at achieving a 
just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. A peace, which 
safeguards and guarantees stability, security, and welfare for 
all the region's nations and states. This peace would also 
guarantee for our Palestinian people the end of the Israeli 
occupation of their land and sanctity, enabling them to restore 
and practice their firm national rights of freedom, independence 
and sovereignty, and to achieve a just and comprehensive peace 
on all fronts throughout the region. 
  Mr President, heads of states and brother participants. No 
doubt you are following the successive statements and the 
fabricated storm which some Israelis are stirring, particularly 
regarding the issue of Jerusalem and its isolation and the 
demographic and settlement changes in it, which is seen as a 
violation to what we have agreed upon: Not to make a decision 
in advance regarding the issues earmarked for the final stage of 
negotiations, at the forefront of which are the issues of 
Jerusalem, settlement, refugees and the final borders, and other 
issues. With these measures, stances and statements the Israeli 
Government, or some members of the Israeli Government, is 
working to impose a status quo situation in advance regarding an 
issue that touches the feelings not only of the Palestinian 
people -- yes, not only the Palestinian people -- but that of 
the Arabs, the Muslims, the Christians throughout the world. 
This also is seen as a blatant violation of UN resolutions, 
Geneva conventions on human rights, and Arab, African, Islamic, 
Nonalignment conferences' resolutions on this holy issue. It 
also violates the resolutions and stances of the U.S. 
Administration, the European Union, Russia, China, Japan and 
others. 
  By making these statements and taking these stances some 
Israeli quarters are weakening the steps that are aimed at 
building trust, which we are working to establish between the 
two peoples in order to make a new Middle East, which in the 
future would be based on coexistence and cooperation between 
nations. However, the continuation of such statements and 
measures will not help to advance the peace process toward 
achieving the hoped-for goals, which harbor good, and benefits 
for all nations and states in the region and the world. 
  We understand, yes, we understand the importance of the 
religious position of the holy city for all religions. We 
respect this out of a total loyalty to the spiritual and civil 
heritage of Jerusalem and Palestine; its tolerance and peaceful 
coexistence among the religions throughout the centuries. 
Therefore, we should all protect these civil, religious, 
historic and humanitarian values. We will not allow, we will 
not allow any extremist forces, either over here or over there, 
to obstruct, or sabotage the peace process, or to alter the 
character of the holy city as it is held by all these divine 
religions. 
  Mr Chairman, please allow me to use this platform, allow me, 
presidents, to use this platform and talk to Mr. Rabin to tell 
him; I would like to tell Mr. Rabin: Let us protect the peace 
of the brave; let us protect the peace of the brave and the 
achievements of this peace for our peoples, for our peoples, our 
children, for the whole region, and the for the world. 
  Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. Our concerns are 
the same, our development problems are the same. From this 
premise, we look at the issues of Arab-African coordination and 
cooperation as an urgent necessity in the shadow of the facts 
and developments in the new international relations. This makes 
it necessary for us all to take into account these developments 
and to consolidate our collective and bilateral relations on 
modern bases which serve the aspirations of our peoples for 
development and construction. 
  We are all called upon to develop the mechanisms of our 
action and cooperation within the Arab League, the OAU, the 
Islamic Conference Organization and the Nonaligned Movement in 
order to settle the issues and crises facing us on the security, 
social and economic levels within the framework of this new 
world order, about which the late Rajiv Ghandi said: New order, 
new order to order; [previous six words in English] and also 
settling bilateral differences and conflicts within the 
framework of understanding, dialogue, and mutual respect between 
us all, so as to prevent foreign interference, and not to allow 
the imposition of solutions which do not agree with the 
interests of our peoples and countries, and which are likely to 
make conflicts worse and put a seal of approval on them. 
[passage omitted] 
  We will preserve, God willing, after our return to our 
homeland, Palestine, our membership [as an observer] if you 
allow us, if you allow us to keep this membership, which gives 
us pleasure and pride. We will continue to give impetus to the 
cooperation between the government of the Palestinian National 
Authority and the PLO, and our African brothers in all fields. 
[passage omitted] 
  Your excellencies, ladies and gentlemen. We are entering the 
new stage of our people's struggle with self-confidence, and the 
confidence in our people's capability and will to deal with it 
with intelligence, wisdom and far-sightedness, knowing the 
volume of current and future difficulties and challenges. Out 
of the depth of the ties of brotherhood and common destiny 
linking our peoples, and our joint aspiration for the future, we 
expect your warm and fraternal backing and your support for our 
efforts and those of our people in completing the construction 
of their national independence so they can live free and 
sovereign lives on their land, in their state, and contribute 
with their brothers in the Arab and African world and in the 
region to achieving the supreme goals for which we all work, for 
the future and aspirations of our peoples. 
  We reiterate our solidarity with the fraternal and friendly 
peoples in Rwanda, Somalia and Liberia, hoping that they will 
overcome their ordeals. We also declare our solidarity with the 
peoples of Angola and Mozambique with regard to the issue of 
democracy. We call for lifting the blockades on the fraternal 
people of Libya and Iraq, and for an end to the tragedies facing 
the fraternal people of Bosnia. [passage omitted] 

