BFN 

<F P=106> [Agneta Engqvist report: "Barnevik Mobilizes on a Broad </F>
Front in China"] 
  [Text] Wednesday [11 May], marks the start of ABB's [Asea 
Brown Boveri] expansion and presence in China on the eve of the 
21st century. Percy Barnevik, corporate top brass, and some 100 
representatives of ABB's top management from around the world 
are on hand. Their joint effort will focus on convincing 
China's highest political and economic leadership that ABB is 
the ideal partner for now and the future. 
  "I see a country that has shown an average GNP growth of 9.5 
percent over the last 15 years. A country that has more than 
doubled its capacity of power generation over the last 10 years. 
A country where international trade has grown from $10 to $200 
billion in 15 years. This is a remarkable development in a 
short time," Percy Barnevik said about China. He and three of 
his closest colleagues met with China's President Jiang Zemin on 
Tuesday. 
  Percy Barnevik wants to show that ABB is serious about 
becoming a local enterprise in China. ABB is moving its head 
office for China from Hong Kong to Bejing. 
  ABB will build a 160,000-square-meter technical and 
educational center in downtown Beijing. This is also where the 
new head office will be located. 
  ABB will use China increasingly as an export base, e.g., for 
Chinese engines and components, not only for the markets of 
Pacific Asia but for the whole world. 
  ABB's investments have slowed down to some degree due to 
China's current austerity policy, but Percy Barnevik believes 
that the country has, even with a growth rate of 5, 8, or 12 
percent per year, an enormous demand for the systems and 
products of the companies. 
  "China will need some 30 power plants per year in the 
future," said Barnevik, who hopes that the company will get at 
least one-third of this business. 
<H5>  Long-Term Projects </H5>
  ABB is also interested in investing in the power plants even 
if the payback will only come after 10 years. 
  "There will be losses the first year, less of them in the 
second, the third may yield some revenue, and later on there 
will be a good deal of money," Percy Barnevik explained at a 
news conference. 
  "There is no quick money to be made in China, one has to 
take 
a long-term view of things," he added. 
  ABB is one of the four main sponsors of the China Summit 
Meeting, starting today in Beijing. This meeting is organized 
by the INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE [IHT] and the Chinese 
Government's Commission of Economic Reforms (SCRES). 
  Percy Barnevik has used this meeting as a starting point to 
mobilize his forces within the company. The message is the 
same, both internally and externally: ABB is making an all-out 
investment effort in China, the world's greatest economy within 
a few decades. 
  The electrotechnical giant will invest 3 billion Swedish 
kronor [SKr] in the country within the next two years. The IHT 
charged SKr4 million for the participation of ABB's top brass in 
the Summit Meeting and for the opportunity to discuss with 
China's Prime Minister Li Peng and State Councilor Li Tieying. 
  A total of 200 of ABB's most important clients plus 
government officials and deputy ministers will be invited to 
subsequent workshops devoted to the four business segments of 
the group. 
  And during two days there will be lectures, meetings, and 
conferences that aim to gain a better understanding of China 
today and tomorrow, including the possibilities of influencing 
future economic and hopefully ABB's business opportunities. 
  Percy Barnevik will speak on how China's infrastructure 
could 
be developed. Other speakers from abroad include Mahathir, the 
prime minister of Malaysia, and Lee Kuan Yew, the founder of 
modern Singapore. 

