Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["President Kim Il-song's Work `For the Ultimate Solution of </F>
the Rural Question Under the Banner of the Socialist Rural 
Theses'" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, February 25 (KCNA) -- The great leader 
President Kim Il-song sent to the National Agricultural 
Conference a letter entitled "For the Ultimate Solution of the 
Rural Question Under the Banner of the Socialist Rural Theses" 
on February 24, 1994. 
  The letter reads in full: 
  The grand National Agricultural Conference which is open on 
the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the publication of the 
socialist rural theses, arousing keen interest and expectations 
of our agricultural working people and the whole nation, is a 
matter of great jubilation and a momentous event. 
  I extend warm congratulations to you who are present at the 
National Agricultural Conference and to all the agricultural 
working people, who have worked devotedly to implement the 
socialist rural theses under the leadership of our party, and 
express my heartfelt gratitude to our working class and our 
people for the active assistance they have given to the rural 
communities. 
  This conference will review the great victory which has been 
achieved by our party and our people in the struggle to carry 
out the socialist rural theses and will mark a new milestone in 
advancing the construction of socialist rural communities to a 
higher stage. It will be a historic conference which will 
powerfully demonstrate the validity of our party's socialist 
rural theses and the advantages of the socialist agricultural 
system in our country and inspire our people to a fresh success, 
the people who safeguard the socialist cause of chuche and bring 
it to consummation. 
  The rural question occupies a very important place in 
realizing the people's cause of independence, the cause of 
socialism. 
  The rural question encompasses the peasant question and the 
agrarian question. The peasantry, along with the working class, 
is a component of the main force of the revolution, and 
agriculture, along with industry, is one of the two major 
sectors of the national economy. Finding solution to the rural 
question is a long-drawn-out, very complex and difficult task 
because of the social and economic characteristics of rural 
communities and their age-long backwardness. As historical 
experience shows, success in the revolution and construction 
depends largely on how the rural question is resolved in each 
stage of the developing revolution. 
  Ever since the initial period of building a new society 
after 
liberation, our party has always paid a deep attention to the 
rural question. In each stage and in each period of the 
development of the revolution, our party has put forward a 
correct line and policy on the rural question from the 
standpoint of chuche and carried them out. As a result, it has 
been successful in finding a smooth solution to the rural 
question without committing any deviation. 
  The completion of agricultural cooperativization on 
socialist 
lines and the victory of the socialist revolution were great 
events which brought about a radical change in the peasants' 
social and economic position and in the development of 
agricultural productive forces. 
  The completion of the socialist cooperativization of 
agriculture is a historic turn in resolving the rural question, 
but it does not immediately mean the ultimate solution of the 
rural question. Because of the backwardness of rural 
communities, a vestige of the old society, the differences 
between urban and rural communities and between working class 
and peasantry remain even after agriculture has been 
cooperativized on socialist lines. So long as these differences 
exist, we cannot say that the rural question has been resolved 
completely. In order to find the ultimate solution to the rural 
question, it is necessary to go through another revolutionary 
stage after the socialist cooperativization of agriculture, a 
stage of revolution to assimilate the peasantry to the working 
class, put agriculture on an industrial basis and modernize it, 
bring cooperative ownership under all-people ownership and thus 
eliminate the differences between urban and rural communities 
and between working class and peasantry. 
  Speeding up the construction of socialist rural communities 
to solve the rural question ultimately is a link in the historic 
cause of achieving the complete victory of socialism; this is an 
important task of uninterrupted revolution to be carried out in 
the period of transition from capitalism to socialism. 
  After completing the socialist cooperativization of 
agriculture, our party advanced the ultimate solution of the 
rural question as a major strategic task in building socialism 
and published the socialist rural theses and has worked hard to 
put them into effect. 
  The theses on the socialist rural question in our country 
are 
our party's programme of building socialist rural communities, 
which is an embodiment of the chuche idea. The theses provide a 
scientific elucidation of the direction, basic principles and 
fundamental methods of solving the socialist rural question. 
Our party's rural theses are an absolutely correct guideline to 
the solution of the socialist rural question as well as the 
banner of struggle to safeguard the socialist principles in 
rural communities and achieve the complete victory of socialism. 
  The road traversed by our party and our people under the 
banner of the socialist rural theses for 30 years has been a 
road of an arduous struggle and yet a road of glorious victory. 
Formerly our country was a colonial agricultural land, so that 
even after agriculture was cooperativized the rural communities 
lagged far behind the urban communities in all fields of 
ideology, technology and culture, and the material and technical 
foundations of agriculture were very weak. Worse still, we have 
had to build socialist rural communities and socialism as a 
whole in the complex and acute situation in which the country is 
divided into North and South and the imperialists and 
reactionaries have been resorting to ceaseless manoeuvres 
against socialism and our Republic. All this has created 
immeasurable difficulties and obstacles to the struggle of our 
party and our people to implement the rural theses. Under the 
leadership of our party, our agricultural working people and all 
the other people have advanced vigorously along the road of 
building socialist rural communities as indicated by the rural 
theses without the slightest vacillation in spite of many 
difficulties and trials. 
  Our party's correct leadership, powerful urban support for 
the countryside, and the devoted struggle of the agricultural 
working people have resulted in a great success in the 
implementation of the socialist rural theses, and the looks of 
the rural areas have changed beyond recognition. 
  As a result of the vigorous ideological and cultural 
revolutions in the countryside, the agricultural working people 
in our country have become reliable masters of socialist rural 
communities who have attained a high level of ideological 
consciousness and creative ability. 
  Everyone of our agricultural working people, like the 
working 
class, leads a very valuable socio-political life, and a radical 
change has taken place in their ideological and mental features. 
Firmly equipped with the chuche idea, the revolutionary idea 
of our party, and united solidly behind the party, our 
agricultural working people loyally support the party's 
leadership and are displaying a high degree of revolutionary 
enthusiasm and creativity in the struggle to build socialist 
rural areas as elucidated by the rural theses. Thanks to our 
party's tireless ideological education and through their 
practical lives under socialism, they have rid themselves of the 
small-holder mentality of their former days, have learned 
collectivist spirit and nurtured it systematically. Collectivism 
has now become the predominant feature of their ideology and 
manner of life. The agricultural working people now highly 
display the beautiful communist trait of helping and leading 
each other forward, devoting themselves for the good of their 
society and collective on the principle of one for all and all 
for one. They work, live and fight on the collectivist 
principles, united single-heartedly behind the party and the 
leader and holding the socialist banner of chuche high. This is 
precisely the ideological and mental features of our 
agricultural working people. This high ideological level 
attained by our agricultural working people proves the brilliant 
victory of our party's policy on the ideological revolution; it 
is an epoch-making success in the transformation of the 
peasants' ideology. 
  The technical and cultural levels of our agricultural 
working 
people have risen very high, and the conditions for the cultural 
life of the rural inhabitants have greatly improved. The new 
generation which has received eleven-year compulsory education 
constitutes the main force in our rural communities, as in the 
urban communities. The standard of general knowledge of all the 
agricultural working people has reached that of senior middle 
school leavers or a higher level. They have acquired new 
technology; they do all kinds of farm work scientifically and 
technically by the use of modern technical means and in 
accordance with the chuche farming method. A great army of 
rural technicians and specialists has been prepared in 
accordance with our party's correct policy on the training of 
our own cadres, and they manage and operate the socialist rural 
economy excellently. Large numbers of modern houses and 
cultural and welfare facilities have been constructed in the 
rural communities, running water, bus and television services 
have been introduced, clinics have been developed into hospitals 
in the rural areas. As a result, the difference in the 
conditions for cultural life between urban and rural communities 
has been reduced considerably. Outmoded and backward notions 
and conventions have all disappeared from among our farmers, a 
sound and optimistic emotional life is flowering among them, and 
the socialist way of living is being established. 
  Man plays the decisive role in the transformation of nature 
and society, and agricultural working people are responsible for 
the construction of the socialist countryside. The fact that 
our agricultural working people have been trained into socialist 
working people with a high standard of political and ideological 
awareness as well as a high level of technical and cultural 
development is the most important guarantee for the complete 
solution of the rural question. 
  Under the powerful support of the chuche industry, a 
brilliant victory has been attained in the rural technical 
revolution. 
  The tasks of irrigation and electrification of agriculture 
were carried out in our country a long time ago. In recent 
years, great projects for harnessing nature, among them the 
construction of the west sea barrage, and the laying out of 800 
kilometres of canals in the western region, which are aimed at 
perfecting the irrigation of agriculture on a higher level, have 
been carried out successfully, so that our country can be proud 
of the powerful irrigation system in the eyes of the world. 
  The tasks of introducing machinery and chemicals in 
agriculture have also been implemented. A large number of 
tractors, lorries and various other kinds of modern farm 
machinery have been produced for the rural areas with the result 
that the comprehensive mechanization of agriculture has reached 
the level where all the major farm operations ranging from 
ploughing to threshing can be done with the help of machines. 
The amount of use of chemical fertilizers has greatly 
increased, the quality of their properties has improved, and a 
scientific system of manuring has been established. Highly 
effective insecticides, disinfectants, and herbicides have been 
produced and supplied in large quantities so as to protect farm 
crops better from insect pests and to kill weeds by chemical 
means. The independent and modern tractor and lorry production 
centres, farm machinery production centres, fertilizer factories 
and other chemical industry bases which have been established in 
our country provide a sure guarantee for the completion of the 
mechanization of agriculture and a sufficient use of chemicals 
for farming. 
  With the realization of irrigation, electrification and 
mechanization of agriculture, and with an extensive chemical 
application in farming the historic task of the rural technical 
revolution set forth in the socialist rural theses has been 
basically carried out. We have laid solid material and 
technical foundations for freeing the farmers from difficult and 
exhausting work and increasing agricultural production to a 
great extent by industrializing and modernizing agriculture with 
our own efforts and techniques. 
  As a result of the rural technical revolution and the full 
implementation of the chuche farming method, all branches of 
agriculture including grain production have developed rapidly, 
and last year, too, we reaped an unusually rich harvest despite 
the unfavourable weather conditions. 
  Under our people-centred socialist system the material and 
cultural standards of the farmers have radically improved 
through the implementation of the rural theses. Our cooperative 
farmers live in cosy modern houses built at state expense, free 
from worries about food and clothing in the modern socialist 
countryside that has been built up splendidly, and the standard 
of living of the farmers is improving with the passage of time 
like that of the workers and office employees. In our country 
the cooperative farmers also enjoy all the state benefits such 
as free compulsory education, free medical care and advanced 
social security. Our farmers who were oppressed, maltreated and 
poverty-stricken for centuries, now enjoy, along with the 
working class, a secure and happy life free from all worries as 
the full-fledged masters of the state and society. In addition 
to the change in the social and economic position of the 
farmers, the conditions needed for their material and cultural 
life have completely changed and the former looks of the 
backward old country areas disappeared long ago. 
  As a result of the energetic promotion of the ideological, 
technical and cultural revolutions in the rural communities and 
thanks to effective guidance and assistance given by the party 
and the state to the countryside, our socialist agricultural 
system has been consolidated still further. 
  A chuche-oriented system of agricultural guidance, the major 
component of which is the county cooperative farm management 
committee, has been firmly set up, its function and role has 
been enhanced and the level of the management of cooperative 
farms has been brought closer to the advanced level of 
industrial management. The state's effective material and 
technical assistance to the agricultural cooperative economy has 
strengthened the productive ties between industry and 
agriculture, organically linked public ownership and cooperative 
ownership and enabled the material and technical means of public 
ownership to hold an overwhelming proportion in agricultural 
production. This shows that our agricultural cooperative 
economy has been consolidated and developed still more and that 
the conditions needed for gradually turning the cooperative 
farms into those under all-people ownership are maturing. 
  Socialism has now struck deep roots in our countryside and 
become inseparable from the destiny of our agricultural working 
people, who hold the socialist agricultural system as dear as 
their own lives. Our agricultural system is a chuche-orientated 
socialist agricultural system, which develops on collectivist 
principles, and under which the agricultural workers are the 
masters of production and management, public ownership and 
cooperative ownership are closely combined, and the state takes 
responsible care of the production and management activities of 
the cooperative farms and the lives of the cooperative farmers. 
Our socialist agricultural system is the most advanced system; 
it not only provides an independent and creative life for the 
farming population but also facilitates the assimilation of the 
farmers to the working class, the development of agriculture 
into an industrial process and a gradual and smooth conversion 
of cooperative ownership to all-people ownership. Under the 
banner of the socialist rural theses, our socialist agricultural 
system clearly shows its superiority and unbreakable vitality, 
and opens up a bright future for socialist rural construction 
and an avenue for the ultimate solution of the rural question. 
  Through their own experience in the struggle and life, our 
cooperative farmers and all the other agricultural working 
people are firmly convinced that the road indicated by the 
socialist rural theses, the road to socialism alone, is the road 
to a genuine life and happiness and to victory and glory. They 
are working hard to defend the gains of socialism they have 
already won and develop them still further. 
  The road of capitalism leads the rural workers to 
degradation 
and the country areas to backwardness. In capitalist society, 
owing to its inherent law, the rural workers cannot prevent 
their differentiation, and the overwhelming majority of them 
cannot free themselves from rightlessness and poverty. The 
historical lesson of building socialism clearly shows that in 
the country areas, too, defence of socialism means victory and 
its abandonment means death. 
  We have won a decisive victory in our efforts to implement 
the socialist rural theses, and the building of socialist 
countryside in our country is entering a new stage of its 
development. The main task in the solution of the socialist 
rural question is to eliminate the ideological, technical and 
cultural backwardness of the rural communities in comparison 
with the towns. We have solved the basic problem in the 
building of socialist countryside by pressing ahead with the 
ideological, technical and cultural revolutions in the 
countryside and achieving remarkable successes in these fields; 
we are on a high peak which affords the prospect of ultimate 
solution of the rural question. If we consolidate the position 
we have already taken up and launch a new battle by making more 
strenuous efforts, we will win a historic victory in the 
solution of the rural question, the most difficult question in 
the building of socialism. 
  We are now faced with the honourable task of finally 
solving the rural question by following up the success we have 
achieved in our efforts to implement the socialist rural theses. 
  Whether we finally solve the rural question under socialism 
or not is an important matter which affects the future of 
socialism. It is only when we ultimately solve the rural 
question by accelerating the building of socialist countryside 
that we will be able to achieve the complete victory of 
socialism, display its superiority and indestructibility and 
increase its attraction. It is a solemn duty we have assumed to 
the present times and history to solve the rural question 
successfully in our country which, under the socialist banner of 
chuche, is defending and developing the socialism of our own 
style. 
  Today our party and our people are struggling to build 
socialism in the most complex internal and external situation 
and in a sharp confrontation with our enemies. We have to carry 
out the task for the high stage of socialist rural construction 
in a grave situation and push our way along an untrodden path by 
overcoming all the difficulties and trials we will encounter in 
solving the rural question. 
  As long as we are led by the great party and have the heroic 
people who are solidly united behind the party in mind and 
purpose as well as the people-centred socialist system of our 
own style and a powerful independent national economy with the 
chuche industry as the mainstay, we will unfailingly carry out 
this difficult and yet honourable task with credit. Upholding 
the banner of the socialist rural theses, all the agricultural 
officials and farming population must energetically promote the 
building of socialist countryside, full of confidence. Our 
working class and all the other working people throughout the 
country must turn out in the sacred cause of solving the rural 
question ultimately by carrying out the rural theses. 
  We must further develop the ideological and cultural 
revolutions in depth to meet the requirements of the new, 
advanced stage of socialist rural construction. 
  It is our party's consistent line of building socialism to 
give precedence to the work of capturing the ideological 
fortress while giving a strong impetus to the struggle to take 
both the ideological and material fortresses. It is only when 
we prepare our farming population more firmly in terms of their 
ideological and mental qualities, technical and cultural 
standards as required by socialism that we can find ultimate 
solution to the rural question. Our task is to develop the 
ideological and cultural revolutions in greater depth in the 
rural communities and definitely raise the ideological, 
technical and cultural levels of the farmers to those of the 
working class and completely eliminate the ideological and 
cultural backwardness of the countryside. 
  It is difficult to transform the ideology of the farmers and 
revolutionize them and assimilate them to the working class. 
Selfishness lingering in the minds of the farmers is very 
conservative and obstinate. It cannot be eliminated easily in a 
short time. Moreover, in view of the imperialists' ceaseless 
attempt to blow the wind of libertarianism into our ranks, we 
must not slacken ideological work even for a moment. Experience 
shows that if the ideological revolution is neglected in 
socialist society, it will be impossible not only to consolidate 
and develop the socialist system but also to defend the gains of 
the revolution that have already been attained, because outmoded 
ideas will revive and the ideology of the working people will 
become paralysed. When the new generation which has not 
experienced the trials of the revolution has emerged as the 
master of socialist construction and people enjoy a prosperous 
life without any worries, and especially when the imperialists 
resort to intensive manoeuvres to undermine socialism 
ideologically and culturally, we must further the ideological 
revolution and conduct ideological work among the working people 
in depth and substantially. This is the most important and 
essential requirement in the struggle to defend and accomplish 
the socialist cause. 
  By holding fast to the party's policy of ideological 
revolution and pressing ahead with ideological work among the 
agricultural working people, we must train them into 
revolutionaries, assimilate them to the working class and model 
them on socialism and the chuche idea. 
  The essential thing in the ideological revolution is to 
fully 
equip all the agricultural population with the chuche idea, the 
revolutionary idea of our party. The chuche idea is a 
revolutionary and scientific world outlook which the people, who 
strive to safeguard independence and realize it, should possess. 
Education in the chuche idea should be conducted with the main 
emphasis on education in the principles of the chuche idea and 
in breadth and depth in close combination with a variety of 
forms of ideological education including education in the party 
policy, the revolutionary traditions and socialist patriotism. 
  We must step up education in the chuche idea among the 
agricultural working people to ensure that they acquire a firm 
chuche-orientated revolutionary outlook on the world and are 
unfailingly loyal to the party and the revolution. We must 
ensure that they all strive through thick and thin to defend and 
carry out the party's lines and policies upholding the 
leadership of our party, and fight for the victory of the cause 
of socialism full of confidence and optimism. We must encourage 
the agricultural working people to perform their 
responsibilities and play their role as masters of the 
revolution and construction with a high degree of consciousness 
of being masters of the state, society and the socialist 
countryside. Along with this, we must prevent the bourgeois 
ideology and all other reactionary and counterrevolutionary 
ideas, alien to the chuche idea, from making inroads into our 
ranks. 
  In ideological work great efforts should be channelled into 
education in class consciousness and collectivism. 
  Class education is an important requirement for training the 
farmers into revolutionaries and assimilating them to the 
working class. We must equip the agricultural working people 
fully with the consciousness and revolutionary spirit of the 
working class so that they always adhere to the revolutionary 
principle and fight against imperialism and class enemies of all 
shades without compromise. In particular, we must pay close 
attention to intensifying education in class consciousness among 
the new generation in the countryside to enhance their class 
consciousness. 
  Socialism is the lifeblood of our people including the 
agricultural workers, and collectivism is the basis of the 
socialist society. Our agricultural working people, the masters 
of the socialist countryside, must rid themselves of the 
outdated ideological remnants of individualism and equip 
themselves fully with the spirit of collectivism. Education in 
collectivism must be intensified in the countryside to give them 
a clear understanding that their individual interests are 
derived from those of the society and the collective, and that 
the worth of their life and happiness consist in the development 
of their socialist motherland and the prosperity of the 
socialist countryside, so that they give full play to their 
patriotic enthusiasm and devotion in developing socialist rural 
communities. Our agricultural working people must live up to 
collectivism in and out of work and thus make it a rule and 
their habit to take part in communal labour voluntarily and 
honestly, treasure communal property and take care of it with an 
attitude befitting masters, and manage all farm work and 
activities of the collective economy assiduously and 
methodically. 
  The ideological work of transforming the ideas of the people 
must be pushed forward persistently with a correct methodology. 
  The method of influencing the people by popularizing 
positive 
examples is the most powerful method of mass education suited to 
the intrinsic nature of the socialist society. We must give 
wide publicity to the good conducts displayed among the working 
people so that a noble communist morality comes into full bloom 
in all families in the countryside as well as in all 
sub-workteams, workteams and farms. 
  We must continue to develop the three-revolution red flag 
movement and other mass movements in the countryside to ensure 
that ideological transformation becomes the concern of the 
agricultural working people themselves and that the mass 
movements have a greater effect on socialist rural construction. 
  We should intensify their life in the party and working 
people's organizations in order to give them ceaseless 
revolutionary education, train them ideologically and heighten 
their sense of organization and discipline, through the life in 
their organizations. 
  The first and foremost task of the rural cultural revolution 
at present is to improve the technical and cultural standards of 
the agricultural working people to meet the requirements of 
making the whole society intellectual. 
  Making the whole society intellectual is a strategic target 
of our party's policy of cultural revolution and a lawful 
requirement for the building of socialism and communism. We 
must develop the cultural revolution in depth in the rural 
communities and improve the technical and cultural 
qualifications of the agricultural working people. In this way 
we will carry out the new tasks in the socialist rural 
construction with success. 
  In order to raise the technical and cultural levels of 
agricultural working people, we must develop our most 
advantageous socialist educational system to suit the rural 
situation. We must modernize the rural schools and further 
improve their quality of education. We must strengthen the 
regular system of higher education and set up a large number of 
study-while-you-work institutions such as farm colleges and 
agricultural colleges so as to build up the ranks of 
agricultural technicians and agronomists systematically and push 
ahead with the work of making all agricultural workers 
intellectuals on a long-term basis. 
  Farms must equip their halls for the propagation of 
agricultural science and technology properly, run them on a 
regular basis, and step up technical study and the imparting of 
technical skills among farmers so that they can acquire the 
latest achievements of agricultural science and technology, 
operate modern technical means efficiently and master our 
party's chuche farming method. 
  An important task of the cultural revolution in the rural 
areas is to establish a cultural and hygienic practice in and 
out of work in the countryside and abolish the difference 
between urban and rural communities in the cultural conditions 
for the working people. 
  To raise the standard of clean and hygienic practice in 
production in the rural communities is very important in 
increasing agricultural production and establishing the habit of 
taking good care of communal property. All the farms must 
treasure the land, the main means of agricultural production, 
and cultivate it neatly, take good care of the tractors and 
various other farming equipment and materials and construct 
production facilities neatly and manage them with care. 
  A cultural and hygienic way of life must be established 
throughout the modern socialist countryside in keeping with its 
new features. Community centres at every ri and farm villages 
must be laid out neatly, roads managed carefully, dwelling 
houses and villages kept clean and neat, and a cultural and 
hygienic way of life developed. Mass culture and art must be 
developed and physical culture and sports promoted on a mass 
basis, all sorts of outmoded habits of life and asocialist 
expressions opposed, and a socialist way and tone of life 
established throughout the rural areas. 
  We must build a larger number of modern houses and cultural 
and welfare facilities in the rural areas. In order to 
eliminate the difference between urban and rural communities in 
living conditions, it is essential to introduce electrification, 
running water and bus services, central-heating and gas systems 
in the rural areas. To follow up the success in 
electrification, water supply and bus service to complete them 
at a higher level in the rural areas, and introduce 
central-heating and gas systems in the rural villages -- these 
are the five major tasks to be carried out within the next few 
years in eliminating the difference between urban and rural 
communities with regard to their living conditions. 
  We must step up health and hygienic service in the rural 
areas and improve the medical care of the agricultural 
population. We must equip the rural hospitals better and 
develop the doctors' area responsibility system, so as to raise 
the level of medical service. 
  We must consolidate and develop the successes achieved in 
the 
rural technical revolution. 
  The four major tasks of the rural technical revolution set 
by 
the socialist rural theses--irrigation, electrification, 
mechanization and an extensive use of chemical means--are of 
paramount importance in eliminating the backwardness of the 
countryside in the sphere of technology and in putting 
agriculture on an industrial and modern basis. Irrigation, 
electrification, mechanisation and application of chemical means 
constitute the material and technical basis for modernized 
agriculture, and apart from them it would be impossible to 
effect industrialization and modernization of agriculture. We 
have fulfilled the four major tasks of the rural technical 
revolution by and large and thus achieved a remarkable progress 
in the struggle to put agriculture on an industrial and modern 
basis, and laid solid foundations for modern agriculture. Our 
task at the present stage is to follow up the success in the 
rural technical revolution to advance the industrialization and 
modernization of agriculture to a high level. 
  We must, first of all, consolidate the success achieved in 
irrigation, electrification, mechanization and chemical 
application so that their effectiveness can be displayed to the 
full. Thanks to the rural technical revolution, our countryside 
has been equipped with an enormous amount of material and 
technical means that serve agricultural production. To take 
good care of them and make an effective use of them is now the 
first and foremost task in promoting the industrialization and 
modernization of agriculture. In the field of irrigation it is 
necessary to maintain in a good state of repair and reinforce 
the irrigation facilities, structures for water conservation, 
reservoirs, canals and all other means of irrigation on a 
planned basis and conserve water scientifically and technically, 
so that damages from whatever drought and flood can be prevented 
and the water problem solved completely in farming. We must 
regularly repair and maintain tractors and other modern farm 
machines, effectively use them and improve the system of 
supplying electricity to rural areas. We must supply a good 
assortment of chemical fertilizers, chemicals and herbicides to 
meet their demands and set up a scientific fertilizing system to 
improve the efficacy of fertilizers. We must ensure that all 
the valuable successes achieved in the rural technical 
revolution by the joint efforts and wisdom of our working class, 
cooperative farmers and all the other people and on the strength 
of self-reliance and fortitude under the leadership of the 
party, prove very effective and bear fruit in the development of 
our socialist rural economy. 
  We must raise the level of industrialization and 
modernization of agriculture steadily by further expanding and 
developing the successes registered in the technical revolution 
in the rural areas. 
  Since irrigation and electrification have been completed at 
a 
high level, we must concentrate our efforts on expanding and 
developing the successes in mechanization and chemical 
application. It is only when we develop the comprehensive 
mechanization of agriculture and the application of chemical 
means to the rural economy onto a high level that we can carry 
out successfully the political and economic tasks of the rural 
technical revolution aimed at freeing the agricultural workers 
from backbreaking labour and augmenting agricultural production 
continuously. Only when we develop mechanical techniques in the 
countryside and supply larger numbers of various machines to the 
rural areas, can we consolidate the success achieved in 
irrigation, perfect the irrigation system further and follow up 
the success in electrification. We must mechanize all farm work 
ranging from the major operations to auxiliary jobs in 
crop-raising; we must also work hard to effect mechanization in 
fruit-growing and other branches of the rural economy. It is 
necessary to use chemicals to kill weeds in all paddy and 
non-paddy fields, prevent damage by all insect pests and raise 
the per-hectare crop yields. On the basis of our developing 
chuche-based industry, we must invent and manufacture larger 
numbers of tractors and lorries, and other kinds of effective, 
modern farm machines suited to our countryside and supply them 
to the rural areas, and develop new varieties of effective 
chemical fertilizers and chemicals and produce them for the 
countryside. 
  An important task in consolidating and developing the 
success 
scored in the rural technical revolution is to complete the 
realignment of land and to solve the problem of fuel needed for 
the mechanization of the rural economy. To complete land 
realignment is a gigantic project to transform the surface of 
the land, widen the area of farm land and raise the level of 
mechanization of the rural economy. The people in the rural 
economy must work out annual plans for land realignment and 
concentrate machines and other technical means and manpower on 
large-scale land realignment so as to change small plots of 
paddy fields and slopping fields in a short period into 
large-sized standardized fields for mechanized farming. We must 
set up solid bases for the production of such fuel substitutes 
as methane gas or chip-briquettes in county towns and ri of the 
countryside and produce large quantities of fuel substitutes and 
use them widely for tractors, lorries and various other farm 
machines. 
  We must develop agricultural science and adopt its success 
widely, and implement the chuche farming method of our party 
thoroughly to make agricultural production more scientific and 
intensive. 
  We must establish solid agricultural research institutes and 
intensify research into agriculture, and step up the green 
revolution. In particular, we must, on the basis of the success 
in cell engineering, gene-engineering and other spheres of 
modern biology, obtain good, high-yielding seeds and develop the 
techniques of crop raising and livestock breeding. 
  The chuche farming method created by our party is a 
scientific and technical method of farming suited to the 
climatic and soil conditions of our country and the biological 
characteristics of crops; it is a method of growing farm crops 
in a highly intensive way on the basis of modern science and 
technology. Drawing on the success in agricultural science and 
technology, we must develop and enrich the chuche farming method 
and, in accordance with it, do all farm work in a scientific and 
technical manner. 
  We must put agriculture on an industrial and modern basis 
and 
develop farming methods and the system of crop growing so as to 
eliminate the distinctions between industrial labour and 
agricultural labour gradually and raise the efficiency of 
agricultural labour decisively. In future, we must ensure that 
a farmer manages at least ten hectares of paddy and non-paddy 
fields. 
  On the basis of success achieved in the rural technical 
revolution and the development of agricultural science and 
technology, we must continue to increase agricultural production. 
  Grain production is the basic element in farming. Our party 
has already set the target of producing 15 million tons of 
grain. We must increase the per-hectare yield of rice and maize 
to at least eight tons each in all areas and on all farms in the 
near future, and then to ten tons or more. In addition, we must 
reclaim tideland energetically, protect farm land and obtain new 
land, so as to expand the area under cultivation. Thus, we will 
fulfil and overfulfil the target of grain production set by the 
party in the near future. 
  We must develop all branches of agriculture including 
stockbreeding, fruit-growing and silkworm-raising as well as 
grain production to find a better solution to the problem of 
food for the people and supply an adequate amount of raw 
materials from agriculture to meet the demands of industry. 
  Assistance to the rural areas must be further stepped up in 
keeping with the development of socialist rural construction 
onto a new high. 
  Guidance of the working class to the peasantry, industry's 
assistance to agriculture and the support given by the towns to 
the countryside are the intrinsic requirements of the socialist 
society and a fundamental principle of solving the socialist 
rural question put forward in the rural theses. Under socialism 
assistance to the rural areas should be strengthened without 
letup until the countryside reaches the level of the town in all 
aspects. We must further intensify assistance to the rural 
areas in political, economic, cultural and other fields in 
accordance with the present requirement of socialist rural 
construction. 
  It is the historical mission of the working class not only 
to 
free the farmers from exploitation and oppression by leading 
them along the road of socialism but also to eliminate the 
distinctions between working class and peasantry and build a 
classless society by training them into revolutionaries and 
assimilating them to the working class. We must ensure that the 
working class further improve their revolutionary character, 
sense of organization and cultural refinement to set an 
excellent example in transforming the peasantry after the 
revolutionary and working-class pattern and enhance their 
leading role in socialist rural construction. 
  What is important in socialist rural construction at present 
is to intensify industry's material and technical assistance to 
agriculture. In socialist society agricultural productive 
forces develop in the wake of industrial productive forces, and 
industry's material and technical assistance is the prerequisite 
for putting agriculture on an industrial and modern footing. We 
must increase the capabilities of the chuche-oriented industry 
and further develop the industrial branches directly serving 
agriculture, particularly those which produce tractors, lorries 
and other modern farm machines and chemical fertilizers, so that 
our industry vigorously promotes the industrialization and 
modernization of agriculture. All the industrial sectors must 
give active material and technical assistance to agriculture as 
required by the agriculture-first policy of our party and on a 
preferential basis produce the fuel, power, equipment and 
materials needed for agricultural production and rural 
construction. 
  Commodity supply for the rural communities should be 
improved. Only when an adequate amount of industrial goods is 
turned out and supplied to meet the demands of the countryside, 
can the economic ties between towns and countryside be fully 
guaranteed, the farmers' standard of living be systematically 
improved and their zeal for production be further heightened 
through the correct implementation of the socialist principle of 
distribution in the countryside. We must step up the revolution 
in light industry, produce a wide variety and larger quantities 
of industrial goods for the countryside to fill the rural shops 
with high-quality household utensils and articles for cultural 
use as well as daily necessities so that the rural population 
can buy at any time whatever goods they need. 
  In addition, it is important to fix the prices of industrial 
products supplied to the countryside and the purchasing prices 
of agricultural products reasonably. In our country the state 
uniformly fixes the prices of industrial products and the 
purchasing prices of agricultural products and these prices 
serve as an important economic lever that ensures the production 
and commercial ties between towns and countryside in a planned 
way and urban support for the countryside. We must properly fix 
and apply the prices of industrial products and the purchasing 
prices of agricultural products on the principle of 
strengthening industry's assistance to agriculture and urban 
support for the countryside to ensure a balanced development of 
industry and agriculture and an equitable improvement of the 
living standards of workers and farmers. 
  We must firmly adhere to the principle of giving assistance 
to the countryside, always pay close attention to the 
development of agriculture and the lives of the agricultural 
workers, accelerate the industrialization and modernization of 
agriculture on the basis of industrial development and take 
positive state and social measures to provide the farmers as 
well as the workers with better working and living conditions. 
  In order to eliminate the distinctions between towns and 
countryside and finally solve the rural question, we must, on 
the strength of the success in the ideological, technical and 
cultural revolutions, eliminate the distinctions in the standard 
of economic management between industry and agriculture, and 
turn cooperative property in the countryside gradually into 
all-people property. 
  The basic method of eliminating the distinctions in the 
standard of economic management between industry and agriculture 
is to bring the management method of the agricultural 
cooperative economy close to the advanced enterprise management 
method of industry as indicated by the rural theses. 
  After the cooperativization of agriculture in the 
countryside, our party established the chuche-orientated system 
of agricultural guidance centring on the county cooperative farm 
management committee, and ever since it has steadily improved 
its guidance and management of the socialist rural economy. The 
reality of our rural communities clearly shows that the system 
of agricultural guidance established by our party is the most 
effective way of giving industrial guidance and the state's 
material and technical assistance to the cooperative rural 
economy. 
  We must build up the county cooperative farm management 
committee and other agricultural guidance organs in keeping with 
the requirement of the developing situation and enhance their 
functions and role to improve the guidance and management of the 
rural economy. 
  Now that the material and technical foundations of the rural 
economy have been consolidated incomparably and the level of 
industrialization and modernization of agriculture is rising 
every day, we must improve technical guidance to agricultural 
production decisively. The technical guidance of agricultural 
production is the main task of the county cooperative farm 
management committee which gives direct guidance to the 
production and management activities of cooperative farms in the 
field. The management committee must establish a well-organized 
system of technical guidance, give scientific and technical 
guidance to all the processes of agricultural production as 
required by the chuche farming method and ensure that the 
cooperative farms make effective use of the modern farming 
machines and farming materials. The management committee must 
also build up the state enterprises that serve the rural 
cooperative economy and manage them skilfully so that they play 
a greater role in the agricultural production of cooperative 
farms and realize the state's material and technical assistance 
effectively. 
  In the guidance and management of the rural economy, it is 
necessary to raise the level of planning and ensure the economic 
effectiveness of production. The state planning institutions 
and the agricultural guidance organs must draw up a dynamic and 
feasible agricultural production plan and assess its 
implementation substantially so that the agricultural workers 
display a high sense of responsibility and great enthusiasm for 
carrying out the plan. They must work out an accurate, 
well-coordinated plan of material supply and technical 
assistance for the rural economy, and supply all the farming 
equipment and materials punctually as planned. The agricultural 
sector must make strenuous efforts to save manpower to the 
maximum, make rational use of the farming equipment and 
materials and increase the economic effectiveness of production. 
  The management of cooperative farms must be improved. The 
cooperative farms must organize farm work rationally to suit the 
natural and geographical conditions and their specific farm 
situation and coordinate correctly the farming processes, the 
organization of labour and the utilization of the equipment and 
materials in a comprehensive manner so that all the farming 
operations are carried out qualitatively in the right season. 
The cooperative farms must manage manpower, equipment, 
materials and funds efficiently and observe the principle of 
democracy strictly in their management. 
  Cooperative farms must organize workteams and sub-workteams 
in a rational way and run them efficiently; they should also 
apply the workteam premium system and sub-workteam management 
system properly. A sub-workteam is a cell of communal labour and 
collective life; the sub-workteam management system is an 
excellent mode of production organization and management method 
which ensures that the farmers take a sincere part in production 
and management as masters with affection for the communal 
economy. The superiority of the system should be given full 
rein so as to improve the cooperative farms' production and 
management steadily and cultivate the sense of collectivism 
among the farmers. 
  Cooperative ownership should be switched over to all-people 
ownership with success by consolidating and developing the 
agricultural cooperative economy. 
  The switchover is a historic event of completely 
transforming 
the farmers' socio-economic relationships. This is a great 
social change; nevertheless, unlike the switchover of private 
ownership to socialist ownership, this is a development of the 
lower stage of cooperative ownership to the higher stage of 
all-people ownership, in the framework of the same socialist 
ownership; this work must, to all intents and purposes, be 
carried out gradually in keeping with the maturity of all the 
conditions and possibilities. 
  The fundamental prerequisite for the switchover is to raise 
the level of ideological consciousness of the cooperative 
farmers and consolidate the material and technical foundations 
of the cooperative economy. A vigorous drive should be launched 
in socialist rural construction to capture the ideological and 
material fortresses and thus train the cooperative farmers into 
revolutionaries and assimilate them to the working class and put 
the rural economy on a high industrial and modern footing; only 
on this basis can cooperative ownership be elevated to 
all-people ownership. If cooperative property is made the 
property of the entire people too hastily without sufficient 
ideological, material and technical preparations, it will give 
rise to an unhealthy tendency to eat the bread of idleness in 
the countryside, decrease agricultural production and cause a 
great hindrance to the overall construction of socialism. We 
have been creating favourable conditions for switching 
cooperative ownership over to all-people ownership in the future 
by carrying out the ideological, technical and cultural 
revolutions in the countryside while closely combining the two 
forms of ownership and steadily improving the leading role of 
all-people ownership in conformity with the basic principles of 
solving the socialist rural question, the principles elucidated 
in the rural theses. 
  We must consolidate and develop the success already 
achieved in socialist rural construction and efficiently perform 
the task of switching cooperative ownership over to all-people 
ownership without any deviations. 
  Cooperative farms should be converted into all-people 
property with the county as a unit. In our country the county 
is the base for linking the towns with the countryside in all 
spheres of politics, the economy and culture and serves as the 
basic unit for the direct guidance and management of the rural 
economy. A county has the farm machine stations, farm implement 
factories, irrigation administration offices and other state 
enterprises which serve the rural economy, and equipment and 
farming materials are supplied to cooperative farms with the 
county as a unit. Therefore, cooperative ownership must be 
transformed into all-people ownership with the county as a unit. 
Even after cooperative farms are converted into the state farms 
of all-people ownership, the rural economy must be developed on 
a county basis. 
  The forms and methods of converting cooperative property 
into 
all-people property, too, must accord with the socialist rural 
economic system of our country and the specific situation in our 
rural communities. 
  Since a well-organized agricultural guidance and management 
system has been established with the county as a unit in our 
country, the most reasonable form and method is to convert 
cooperative farms in the county into state farms under 
all-people ownership and let the county undertake their unified 
guidance and management. This will make it possible to manage 
satisfactorily the farms which have come under all-people 
ownership, using and strengthening further the comprehensive 
guidance and management system of the rural economy and the 
material and technical means that serve agriculture, which have 
already been prepared in counties. In this case, the county 
cooperative farm management committee may be changed into a 
state farm management committee, an agricultural guidance body, 
or into an agricultural complex. If the management committee is 
transformed into an agricultural complex rather than an 
agricultural guidance body, this will enhance its sense of 
responsibility and role in agricultural production and improve 
its industrial direction of the farms. 
  When the county cooperative farm management committee is 
transformed into an agricultural complex, the state enterprises 
that serve agriculture and state farms will come under its 
jurisdiction, and both the complex and the enterprises and farms 
under it must operate by the self-balancing system and they all 
will become involved in the dual self-balancing system. We have 
introduced the self-balancing system with the county as a unit 
in Sukchon County to set an example in anticipation of the 
transformation of cooperative property into all-people property. 
  When converting cooperative farms into the state farms under 
all- people ownership, we should somewhat enlarge the size of 
farms by their reasonable merger and adjustment so as to make 
effective use of land, irrigation facilities, tractors and other 
production means. 
  In a county of moderate size where the level of management 
of 
the county cooperative farm management committee and cooperative 
farms is high, all the cooperative farms and the state 
enterprises that serve agriculture in that county may be merged 
into a state farm with the former cooperative farms made its 
branch farms and the former enterprises its workshops. If this 
is done, the cooperative farms and agricultural enterprises in 
the county will come under a general state farm and may 
facilitate the effective use of manpower, land, equipment and 
materials. 
  The general farms, which have been organized as model units 
in Sonbong and some other counties through the merger of not 
only agriculture but also local industry, goods distribution, 
education, culture, health care and all other local 
administrative and economic functions, must continue to operate, 
further improving their management. With the development of the 
farms of all-people ownership and with the accumulation of 
experience in the operation of state farms of different forms, 
the number of such general farms may be increased. 
  Even after cooperative ownership is converted into 
all-people 
ownership, all state farms should be managed under the self- 
balancing system and the socialist principle of distribution 
should be thoroughly implemented. This is an important 
requirement for managing the state farms of all-people ownership 
rationally and stimulating the farmers' productive enthusiasm to 
give full play to the advantages of state farms. 
  We must define correct forms and methods of transforming 
cooperative ownership into all-people ownership, by drawing on 
the advantages of the socialist agricultural system of our style 
and on the success in the building of the socialist countryside, 
in such a way as to preserve the existing guidance and 
management system of agriculture without changing it too much 
and by taking each local situation into careful consideration. 
The work of converting cooperative ownership into all-people 
ownership should be started on a trial basis in some counties 
where all conditions including the ideological level of farmers 
and the material and technical foundations of the rural economy 
have fully matured, and then should be extended to other 
counties gradually as experience accumulates. This will enable 
us to avoid possible deviations and loss in the process of 
transforming cooperative ownership into all-people ownership, 
carry out this task smoothly and further develop the rural 
economy without any turns and twists. 
  Because cooperative farms are to be switched over to state 
farms of all-people property on a county basis, the county will, 
in the future, too, play an important role as the base which 
links town and countryside and as an all-embracing unit of 
guidance and management to the rural economy. Therefore, it is 
necessary to build up the county, develop local industry 
further, and improve education, culture, health care and public 
welfare. The county must expand and strengthen the enterprises 
and the production establishments serving the rural economy to 
speed up the development of agriculture. All the counties must 
make it their major task to develop agricultural production and 
improve the living standard of the rural population and must 
push forward the construction of socialist countryside. 
  The complete conversion of cooperative property into 
all-people property will establish an undivided sway of 
all-people property in our country. We must brilliantly fulfil 
the historic tasks of eliminating the distinctions between urban 
and rural communities, between working class and peasantry, of 
solving the rural question ultimately and realizing a classless 
society, by advancing along the road indicated by the socialist 
rural theses, along the road of our socialism. 
  In order to solve the rural question successfully, the party 
must strengthen its guidance of socialist rural construction. 
  Party leadership is the lifeline of socialist rural 
construction and the building of socialism as a whole. Without 
party leadership, it would be impossible to solve the difficult 
and complex problems of socialist rural construction with 
success. 
  The party organizations in the agricultural sector must 
strengthen organizational and political work and ensure that all 
the officials and working people of the rural economy accelerate 
socialist rural construction under the leadership of the party. 
Party organizations and party officials must pay deep attention 
to the rural question, mobilize the party's effort to give a 
strong impetus to rural work and encourage the masses to give 
active assistance to the countryside. 
  It is important to enhance the role of the county party 
committee in improving party guidance to the rural economy. 
  The county party committee is the lowest leadership unit of 
our party, and it must work mainly among the rural communities. 
Our party's policy is amplified by the county party committee 
to suit the specific local situation and implemented under it 
guidance. Enhancing the role of the county party committee is an 
important factor for success in the building of the socialist 
countryside. 
  The county party committee must put great efforts into 
implementing the party's rural policy. It must hold fast to the 
party's rural policy and define the direction and methods of its 
implementation correctly, intensify political work among the 
masses as required by the chongsanri spirit and chongsanri 
method, and vigorously mobilize them in the implementation of 
party policy. It must encourage the officials of the county 
cooperative farm management committee and other administrative 
and economic bodies to do all work of socialist rural 
construction in a responsible manner by displaying a high 
revolutionary spirit, party spirit, working- class spirit and 
the spirit of service to the people, true to the party's rural 
policy. 
  It is now an important task of the county party committee to 
strengthen the rural bulwark of socialism politically, 
ideologically and from the class point of view. The county 
party committee must intensify party work, work among the 
people, in the countryside and rally the broad masses more 
closely behind the party by thoroughly implementing the mass 
line of the party, so that they share life and death and destiny 
with the party and support party leadership loyally. The county 
party committee must strengthen the ri party committees and 
rural party cells and help and lead all rural party 
organizations to perform their functions and role properly. 
  The struggle of our party and our people to build the 
socialist countryside is a glorious and fruitful struggle. We 
must continue to innovate and advance to speed up the 
development of the socialist countryside and hasten the complete 
victory of socialism. 
  I believe that you who are present at the national 
agricultural conference and all the agricultural working people 
throughout the country will bring about a new revolutionary 
change in socialist rural construction by working hard, holding 
aloft the banner of the socialist rural theses. 

