Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Feature by Yuriy Dmitriyev, Nikolay Dorofeyev, and Nikolay </F>
Kishkin: "`Universal Forgiveness': Does This Road Lead to the 
Temple of Accord?"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] What Are We To Expect? 
  This question is of concern to everyone now. Will the hasty 
amnesty not entail outbursts of extremism and lead to a new 
standoff of the powers? Journalists asked presidential 
apparatus staffers about this at a briefing yesterday. 
  A. Yakovlev, the president's representative in parliament, 
does not rule out such a development of events. In his opinion, 
special attention must be given to May Day this year, which, if 
we recall the past, might be exploited by extremist forces. 
Presidential aide G. Satarov declared that B. Yeltsin is taking 
measures to iron out as far as possible the negative 
consequences of what has happened. At the same time the same 
intention can be perceived among a section of deputies, or, at 
any rate, among those who voted for the act of amnesty in the 
sincere belief that it would lead to civil reconciliation. For 
Satarov believes (and Duma Speaker I. Rybkin concurs) that the 
deputies have become the hostages of their own decision and of 
the future conduct of those whom they have set free, and so an 
outburst of extremism and an exacerbation of the political 
situation will strike at their authority above all. Of course, 
we must not disregard the fact that there are forces, in 
parliament too, which will attempt to start their own political 
game on the basis of the act of amnesty. But it is not they, in 
the end, who play the decisive role. 
  The presidential spokesmen resolutely rejected the report 
that appeared somewhere or other alleging that the president is 
preparing a state of emergency to combat crime, which will then 
be used to crush the opposition. "Nonsense," came the reply. 
Such rumors are being spread for the quite deliberate purpose 
of inflaming the situation in the country.... 
  Satarov does not believe that the release of the Lefortovo 
inmates will sharply complicate cooperation between the 
president and parliament. Following the head of state's 
message, Duma committees have begun constructive work on 
implementing the strategic plan enshrined in that document. It 
has itself been greeted with understanding in parliament. 
  Yet, what are the implications of a return to politics by 
the 
organizers of the October riots, and will it materialise? R. 
Khasbulatov can scarcely count on anything. Evidently realizing 
this, he has already made the statement that he will not engage 
in political activity. As for A. Rutskoy, the possibility 
cannot be ruled out that his name will be exploited by 
antipresidential forces to undermine the policy of reforms. V. 
Mironov, deputy chairman of the State Duma Security Committee, 
believes that "the organizers of the October events might be 
thrown by the opposition, like penal battalions, into 
undermining democracy and civil peace." V. Anpilov has already 
shown up at a noisy rally in Teatralnaya and declared his 
intention "to fight against the present regime" right after 
coming out of Lefortovo. 
  If, after the amnesty, the political struggle develops not 
in 
civilized forms, then the factions which voted for it, basing 
their stance on the search for civil peace, will find themselves 
in a very difficult position. This primarily concerns the Party 
of Russian Unity and Accord, whose votes enabled the Duma to 
adopt the decision to release the Lefortovo inmates. Evidently 
sensing this, S. Shakhray, the party's leader, has already 
issued a statement: "The political organizations which sought 
only a political amnesty must assume responsibility for the 
actions of the freed leaders. If they intend to continue the 
struggle at the elections, like other citizens of the Russian 
Federation, this is a normal phenomenon; but if their chosen 
means of struggle is appeals to seize, destroy, or shoot, this 
means that new criminal cases will be instituted and there will 
be no accord and reconciliation." 
  The possibility cannot be ruled out that in the event of an 
outburst of extremism parliament will have to take some 
additional measures if it wants to be aware of the danger to the 
country of such a development of events. Deputy K. Zatulin, for 
example, proposed "discussing in the Duma the question of a 
possible ban on political activity by active participants in the 
events of October 1993." 
  In the meanwhile it is clear that things have not become 
calmer in the country at this time. 

