BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 6 KYODO -- A panel of advisers urged 
the government Monday [6 Jun] to halve the gap between domestic 
and overseas prices of some Japanese products over the next five 
years by promoting deregulation. 
  To accomplish the proposal, a working group of Prime 
Minister 
Tsutomu Hata's task force on administrative reform will draw up 
a specific timetable this month for reducing price differences, 
according to a report submitted by the panel to cabinet 
ministers. 
  "It is a problem that Japan's basic prices are 36 to 50 
percent higher than in the United States and European 
countries," Hata told a meeting of the working group discussing 
measures to promote imports and to improve market access and 
distribution. 
  "Reducing the gap in prices will not lead to deflation," he 
said. "Deregulation will help create domestic employment and 
allow foreign companies to enter the Japanese market." 
  After the meeting, Hata told reporters that he thought such 
a 
gap could be reduced by about 20 percent. 
  In a related development, business leaders chairing three 
government-commissioned economic advisory groups met separately 
to discuss problems associated with administrative reform. 
  But they failed to endorse a proposal by one of them, Tax 
Commission Chairman Kan Kato, to set targets for reducing price 
gaps, commission sources said. 
  The other participants were Gaishi Hiraiwa, who heads the 
Economic Council, and Eiji Suzuki, chairman of the Fiscal System 
Council. 
  Kato made the proposal to Hata recently along with other 
reform measures, including a review of the method for fixing 
public service charges. 
  The task force panel report, written by private-sector 
specialists of the working group, urged deregulation of the 
licensing system for retailers of liquor products, tobacco and 
rice by allowing other able and highly-motivated retailers to 
sell such products. 
  It proposed imposing mandatory upper-limit pricing for 
public 
services and other charges such as railway fares, and gas and 
electric fees. 
  The paper asked for authorization to establish self-service 
gas stations, while making it easier for trucking companies to 
get permission to increase the number of districts to which they 
are allowed to deliver cargo and parcels. 
  It urged the lifting of a ban on setting up holding 
companies, and called for a review of regulations on the amount 
of shares that can be owned in certain firms. 
  The report asked the government to phase out the current 
restrictions on establishing large-scale retailers and 
liberalizing imports and marketing of gasoline and other oil 
imports. 
  It also called for the abolition of exceptions to the 
formation of price and other competition-limiting cartels within 
five years. 
  U.S. trade negotiators have blasted the price gaps as the 
result of Japanese export industries' policy of subsidizing 
export prices by transferring the cost to Japanese consumers in 
the form of higher domestic prices. 

