BFN 

<F P=106> ["Qinghai Province Management Procedures for Birth Control </F>
of Floating Population"] 
  [Text] Article 1 These procedures are enacted 
according to the state's relevant stipulations on "Management 
Procedures for Birth Control of Floating Population" and the 
"Qinghai Province Regulations Regarding Birth Control" for 
strengthening birth control management of the floating 
population. 
  Article 2 The floating population discussed in 
these procedures refers to the population of child-bearing age 
which has left their places of registered permanent residence 
for other areas for work and living. 
  Article 3 The people's government at various 
levels exercises unified leadership over birth control work of 
the floating population in the area under its jurisdiction, and 
introduces target management responsibility system for 
population and birth control. 
  Article 4 Birth control administrative departments 
at various levels, township (town) people's governments, and 
neighborhood offices are specifically responsible for management 
of birth control of the floating population in the areas under 
their jurisdiction. 
  Public security, industry and commerce administration, tax, 
labor, public health, communications, construction, and other 
departments, and individual laborers associations should 
coordinate closely with birth control administrative 
departments, township (town) people's governments, and 
neighborhood offices, and they should do a good job in jointly 
managing birth control of the floating population. 
  Article 5 The duties of township (town) people's 
governments and neighborhood offices located at the floating 
population's present places of residence are: 
  1. To advise persons of child-bearing age on birth control 
rules and regulations, policies, and eugenics; 
  2. To examine the birth control certificates of persons of 
child-bearing age, and make registration and affix signatures 
and seals; 
  3. To check on the birth control situation of married 
persons of child-bearing age; 
  4. To provide married persons of child-bearing age with 
contraceptives and tools, and birth control technical services, 
and regularly check the pregnancy situation of married persons 
of child- bearing age; 
  5. To supervise and examine various measures taken by 
departments concerned with implementing the management of birth 
control of the floating population; 
  6. To record the birth situation of the floating population 
and notify township (town) people's governments and neighborhood 
offices located in their registered permanent residences; 
  7. To put forward punishment suggestions for persons who 
violate birth control rules and regulations and policies, and 
submit these suggestions to county-level birth control 
administrative departments for decision. 
  Article 6 Township (town) people's governments and 
neighborhood offices located at the registered permanent 
residences of the floating population should do good jobs in the 
following aspects: 
  1. Urging persons of child-bearing age who are going to 
other areas to implement contraception and birth control 
measures, and building up a system of contact with them; 
  2. Issuing birth control certificates to persons of 
child-bearing age who are going to other areas; 
  3. Setting up birth control files for persons of 
child-bearing age who are going to other areas. 
  Article 7 The floating population moving to their 
present places of residence for living and work should call on 
county, city (district) birth control administrative 
departments, township (town) people's governments, and 
neighborhood offices, and present their birth control 
certificates for examination. Examination certificates will be 
issued after examination and registration by the county, city 
(district) birth control administrative departments, township 
(town) people's governments, and neighborhood offices located at 
their present places of residence. 
  Article 8 Only after checking up the birth control 
certificates of the floating population can departments or 
enterprises concerned at their present places of residence 
handle household registration of temporary residence, the 
signing of labor contracts, the issuing of business licenses, 
and other procedures. 
  Article 9 Units and departments employing workers 
are to carry out birth control management of the floating 
population they employ, and accept supervision and inspection by 
local township (town) people's governments, neighborhood 
offices, and birth control administrative departments at the 
county level and above. 
  Article 10 Birth applications of the floating 
population are to be examined and approved by birth control 
administrative departments, township (town) people's 
governments, and neighborhood offices located at their 
registered permanent residences according to local relevant 
regulations. 
  Only against birth certificates laid down in previous 
provisions can the floating population give birth to children at 
their present places of residence. 
  Article 11 The number of children given birth to 
by the floating population is to accord with the regulations 
laid down in their registered places of permanent residence. 
  Article 12 Guest houses, hotels, room or house 
renters, as well as relatives and friends of the floating 
population should actively help departments concerned do a good 
job in birth control for the floating population. If they 
discover violations of birth control rules and regulations and 
policies, they should report in time to birth control 
administrative departments, township (town) people's 
governments, and neighborhood offices. 
  Article 13 If departments and units that should 
perform relevant birth control management duties in accordance 
with the present procedures cannot meet the requirements of 
birth control target management, local people's governments and 
departments concerned should investigate and affix according to 
regulations the responsibility of their leading members and the 
person held directly responsible. 
  Article 14 Members of the floating population who 
violate birth control rules and regulations and policies, and 
who become pregnant and give birth to children outside the plan 
should be punished according to Articles 40 and 41 of the 
"Qinghai Province Regulations Regarding Birth Control". 
  Those who violate the regulations laid down in previous 
provisions -- and if the case is serious -- should be charged 
one to five times extra fees for pregnancy and childbirth 
outside the plan according to the highest penalty limit laid 
down in the previous provisions. Various departments concerned 
and units employing workers should render active assistance. 
  Article 15 Units and individuals that violate 
these procedures, provide hiding places, or withhold and cover 
up cases without reporting the are to be penalized up to 1,000 
yuan depending on the seriousness of the case. 
  Article 16 For those who forge, sell, or acquire 
certificates by cheating, birth control administrative 
departments at the county level and above should warn and punish 
the persons held directly responsible, and confiscate their 
illegal income. These offices also should make suggestions to 
the units where these people work and to the departments 
concerned for punishment. 
  Administrative disciplinary measures are to be taken by the 
departments in charge against working personnel of state organs 
who violate these procedures, carry out fraudulent practices for 
the benefit of their relatives and friends, and resort to 
deception. 
  Article 17 Departments, units, and individuals who 
have made outstanding achievements in carrying out these 
procedures are to be commended and awarded by people's 
governments at various levels and birth control departments. 
  Awards to only-child parents of the floating population are 
to be given by township (town) people's governments and 
neighborhood offices located at their registered permanent 
residences according to relevant regulations. 
  Article 18 Administrative punishments laid down on 
these procedures are to be imposed by birth control 
administrative departments. Litigants who refuse to accept the 
administrative punishments may apply for administrative 
reconsideration or take legal proceedings against the 
departments according to the law. 
  Penalties and monies confiscated are to be turned over to 
local finance offices without exception. 
  Article 19 The Qinghai Provincial Birth Control 
Commission is to be responsible for explaining the specific 
issues that emerge in the application of these procedures. 
  Article 20 These procedures are to be put into 
effect from the date of issue. 

