Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Czech Radio Has Extended Its </F>
Long-Wave-Band and Medium-Wave-Band Broadcasts"] 
  [Text] Prague--Czech Radio will, for now, extend its 
broadcasts on the long-wave band until the end of February, and 
that with a 50-percent output. At the slightly reduced 
medium-wave band, Radiozurnal will stay until the end of 1994, 
Czech Radio Director General V. Jezek stated yesterday. 
  "We will reduce the medium-wave network by the reduction of 
the output of certain transmitters and their number. The 
50-percent output of the transmitters on the long-wave band will 
save us money without substantially affecting the content of the 
broadcasts. Thanks to the accommodating approach by the Ceske 
Radiokomunikace company [Czech Radiocommunications], we will not 
pay the lease tariff in February. While on the medium-wave band 
we have opted for this solution until the end of the year, we 
have extended the broadcasts by one month on the long-wave band 
because we must await the decision by economy ministers and the 
government," Jezek said. According to him, the economy ministers 
are to deal with the problem of Czech Radio on Tuesday, 1 
February. "Several bilateral talks are currently in progress, in 
which we are explaining our financial needs," Jezek said. 
  At the end of last year, because of the negative response on 
the part of the listeners to the proposed changes in the 
broadcasts of Czech Radio, Jezek decided to extend the 
broadcasts of the Radiozurnal station on the long- and 
medium-wave bands until 30 January. He also pointed out that, if 
the Finance Ministry does not announce the date and the amount 
of the increase of the license [subscription] fee by 20 January, 
or if the new license fees do not cover the already projected 
deficit and Radiozurnal's use of the long- and medium-wave 
bands, the Czech Radio management will definitely be forced to 
abandon the long-wave band on 1 February 1994. It will also have 
to substantially reduce the medium-wave broadcasts of 
Radiozurnal and, for the second half of 1994, "further reduce 
the programing plans of Czech Radio." 
  The current 20-koruna [Kc] license fee is to be increased to 
Kc25 or 29, and that probably on 1 March. 

