CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Artem Filipenko under the rubric "Bosporus": </F>
"The Symplegades Could Close, Catching the Tail of the Ukrainian 
Fleet"] 
  [Text] Odessa--The ancient Greek story about the journey of 
argonauts to the far-away Colchis has preserved for us the 
legend of the Symplegades--rocks that opened and closed moment 
after moment barring ships' access to the Black Sea. The 
argonauts were lucky to pass between the rocks, losing only a 
small part of the stern. The Symplegades froze and have never 
stirred since, symbolizing free passage to the Black Sea. 
However, it appears that the rocks could close again soon, and 
forces of nature will not be to blame for this. 
  From 1936 to this date, the regimen of navigation in the 
Turkish straits of Bosporus and Dardanelles has been regulated 
by a convention signed in the city of Montreux by England, 
France, Bulgaria, Greece, Turkey, Japan, Italy, and the USSR. 
The document envisioned the free passage of vessels of all 
states through the straits and procedures for the passage of 
military ships of the Black Sea and non-Black Sea countries 
through them. 
  However, Turkey has apparently decided that the Montreux 
convention is obsolete. In recent years, the number of vessels 
passing through the straits has increased sharply (to 45,000 a 
year), as has the size and tonnage of the ships. More than 60 
percent of the vessels carry oil, natural gas, toxic chemicals, 
and waste from nuclear power stations. The new rules developed 
in Ankara, whose introduction is scheduled for 1 June, apply 
primarily to these categories of carriage. 
  In keeping with Point 2.4, the owner or charterer of a large 
vessel must warn the Turkish administration in advance of his 
intention to use the straits and of the freight on board. If oil 
or nuclear or chemical waste appear in this entry, or if the 
vessel is nuclear-powered, the captain must file a report with 
the Turkish doorkeeper no later than 24 hours before arrival. If 
the gods, border services, and meteorological and oceanic 
conditions favor you, you sail on. Captains who operate 
potentially dangerous ships must have a local pilot on board. 
The movement of these vessels is only allowed during daytime and 
with the use of a tug. Article 3.6 envisions that the Straits of 
Bosporus and Dardanelles may be closed to maritime traffic 
during the passage of vessels with large draft, nuclear-powered 
vessels, and vessels carrying nuclear and toxic waste. Turkey 
also reserves the right to close the corridor under poor 
meteorological conditions. 
  One does not have to be an old salt to guess that the new 
restrictions will bring about delays of ships and, accordingly, 
considerable losses. However, the main point is that the 
principle of maritime traffic in the straits will be changed. 
The Turks are switching from a notification system to an 
authorization system, and authorization might be denied. The 
ecological threat, which mounts with every passing year, is the 
reason for new restrictions. Turkish experts believe that 
tankers are huge Molotov cocktails which bob on the waves in the 
middle of Istanbul with its 10 million population. 
  Murat Uzun, aide to the Turkish secretary for maritime 
affairs, stated to journalists that the new rules have just one 
purpose--to guarantee the safety of ships in the Bosporus and 
the Dardanelles, and that no revision of the convention itself 
is envisioned. That is to say, de facto Turkey has no right to 
regiment the passage of nonmilitary vessels through the straits. 
Nonetheless, recently the Turkish Government has continuously 
and unilaterally tightened the navigation regimen, having 
approved more than 20 rules restricting connections between the 
Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. 
  The restrictions introduced on tankers affect first of all 
the interests of two Black Sea states--Russia and Ukraine. It is 
possible that the former will suffer as a leading exporter of 
oil, and the recently completed oil terminal can remain a 
reminder of the former oil might of Russia. As far as Ukraine is 
concerned, after the introduction of the new rules it will have 
to forget about importing oil from the Near East. Restrictions 
apply to tankers with a displacement of more than 80,000 tonnes. 
This is the main type of Ukrainian oil carriers. To the mind of 
Yevhen Naumenko, commercial director of the Blasko-Tanker 
department, transportation of Iranian oil by small tankers will 
call for additional expenditures. 
  Let us recall that the concept of importing oil from the 
Near 
East has come up as a result of strains in the delivery of 
Russian energy resources. The developed program envisioned 
building a string of oil terminals along the Black Sea coast, 
first at the southern port in the vicinity of Odessa, where it 
was planned to build an oil offloading complex with an annual 
capacity of 40 million tonnes of oil. The program for building 
the tanker fleet of Ukraine was geared to this project. Despite 
the dubious aspects of both programs, some politicians were 
disposed to equate the terminal with Ukraine's independence. 
Warnings about the possible closure of the Turkish straits were 
perceived as a joke. However, there is a grain of truth in each 
joke. 
  Mr. Naumenko, commercial director of Blasko-Tanker, believes 
that it is too early to abandon the construction project, 
although recently the Black Sea Shipping Line has not added a 
single new oil tanker. There are several ways out of this 
situation, including the purchase of BV tankers, i.e. tankers 
that have already been used to transport oil. The 64th session 
of the Maritime Safety Committee of the International Maritime 
Organization has just ended in London. A group of Russian and 
Ukrainian maritime specialists took part in it. 
  P.S. When this article was ready for printing, a POST-POSTUP 
correspondent was notified at the department of maritime and 
river transportation that, according to the latest unofficial 
information, the Maritime Safety Committee has resolved the 
issue of the regimen of passage through the Bosporus and the 
Dardanelles in favor of Ukraine and Russia. A highly placed 
Ukrainian Government official for maritime affairs said: "Had 
Turkey achieved its objective, it would have been managing our 
merchant marine." In the opinion of this functionary of the 
department of maritime and river transportation of Ukraine, the 
Turks attempted to gain an economic advantage from their 
geographic position. They were also urged to take such actions 
by certain international cartels which would like to weaken the 
role of Russia and Ukraine in the world market. The Ukrainian 
delegation that worked in London will return early next week. It 
appears that this time the Symplegades did not move. However, 
there is no guarantee that a similar situation will not recur in 
the future. Perhaps this case will prompt the Ukrainian 
leadership to look for new sources of energy resources. 

