Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Jiang Yonghong (3068 3057 4767): </F>
"When Visiting PLA Units Stationed in Shanxi, Chairman Jiang 
Zemin Encourages Officers and Men To Set Store by the People's 
Interests and take Pride in Rendering Service to the Motherland"] 
  [Text] Taiyuan, 3 Feb (JIEFANGJUN BAO)--During his 
inspection trip in Shanxi, Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the 
CPC Central Committee, president of the People's Republic of 
China, and chairman of the Central Military Commission, paid 
separate visits to PLA units garrisoned in Shanxi under the 
State Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for 
National Defense and the Beijing Military Region on behalf of 
the CPC Central Committee, the State Council, and the Central 
Military Commission. During his visits, he expressed his deep 
concern about and extended Spring Festival greetings to the 
officers and men of the entire army. He urged the vast numbers 
of officers and men to place the interest of the people above 
everything else, to take pride in rendering services to the 
motherland, and to help each other on the way ahead. Cadres 
should take good care of soldiers, veterans should help new 
recruits, and newcomers should show respect for their superiors. 
All officers and men should unite as one, strengthen political 
studies, do a good job in military training, and build the 
troops into combat collectives which are able to pass the 
strictest tests. 
  Carrier rocket launchers towered aloft on the uncultivated 
loess plateau. This is the place where the troops under the 
State Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for 
National Defense work hard year in and year out, and they have 
scored one victory after another in the spirit of hard struggle 
and selfless contribution. Chairman Jiang chose this place as 
his first stop on his Shanxi trip. In the early morning of 29 
January, the temperature dropped to minus 18 degrees centigrade, 
and all the hills were covered with a thin layer of snow. As 
soon as he got off the train, braving the cold, Chairman Jiang 
enthusiastically inspected all the major equipment on the base 
and inquired about the progress of scientific research and 
experiments. He then entered a workshop and cordially met with 
the base's cadres at the regimental level and above. Seeing 
that Chairman Jiang was walking toward them, these cadres, who 
were engaged in high-tech work under difficult working and 
living conditions, found it hard to control their emotion and 
burst into warm applause. 
  Jiang Zemin said sentimentally: Conditions here are very 
difficult. You people have worked and lived here for many years 
on end and have made significant contributions to the 
modernization of national defense. The party and people are 
grateful to you. Turning to Shanxi Provincial Party Secretary Hu 
Fuguo and acting Governor Sun Wensheng who accompanied him 
during the trip, Jiang Zemin said: Communications are not 
convenient and conditions are not very good here. Our troops on 
this base have faced many difficulties in their lives, and the 
young comrades are also faced with difficulty in finding a 
suitable spouse. I hope that the local party committees and 
governments can do their best to help our troops solve 
difficulties back at home so that they can concentrate their 
energy on their work and make greater contributions. 
  What Chairman Jiang said warmed the hearts of all those 
present, and they responded with warm applause. Chairman Jiang 
walked to the front of a rank and shook hands and talked with 
the scientific cadres standing in the front row. People 
extended greetings to Chairman Jiang, who also waved greetings 
to the comrades standing in the back row. 
  Chairman Jiang always has the welfare of the troops at 
heart. 
During his entire inspection of Shanxi, he spoke more than once 
about ways to improve the living standards of our troops with Fu 
Quanyou, member of the Central Military Commission and director 
of the PLA General Logistics Department, and Li Laizhu, 
commander of the Beijing Military Region, who accompanied him 
during the inspection. As soon as he arrived in a new Army 
unit, Chairman Jiang would inquire about its agricultural and 
sideline production and the welfare of the rank and file. On 
the morning of 1 February, Chairman Jiang paid a special visit 
to the officers and men of a military farm under a group army 
when he was inspecting the development of the Huang He shoals in 
Yuncheng Prefecture. 
  On the afternoon of 1 February, Chairman Jiang rushed to 
visit a certain tank regiment. At the training site, when the 
tank operators, who were receiving training at the time, and the 
new recruits saw Chairman Jiang, they quickly fell into lines 
for him to inspect. When coming to the row of the fifth squad 
of the second company of new recruits by the side of the tank 
number 511, Chairman Jiang shook hands with the soldiers one 
after another, asked them about the training, and asked them how 
they were doing. Afterward, the chairman entered the new 
recruits' dormitory and the company kitchen and asked the 
soldiers about the food. He was very happy when he saw that the 
windows were clean and the quilts were folded up properly in the 
dormitory of the new recruits of the first company. He asked 
the soldiers whether they would have recreational activities 
during the spring festival and whether they were homesick. When 
they unanimously said that they were comfortable being in 
service, he smiled with relief. He also encouraged the officers 
and men of this regiment to strengthen solidarity, study 
diligently, train hard, and improve their own quality and the 
troops' fighting capacity in a comprehensive way. 
  A certain infantry regiment once acted as guard for the 
Second Plenary Session of the Seventh CPC Central Committee. 
With diligent efforts, their officers and men have made fairly 
big progress in material and cultural life in recent years. On 
the afternoon of 2 February, Chairman Jiang inspected the 
regiment's livelihood service center, where he found 22 
different kinds of vegetables and types of food to supply the 
various companies. Chairman Jiang carefully inquired about the 
prices of various kinds of vegetables and types of food. 
Soldiers at the service center told Chairman Jiang that they 
processed the bean curd, bean sprouts, and dried bean curd 
themselves; that they raised and slaughtered the pigs 
themselves; and that they grew some of the vegetables which were 
relatively inexpensive. After he heard this, Chairman Jiang 
praised them several times. Chairman Jiang also visited a 
workshop where fried dough and pastries were made and dumplings 
were made by machines. He saw how the soldiers made more than 
100 pickled vegetables and how the cooks skillfully prepared the 
food with their knives. Later, he entered the "Home of the 
Company Quarter Master." When he found that they used strict 
auditing measures to ensure that the food expenditures were 
fully used by the soldiers, he praised this by nodding his head 
repeatedly. 
  In Taiyuan, Chairman Jiang met with PLA cadres at and above 
the divisional level stationed there. He gave important 
instructions regarding the question of studies. He said: 
Building socialism with Chinese characteristics and 
invigorating China is a great task before us. In order to 
complete this task, we must continue to struggle arduously and 
make efforts to consolidate our studies. All our officers and 
men must first study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics and his thinking about 
army building during the new period, and they should use them as 
a guide for all of our work. Following the development of 
science and technology, new technologies and new knowledge keep 
coming. All cadres of the troops should consolidate the study 
of new technologies and new knowledge, especially basic 
high-tech knowledge, and should continuously improve their 
skills so as to meet the needs of the new situation and new 
tasks. 
  Some leaders of the relevant ministries of the central 
authorities also accompanied General Secretary Jiang on his 
working and troop inspection tour, including Zeng Qinghong, Ye 
Qing, Liu Jiang, Han Zhubin, Zhang Youcai, Teng Wensheng, and 
Yang Yongzhe. 

