Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Terumichi Murakami, Research Director, Nomura </F>
Research Institute] 
  [Text] The Nomura Research Institute surveyed 1800 Japanese 
businesses concerning the current situation of intellectual 
property rights. From the results of the survey, the 
characteristics of the electronics industry were inferred with 
the comparison of the industries of pharmaceuticals, 
automobiles, and machines. In the electronics industry, even 
when disputes arise, they rarely advance to litigation. 
Litigation is more often brought by foreign businesses than 
domestic businesses. Organizations for handling intellectual 
property rights are prepared, but are as yet passive concerning 
the assertion of rights. Less than 70% of businesses are 
equipped with a defense mechanism in the way of using patents. 
  A questionnaire survey was sent to the persons responsible 
for intellectual property rights of 1800 Japanese businesses of 
all types excluding financial organizations (``Survey of 
Intellectual Property Rights'', November 1992, 480 usable 
replies, 26.6% response rate).[.sup]1[/] Based on the 
results of this questionnaire, an overview of the measures and 
the current state of the intellectual property rights measures 
was made from the viewpoint of comparison with other industries. 
  The examination was made mainly with patents in mind. 
  Of all responses to the questionnaire, 61 companies 
responded 
from the electronics industry (the electric instruments 
industry, in the questionnaire). Upon looking at close 
industries, 16 were precision instruments companies and 45 were 
machine companies; these three industries made up 25% of 
the 
total. Moreover, the industries of individual businesses was 
determined by the businesses themselves, the questionnaire being 
multiple choice. 
  The survey results were broadly divided into the current 
state of disputes concerning intellectual property rights and 
the companies' systems concerning intellectual property rights. 
The characteristics of the electronics industry for each of 
these respectively is explained. 
  The questionnaire asked about disputes concerning 
intellectual property rights during the five years up to 1992. 
The special characteristics of the domestic electronics industry 
for disputes can be learned from these results. 
  Compared with other industries, there are three 
characteristics in this industry. First, even if intellectual 
property rights disputes occur, they rarely are related to 
litigation (Figure 1 (a)). Second, most litigation caused as a 
violation of the partner's rights is brought by foreign 
companies and individuals (Figure 1 (b)). Third, in disputes 
with foreign partners, rights are asserted from another as the 
rights are violated more often than rights are asserted to 
another as one's rights are violated. 
<H5>  Litigation is Difficult to Bring Even When Disputes Arise </H5>
  Let's look at the survey results for the first point. The 
questionnaire asked about the experience in the five years up to 
1992 of the two cases of intellectual property rights disputes 
beginning by sending a warning of rights violations and those 
cases going as far as litigation. The statistics introduced here 
are the results for disputes of the said company violating 
another's rights and asserting rights. 
  Looking at Japanese business overall, businesses having 
experienced intellectual property rights disputes amount to 
56% 
of all (Table 1). In other words, one out of two companies has 
experienced a dispute. Disputes with the inventors of foreign 
companies and foreigners are 27.8% which is high, being 
close 
to 30%. 



  Table 1. Percentage of companies experiencing disputes and litigation in the 
five years up to 1992. In each industry, the percentage of companies 
experiencing disputes and litigation of violating the rights of another are 
shown. From ``Survey of Intellectual Property Rights'' (Nomura Research 
Institute, November 1992). 

                  (A)             (B)             (C)             Percentage 
                  Percentage      Percentage      Percentage      (%) of 
                  (%) of          (%) of          (%) of          companies 
                  companies       companies       companies       experiencing 
                  experiencing    experiencing    experiencing    disputes with 
                  litigation      litigation      disputes        a foreign 
                                  with a                          party 
                                  foreign party 


Overall           18.4            8.7             8.7             56.2 

Construction      17.1            2.9             48.6            11.4 

Textiles          8.3             0.0             50.0            33.3 

Pulp and paper    12.5            0.0             50.0            0.0 

Glass, cement,    18.8            0.0             50.0            18.8 
and ceramics 

Chemical and      25.5            6.4             66.0            34.0 
rubber products 


Medicine          35.7            14.3            78.6            35.7 

Steel and         22.6            12.9            67.7            25.8 
nonferrous 
metals 

Machine           22.2            6.7             75.6            42.2 

Precision         37.5            31.3            100.0           62.5 
instruments 

Electrical        16.4            14.8            72.1            45.9 
instruments 

Automobiles and   31.4            20.0            71.4            45.7 
other 
transportation 
machines 

Other             17.4            10.9            52.2            19.6 
manufacturing 

Energy            0.0             0.0             25.0            12.5 

Service           6.3             1.3             17.7            5.1 


  Excluding the 20% or so service industries and the 
energy 
industry experiencing disputes, in any type of the manufacturing 
industries, over half of businesses have experienced an 
intellectual property rights dispute. In the electronics 
industry, most, 72.1%, of businesses have that 
experience. In 
the precision, automobile, and pharmaceuticals industries as 
well, those not having that experience are in the minority. 
  On the other hand, companies having experienced litigation 
even once in the past five years are 18.4% when seen from 
the 
industry as a whole. By the way, the average number of incidents 
was 1.7. In the electronics industry, the percentage of 
companies with litigation experience is 16.4% and is less 
than 
overall. 
  When finding the overall number of disputes and the 
percentage of incidents (litigation rate) which went as far as 
litigation, characteristics of the electronics industry are 
shown. For convenience, Table 1 A/C shows the litigation rate. 
In responding businesses overall, the litigation rate was 
32.8%. In the electronics industry, the litigation rate 
was 
very low, 22.7% (p.311 Figure 1 (a)). 
  Even in the electronics industry, when looking at disputes 
of 
foreign parties, the litigation rate (Table 1 B/D) becomes 
32.1% and is almost the same level for industry overall 
which 
is 31.3%. In other words, in this industry, while the 
experience of disputes is way above the overall average, 
domestic disputes are often resolved before going as far as 
litigation. 
<H5>  Litigation Part is 90% Foreign </H5>
  Also related to the above results, the electronics industry 
has an extremely high percentage of litigation with foreign 
parties in experience of litigation (Table 1 B/A, p. 311 Figure 
1 (b)). Looking at Japanese industry overall, the percentage of 
litigation with foreign parties was 47%. In the case of 
the 
electronics industry, it actually reached 90%. 
  In effect, in this industry, litigation concerning 
intellectual property rights problems is in itself litigation 
with foreign parties; it is very rarely litigation between 
Japanese businesses and individual inventors. The electronics 
industry is an industry having a special pattern of intellectual 
property rights disputes with a combination of the high 
``dispute processing efficiency'' within Japan and the high 
frequency of litigation with foreigners. 
  There are more of the incidents themselves of litigation 
with 
foreign parties than in other industries. The percentage of 
businesses having the experience of litigation brought by 
foreign businesses in the past five years as those rights were 
violated was 8.7% (Table 1) for industry overall. The 
percentage for the electronics industry was 14.8% and one 
of 
seven companies went as far as litigation with a foreign party. 
  Along with precision instruments and automobiles, the 
electronics industry is thought to be an industry with much 
experience of foreign litigation. These figures agree with the 
solid sense of the industry. By the way, the percentage for the 
precision machine industry was 31.3% and 20.0% for 
the 
automobile industry. 
<H5>  Rights Violations are Asserted in Many Cases </H5>
  The statistics up to now concern the disputes (violations 
cases) of rights asserted as the company concerned violated the 
rights of another company. Another side of the intellectual 
property rights dispute is the side of a non-violation with the 
company concerned actively asserting the rights. Another 
characteristic of the electronics industry concerning disputes 
with foreign parties is seen by looking at the percentage of 
violations and non-violations. 
  In the electronics industry, the percentage of violation 
cases with warnings from another company greatly surpasses the 
cases of non-violation where one company asserts their rights to 
another. Figure 2 shows the position of the industry with the 
vertical axis being the percentage of businesses experiencing 
disputes with non-violation cases and the horizontal axis being 
the percentage of businesses experiencing violation cases. The 
electronics industry has a trend to the right of the average of 
domestic industry overall. 
  The Japanese electronics industry continually maintains a 
high competitive force in the global market and leads the world 
in new products as well. This figure shows that in the area of 
intellectual property rights, even now they are in a defensive 
position. 
<H3>  50% of Businesses See a Worsening of U.S.-Japan 
Disputes </H3>
  In disputes in the case of violations, in most industries, 
the United States nationality is seen most often (excluding 
Japan) when seen in detail by nationality of the party. In the 
electronics industry, among businesses experiencing disputes of 
violations cases 65.3% are with parties from the United 
States 
and 10.2% are with European parties. By the way, in cases 
of 
non-violations, 23.3% were United States, 6.7% 
were European, 
and 23.3% were Asian (multiple responses possible). 
  The unyielding attitude of United States businesses 
concerning intellectual property rights disputes, especially 
patent disputes, has a great influence on the intellectual 
property rights measures of Japanese businesses. One important 
issue of intellectual property rights concerning business 
management overall is the large scale patent disputes with 
American parties of Minolta Camera and Sega Enterprises (see pp. 
314-315 Steeply rising U.S. patent dispute reparations). 
  For this type of current situation, what type of perception 
do domestic businesses have concerning the movement of future 
U.S.-Japan patent disputes? This question was asked in the 
questionnaire. 
  In Japanese businesses overall, 50% of businesses 
have the 
pessimistic viewpoint that ``litigation from the United States 
will become more frequent and Japanese companies will undergo a 
great shock'' (Table 2). 23.6% of businesses 
optimistically 
grasp that ``disputes are temporary and are not to be worried 
about in the long run.'' 19.1% of businesses have the 
spirited 
viewpoint that ``in the near future Japanese businesses will 
become dominant in intellectual property rights disputes and the 
situation will become the opposite of now.'' The electronics 
industry also generally recognizes a similar pattern. 



  Table 2. Outlook for the progress of US-Japanese intellectual property 
rights disputes. The percentages of businesses selecting each answer for 
the question of ``How will U.S.-Japanese intellectual property rights 
disputes be by the year 2000?'' are shown. From ``Survey of Intellectual 
Property Rights'' (Nomura Research Institute, November 1992). Unit: %. 

                    Litigation      Disputes are   In the near     Other 
                    from the        temporary      future 
                    United States   and are not    Japanese 
                    will become     to be          businesses 
                    more frequent   worried        will become 
                    and Japanese    about in the   dominant and 
                    companies       long run.      the situation 
                    will undergo                   will become 
                    a great                        the opposite 
                    shock.                         of now. 

Overall             50.2            23.6           19.1            7.1 

Construction        56.3            15.6           28.1            0.0 

Textiles            75.0            16.7           8.3             0.0 

Pulp and paper      42.8            28.6           28.6            0.0 

Glass, cement,      53.8            7.7            38.5            0.0 
and ceramics 

Chemical and        32.6            37.0           13.0            17.4 
rubber products 

Medicine            46.2            38.5           15.3            0.0 

Steel and           46.7            26.7           16.5            10.1 
nonferrous metals 


Machine             45.5            27.3           18.2            9.0 

Precision           57.1            21.4           7.1             14.4 
instruments 

Electrical          52.5            22.0           18.6            6.9 
instruments 

Automobiles and     52.9            26.5           11.8            8.8 
other 
transportation 
machines 

Other               45.2            23.8           26.2            4.8 
manufacturing 

Energy              57.2            28.6           7.1             7.1 

Service             58.6            14.3           21.4            5.7 


  On the other hand, some industries have a more spirited 
viewpoint. In the chemical and medical products industries, the 
viewpoint of not worrying in the long run is stronger than the 
viewpoint that Japanese businesses receive more blows. 
Furthermore, in the pulp and paper and ceramics industries, 
about 30% of businesses feel that Japanese business is 
becoming 
dominant. 
  Compared to the electronics and precision instruments 
industries, these are areas with a high degree of maturation as 
industries. For this reason they appear to be optimistic 
concerning the relationship of U.S.-Japanese intellectual 
property rights disputes. 
  What type of system do electronics makers have to deal with 
the above types of disputes concerning intellectual property 
rights? 
  From the results of the survey, in the electronics industry, 
the acquisition of intellectual property rights and the 
preparation of an organization to handle disputes are 
comparatively advanced and many personnel participate. 
Concerning the assertion of rights, naturally many businesses 
have a passive way of thinking. 
<H5>  Twenty Percent Have an Intellectual Property Rights Division </H5>
  Divisions handling intellectual property rights in domestic 
businesses historically were either organized as divisions 
related to general affairs or divisions related to research and 
development. Patents, the center of intellectual property 
rights, hold together the technical side of results of research 
and development and the side of rights for legally protecting 
those. 
  Affairs concerned with intellectual property rights in 
domestic businesses centered on patent applications up to now. 
Upon considering this point, businesses handling intellectual 
property rights in the R&amp;D division close to the scene of 
development had full scale handling. Also, recently, the 
necessity for litigation countermeasures in addition to patent 
application formalities has increased. Therefore, ``Intellectual 
Property Rights Divisions'' for unified control of intellectual 
property rights resistant to litigation and including business 
and legal divisions have appeared. 
  Upon considering this background, how much effort businesses 
put into intellectual property rights problems can be generally 
inferred by the department responsible. The efforts are 
considered to be getting serious if the responsible department 
is one of the following in order: the business division, legal 
affairs division, R&amp;D division, patent division, and 
intellectual property rights division. While some industries 
already have a system in the form of patent departments as in 
the medical and pharmaceutical products industry, industries 
also exist which do not even have the form of an intellectual 
property rights division. 
  When seen from this perspective, along with the precision 
instruments industry, the electronics industry in which 
comparatively many businesses have intellectual property rights 
divisions can be considered the industry with the most advanced 
full-scale handling (Figure 3). 
<H5>  Many Personnel Participate </H5>
  The same type of thing can be seen from the total number of 
personnel dealing with intellectual property rights. The total 
number of personnel is of course greater the larger the scale of 
the company, but varies rather widely depending on the type of 
business. In major businesses of over 10,000 employees in the 
electronics industry, the number of employees per one business 
has become overwhelming (Table 3). 



  Table 3. Number of personnel participating in intellectual property rights. 
This shows the average number for each size of corporation of the total number 
of personnel participating in intellectual property rights. The size of scale 
is classified by the number of employees. Small and medium companies have less 
than 1000 employees; large companies have 1000 to 10,000 employees; and major 
companies have over 10,000 employees. The electronics manufacturers classified 
as major companies separate overwhelmingly many people by the intellectual 
property rights policies. From ``Survey of Intellectual Property Rights'' 
(Nomura Research Institute, November 1992). Unit: People. 

                        Small and medium   Large companies    Major companies 
                        companies 

Overall                 3.3                11.3               53.6 

Construction            2.0                5.9                9.0 

Textiles                2.3                10.3               --- 

Pulp and paper          ---                10.4               --- 

Glass, cement, and      2.2                7.0                43.0 
ceramics 

Chemical and rubber     7.1                18.2               52.0 
products 

Medicine                4.0                13.2               90.0 

Steel and nonferrous    2.4                7.0                49.7 
metals 

Machine                 3.2                12.0               32.0 

Precision instruments   4.5                30.0               --- 


Electrical              3.5                11.0               215.0 
instruments 

Automobiles and other   2.0                7.9                68.2 
transportation 
machines 

Other manufacturing     3.3                7.7                21.5 

Energy                  4.0                13.1               6.0 

Service                 2.7                4.1                3.2 


  The closely related precision instruments industry as well 
is 
becoming an industry in which the average total number of 
employees is overwhelmingly great among businesses entering the 
category of large companies. 
  While some places have over 100 patent attorneys in one 
company in US businesses, in the case of Japanese businesses 
only 3.8% of all employees are personnel having the 
qualifications of attorneys and patent attorneys. The reason for 
this is that in Japan the burden on persons taking the 
qualifying exam for patent attorney is great and the contents 
also concern the application process and only contribute 
partially to the affairs concerning intellectual property 
rights. The current state in which business does not perform 
special treatment is another factor. 
  Actually, persons having the abilities of qualified persons 
even without qualifications appear to be lurking in Japanese 
companies. The same type of thing may also appear in the 
electronics industry. 
<H5>  The Easily Imitated Electronics Industry </H5>
  Relatively speaking, the electronics industry is the 
industry 
with the most advanced handling in the country in terms of 
personnel and organization. This does not mean that the 
awareness of ``rights'' for intellectual property rights as they 
are is the most advanced. 
  This questionnaire asked to what degree the rights held by 
one's company are asserted concerning products produced by other 
companies. In the current environment of intellectual property 
rights, it was asked whether the development of similar products 
by another company is possible (difficulty of imitation) and to 
what degree the rights of one's company are strongly asserted 
when imitated (assertion of rights). 
  Figure 4 shows these results seen by type of company. It is 
understood that in the electronics industry, the difficulty of 
imitation is low so it is comparatively easy for other companies 
to develop similar products and the assertion of rights is also 
low (Zone B of the figure). This agrees with the results of 
analyzing the current state of intellectual property rights 
disputes. 
  The pharmaceutical and medical products industry and the 
chemical industry are at the opposite pole; imitation is 
difficult and the assertion of rights appears high (Zone A of 
the figure). The automobile and steel industries fall into the 
category of industries where imitation is difficult, but the 
assertion of rights is not performed very actively (Zone C of 
the figure). 
  It is suggested that the electronics and automobile 
industries, presently dragging the Japanese economy, both fall 
into the category of low assertion of rights. If it may be fine 
to remain like this in the future, major questions remain. It is 
necessary to have energetic discussion in the industry. 
<H5>  Becoming Free From Defense Patents is Indicated </H5>
  The passive outlook of the electronics industry for 
intellectual property rights is also shown in the use of 
intellectual property rights. 
  When the way of using patents which are the nucleus of 
intellectual property rights is positioned in management 
strategies, it can be broadly divided into four types. The first 
is the defense method for attack by the intellectual property 
rights of a competing company. This is related to the action of 
applying for concentrated and many peripheral patents for 
applied technology related to the invention and items considered 
to be necessary in order to connect with the production of that 
invention. 
  The second is thinking to aim for a monopolistic position in 
the market, patenting very new and exclusive inventions of 
another company and not allowing another company to follow. This 
is said to make the most of the essential function of patents. 
  The third is to apply for and acquire patents actively and 
to 
restrain the entrance of another company to a specific area. 
This uses the application disclosure system of Japan's patent 
system as a dirty trick and uses the dark or clear influencing 
power in the R&amp;D strategies of competing companies due to 
active 
applications to a specific area. 
  The fourth is to publish the acquired patent (usually a 
selected publication) and attain royalties. 
  Figure 5 shows which of the four types is used by Japanese 
companies. Currently, companies viewing patents as a ``defense 
method'' are 60.7% of all. Companies ``aiming at a 
monopoly'' 
are 27.3%. Companies ``restraining other companies'' are 
8.4%. 
Companies ``acquiring royalties'' are 1.6% and close to 
none. 
Electronics manufacturers are more passive. In order they become 
67.9%, 25.0%, 5.4%, and 1.8%. 



  Figure 5. Freedom from defensive patents in the future. The ways of using 
patents are classified into four ways and the companies chose which they fell 
under. The percentages of companies choosing the respective choices of all 
companies responding are shown. The trend of the electronics industry is 
almost the same as this figure. In the electronics industry, currently 67.9% 
of companies chose ``method of defense,'' but in the future 41.4% replied 
``aiming at a monopoly.'' From ``Survey of Intellectual Property Rights'' 
(Nomura Research Institute, November 1992). Unit: %. 

                            Currently                   Future 

Method of defense           60.7                        28.7 

Aiming at a monopoly        27.3                        35.5 

Restraint of another        8.4                         19.4 

Collect royalties           1.6                         14.9 

Other                       1.9                         1.4 


  However, in the future many businesses are thinking of 
improving this situation. When we asked about future 
development, companies choosing ``method of defense'' were 
28.7%, dropping by half. Meanwhile, companies selecting 
``aiming at a monopoly,'' ``restraining other companies,'' and 
``acquiring royalties'' increased. These expanded greatly to 
35.5%, 19.4%, and 14.9%. 
  The electronics industry is no exception. Looking at the 
contents of the responses, these were respectively 28.6%, 
41.1%, 17.9%, and 12.5%. If one considers 
using intellectual 
property rights as a ``method of defense'' as passive and the 
other three as active, it can be considered that the electronics 
industry in the future would like to develop an active 
intellectual property rights strategy. 
  Currently, the source of the competitive force of Japanese 
businesses has reached a point where it must shift from the 
capacity for quality control and price competition due to the 
so-called homogenous share expansion competition to the 
conceptual creative power for products and 
business.[.sup]2,3[/] The intellectual property rights 
strategy of each company is becoming the key to this shift. The 
electronics industry is the industry which must be the nucleus 
of this shift. In the future the electronics industry is 
expected to reconstruct the intellectual property rights 
strategy and develop into a creative industry at the same time 
being advanced and competitive. 
Footnotes 
  1. Nomura Research Institute, ``Current state and outlook 
for 
the intellectual property rights policies of Japanese 
businesses'', Nomura Research Institute, April 1993. 
  2. Nomura Research Institute, ``Strategy for 
creativity---Management know-how for the creative era'', Nomura 
Research Institute, March 1991. 
  3. Nomura Research Institute, ``Future growth---Signs of a 
new social system'', Nomura Research Institute, April 1993. 
Steeply Rising Indemnities for U.S. Patent Disputes 
  In patent disputes occurring in the United States, the 
amount 
of damage indemnification increases year by year. Figure A shows 
the indemnification for major litigation since the 1970's. For 
indemnification, since neither the United States and Japan have 
official statistics, this was made from information from 
newspapers, reports, and publications concerning patent law. 
This is not exhaustive data and only handles major litigation. 
  Looking at the changes in indemnification, the average 
amount 
was $13 million in 1975 to 1979, but was $18 million in 1980 to 
1984 and $33 million in 1985 to 1989, an increase of 13% 
each 
year. The average amount was $92 million in 1990 to 1992, an 
abrupt rise of 24% each year. 
  Looking at Figure A, cases concluded by adjudication 
increased since the second half of the 1970's. One reason for 
the rise in indemnification can be interpreted to be the 
increase in adjudication ordering payment of high 
indemnifications. Furthermore, at the second half of the 1980's, 
the payment of high indemnifications came to be seen even in 
cases concluded by compromise. This may show the trend of 
avoiding drawn out disputes. 
<H5>  Pro-Patent Policies are in the Background </H5>
  The patent policies of the United States government are 
behind the background of increasing indemnification. The switch 
to so-called ``pro-patent'' policies has caused the 
indemnifications in patent disputes to be pushed up. 
  Since the founding of the United States, patent law has been 
practiced. As seen in the inventions of Edison and Bell, 
invention activities were lively from the 19th century to the 
beginning of the 20th century. Afterwards, with the opportunity 
of the global panic in 1929, monopolies due to patents were 
limited and activity to prioritize anti-monopoly laws were 
performed. This was the so-called ``anti-patent'' policy. 
  The anti-patent policy continued up to the 1970's. At the 
second half of the 1970's, the basis for the anti-patent 
policies appears to have changed because of the drop into the 
red of trade income and the economic exhaustion due to the 
Vietnam conflict. In October 1979, under the administration of 
President Carter, the Carter Message (also called the Innovation 
Message) was delivered and the strengthening of patent rights 
once more was suggested. 
  In the first half of the 1980's, a drop in international 
competitive force especially in high technology areas and the 
rise of protectionism concerning trade problems were seen. With 
such a foundation, the policy trend is inclined towards 
``pro-patent'' policies to strength intellectual property rights 
centering on patents. 
  And the CAFC (Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit) 
founded in 1982 takes part in the trend for strengthening patent 
rights protection. Since the foundation of CAFC, federal level 
has been stabilized and started on the basis for the pro-patent 
policy. As a result, many persons having rights have set about 
drastic litigation activity. 
<H5>  Awareness of Intellectual Property Rights is Low in Japan </H5>
  Despite the above conditions in the United States, to what 
degree are the damage indemnification of disputes occurring in 
Japan? In this questionnaire, the Japanese companies were asked 
about the indemnifications received in intellectual property 
rights disputes; the average damage indemnifications were 
&yen;134 million and a maximum of &yen;1.9 billion (Figure A). 
  These numbers are results including disputes with foreign 
parties, but most cases are considered to be the amounts 
received in disputes with domestic businesses. Compared with the 
indemnifications of patent disputes in the United States, these 
are at least one digit smaller. In just the numbers shown here, 
the US-Japanese indemnifications cannot be directly compared. 
There is no mistaking the great difference between them. This 
difference is thought to be because of the differences in 
setting a value on intellectual property in the United States 
and Japan. 
  The difference of awareness in the United States and Japan 
concerning the value of intellectual property is shown in the 
difference in the incidents of litigation concerning patents. 
For example, there were 1248 incidents of patent related 
litigation concluded in the 1989 fiscal year in the United 
States. A direct comparison cannot be made since the system is 
different, but in 1992, there were only 69 incidents of 
litigation related to industrial rights decided at the regional 
courts in Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya. 

