Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Y. C. Tsai] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, March 8 (CNA) -- While Taiwan's investments 
in Mainland China have been on the rise, profit margins are 
getting smaller, the Board of Foreign Trade (BOFT) said Tuesday 
[8 March]. 
  According to official Beijing statistics, Taiwan investors 
had channeled US$6 billion into the mainland up to the end of 
1993, making Taiwan the second largest investor on the mainland. 
Hong Kong led the pack with US$13 billion. 
  Unofficial figures, however, put Taiwan's investments at 
more 
than US$10 billion. 
  Despite the investment "fever" on the mainland, BOFT 
officials warned, a business crisis is looming. 
  The officials cited runaway inflation, foreign trade 
friction, and the depreciation of the renminbi (RMB) as the 
three largest difficulties facing the mainland's Taiwan 
investors. 
  Rapid economic growth has caused inflationary pressures on 
the mainland, whose gross domestic product jumped a 15-year high 
of 13 percent last year. January's inflation rate reached as 
high as 23.3 percent in 35 big cities, they elaborated. 
  Exorbitant prices will certainly push up production costs 
for 
Taiwan manufacturers, they noted. 
  In addition, they pointed out, the mainland's trade disputes 
with the United States are increasing, fueled by Beijing's 
continued human rights abuses and US$23.4 billion trade surplus. 
Taiwan investors will be inevitably affected by any trade 
friction between the two sides, they stressed. 
  Another factor adversely affecting Taiwan investors' 
interests is the long-term devaluation of the RMB, expected to 
eat away at business profits, they said. The RMB's value has 
dropped about 80 percent during the past year, and the trend is 
expected to continue, they added. 
  Taiwan manufacturers should pay attention to any changes in 
the mainland's investment climate, they warned. 
  Meanwhile, BOFT tallies show that indirect trade across the 
Taiwan Strait via Hong Kong totaled US$8.69 billion last year, 
up 17.31 percent from 1992. Of the total, Taiwan's exports to 
the mainland grew 20.63 percent to US$7.59 billion, while 
imports fell 1.38 percent to US$1.1 billion. 
  The 1993 Cross-Strait trade growth rate was much lower than 
the more than 30 percent registered in the two previous years. 
This was blamed on worldwide economic sluggishness, the 
officials said. 
  They also pointed out that the actual Cross-Strait trade 
figure might exceed US$15 billion in 1993 as a growing number of 
Taiwan's shipments to the mainland are not being registered with 
Hong Kong customs authorities. 

