Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Text of law under the rubric "The Laws of the Independent </F>
State": "Law of Ukraine on State Service"] 
  [Text] This Law regulates the social relations that 
encompass the activity of the state pertaining to the creation 
of legal, organizational, economic and social conditions for the 
realization of the right to state service by the citizens of 
Ukraine. 
  It defines the general principles of the activity, as well 
as 
the status, of state employees working in state bodies and their 
apparatus. 
<H6>  Part I </H6>
<H6>  General Provisions </H6>
  Article 1. State service and state employees 
  State service in Ukraine is the professional activity of 
individuals who occupy positions in the state bodies and their 
apparatus with regard to the practical fulfillment of the tasks 
and functions of the state and who receive pay in state funds. 
  These individuals are state employees and have the 
corresponding official powers. 
  Article 2. The position and the official 
  A position is a primary structural unit of a state body and 
its apparatus, as defined by the structure and standard 
schedule, to which official powers defined by official documents 
are entrusted. 
  Officials, under this Law, are considered to be the heads 
and 
deputy heads of state bodies and their apparatus, and other 
state employees to whom the exercise of organizational-directive 
and consultative-deliberative functions is entrusted by laws or 
other official documents. 
  Article 3. Fundamental principles of state service 
  State service is founded on these fundamental principles: 
  --service to the people of Ukraine; 
  --democratism and legality; 
  --humanism and social justice; 
  --the priority of the rights of the person and the citizen; 
  --professionalism, competence, initiative, integrity and 
devotion to the cause; personal responsibility for the 
fulfillment of official duties and discipline; 
  --the upholding of the rights and legal interests of bodies 
of local and regional self-government; 
  --the upholding of the rights of enterprises, institutions, 
organizations and associations of citizens. 
  Article 4. The right to state service 
  The right to state service is held by citizens of Ukraine 
regardless of their origins, social and property status, racial 
or ethnic affiliation, gender, political views, religious 
convictions or place of residence, who have received the 
appropriate education and professional training and have 
completed competitive selection under the stipulated procedure, 
or under some other procedure as provided for by the Cabinet of 
Ministers of Ukraine. 
  Article 5. Ethics of the conduct of the state 
employee 
  The state employee shall: 
  --conscientiously perform his official duties; 
  --have a respectful attitude toward citizens, superiors and 
coworkers, and will uphold a high standard of interaction; 
  --will not permit acts or deeds that could harm the 
interests 
of Ukraine or have a negative effect on the reputation of the 
state employee. 
  A state employee is prohibited from: 
  --taking part in actions that contradict the national 
interests of Ukraine or make the functioning of official bodies 
more difficult; 
  --committing acts that could be regarded as making use of 
his 
own official position for personal gain in his own interests, as 
well actions that are considered to be corrupt in accordance 
with prevailing legislation; 
  --displaying prejudice or sympathy, notwithstanding the 
interests of the matter, toward any enterprise, institution, 
organization, body, association of citizens or particular 
individual; 
  --displaying bureaucratism, departmentalism or parochialism. 
<H6>  Part II </H6>
<H6>  State Policy in the Sphere of State Service </H6>
  Article 6. The principal areas of state policy in 
the sphere of state service 
  State policy in the sphere of state service is defined by 
the 
Supreme Soviet of Ukraine. 
  The principal areas of state policy in the sphere of state 
service are the designation of the basic aims, tasks and 
principles for the functioning of the institution of state 
service, and assurance of the efficient operation of all state 
bodies in accordance with their scope of authority. 
  The Main Administration for State Service of the Cabinet of 
Ministers of Ukraine is created for the pursuit of a uniform 
policy and for the functional administration of state service. 
  Questions of the functioning of state service at other state 
bodies whose legal status is governed by special laws of Ukraine 
are resolved by those bodies. 
  Article 7. The administrative body of state service 
  The administrative body of state service at state bodies and 
their apparatus is the Main Administration for State Service of 
the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  The Main Administration for State Service of the Cabinet of 
Ministers of Ukraine: 
  --predicts and plans for the personnel needs of state bodies 
and their apparatus; provides for the realization of general 
policy guidelines in the sphere of state service at state bodies 
and their apparatus, in conjunction with other state bodies; 
  --develops and submits for the consideration of the Cabinet 
of Ministers of Ukraine drafts of official documents on question 
of state service in state bodies and their apparatus; 
  --develops, coordinates and monitors the implementation of 
measures relating to increasing the efficiency of state service 
in state bodies and their apparatus; 
  --exercises methodological supervision of the conduct of 
competitive selection for state employees in state bodies and 
their apparatus; 
  --organizes the education and professional training of state 
employees of state bodies and their apparatus; 
  --monitors the upholding of the conditions stipulated by 
this 
Law for the realization of the right of citizens to state 
service; 
  --organizes, coordinates and provides conditions for the 
development of scientific research on questions of state service. 
  Article 8. The Coordinating Council on Issues of 
State Service 
  An interagency deliberative body--the Coordinating Council 
on 
Issues of State Service at State Bodies--is created for the 
purpose of defining the ways, means and forms of realization of 
the principal guidelines of state policy in the sphere of state 
service and combining all of the efforts of state bodies to 
increase the efficiency of state service. 
  The Statute on the Coordinating Council on Issues of State 
Service at State Bodies is approved by the Cabinet of Ministers 
of Ukraine. 
<H6>  Part III </H6>
<H6>  Legal Status of State Employees of State Bodies and Their 
Apparatus </H6>
  Article 9. Specific features governing the status 
of state employees of state bodies and their apparatus 
  The legal status of the President of Ukraine, the Chairman 
of 
the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine and his deputies, the heads of the 
standing commissions of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine and their 
deputies, the people's deputies of Ukraine, the Prime Minister 
of Ukraine, members of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, the 
Chairman and members of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine, the 
Chairman and judges of the Supreme Court of Ukraine, the 
Chairman and arbiters of the Higher Court of Arbitration of 
Ukraine, the General Procurator of Ukraine and his deputies is 
governed by the Constitution and special laws of Ukraine. 
  The legal status of state employees who work in the 
apparatus 
of the bodies of the procuracy, courts, diplomatic service, 
customs control, security service, internal affairs and others 
is governed by this Law, if not otherwise stipulated by the laws 
of Ukraine. 
  Article 10. The principal duties of state employees 
  The principal duties of state employees are: 
  --to uphold the Constitution of Ukraine and other 
legislation 
of Ukraine; 
  --to provide for effective operation and the fulfillment of 
the tasks of state bodies in accordance with their jurisdiction; 
  --not to permit violations of the rights and freedoms of 
persons and citizens; 
  --to perform the official duties entrusted to them without 
delay, and to fulfill in timely and precise fashion the 
resolutions of state bodies or officials and the directives and 
instructions of their superiors; 
  --to protect state secrets and information about citizens 
that has come to their knowledge during the performance of 
official duties of state service, as well as other information 
that by law is not subject to dissemination; 
  --to improve constantly the organization of their work and 
to 
increase their professional qualifications; 
  --to perform their official duties conscientiously, with 
initiative and creativity in their work. 
  The state employee shall act within the limits of his 
authority. 
  In the event that an assignment is received that contradicts 
prevailing legislation, the state employee is obligated to 
report this immediately to the official that gave the assignment 
in written form, and in cases of insistence on its fulfillment, 
to notify a higher official. 
  Article 11. The basic rights of state employees 
  State employees have the right: 
  --to enjoy the rights and freedoms that are guaranteed to 
citizens of Ukraine by the Constitution and laws of Ukraine; 
  --to take part in the consideration of issues and the making 
of decisions within the limits of their authority; 
  --to obtain from state bodies, enterprises, institutions and 
organizations and bodies of local or regional self-government 
necessary information on issues that fall under their 
jurisdiction; 
  --to respect for their personal dignity and a fair and 
respectful attitude toward them on the part of superiors, 
coworkers and citizens; 
  --to require the approval by a superior of a clearly defined 
amount of official powers for the position of the employee; 
  --to pay in accordance with the position that he occupies, 
the grade that is awarded for it, and for quality, experience 
and time of service; 
  --freely to become familiarized with materials that pertain 
to his performance of state service, with individual 
explanations where necessary; 
  --to advancement in the service with allowance for his 
qualifications and abilities, the conscientious fulfillment of 
his official duties and participation in competition to fill 
positions of higher categories; 
  --to demand an official investigation with the aim of 
clearing charges or suspicions that are groundless in the 
opinion of the employee; 
  --to working conditions that are healthy, safe and conducive 
to highly productive work; 
  --to social and legal protection in accordance with his 
status; 
  --to protection of his legal rights and interests with 
higher 
state bodies and under judicial procedures. 
  The specific duties and rights of state employees are 
defined 
on the basis of standard descriptions of qualifications, and are 
reflected in the statutes and instructions for the positions as 
approved by the heads of the corresponding state bodies within 
the bounds of the law and their scope of authority. 
  Article 12. Restrictions connected with acceptance 
for state service 
  Individuals may not be selected or named to a post in a 
state 
body or its apparatus as follows: 
  --those who have been deemed incapable; 
  --those who have a legal conviction which is incompatible 
with the holding of a position; 
  --in cases of acceptance into service where they will be 
immediately subordinate to individuals who are their close 
relatives or in-laws; 
  --in other cases stipulated by the laws of Ukraine. 
  Article 13. Declaration of income of state 
employees 
  An individual wishing to hold a position of state employee 
in 
categories three through seven, as stipulated by Article 25 of 
this Law, will submit by place of future service information on 
income and obligations of a financial nature, including abroad, 
as pertains to himself and the members of his family. An 
individual wishing to hold the position of state employee in 
categories one and two, as stipulated by Article 25 of this Law, 
shall submit such information on real property and valuable 
personal property, including in banks and in securities, that 
belong to him and the members of his family. 
  This information is submitted by a state employee every 
year. 
The procedure for the submission, retention and use of that 
information is established by the Cabinet of Ministers of 
Ukraine. 
  Article 14. Specific features of the disciplinary 
liability of state employees 
  Disciplinary penalties are applicable to a state employee 
for 
the failure to perform, or the unsatisfactory performance of, 
official duties, exceeding his authority and violating 
restrictions connected with the performance of state service, as 
well as for actions that discredit the state employee or 
discredit the state body at which he works. 
  The following disciplinary measures may also be applicable 
to 
employees aside from the disciplinary penalties envisaged by 
prevailing legislation on labor in Ukraine: 
  --warning of incomplete conformity to official duties; 
  --a delay of up to a year in the awarding of the next grade 
or in being named to a higher post. 
<H6>  Part IV </H6>
<H6>  Performance of State Service in State Bodies and Their 
Apparatus </H6>
  Article 15. Acceptance for state service 
  Acceptance for state service in a position of categories 
three through seven, as stipulated by Article 25 of this Law, is 
accomplished on a competitive basis, aside from cases where the 
laws of Ukraine stipulate otherwise. 
  The procedure for the conduct of the competition for entry 
into state service is regulated by a Statute approved by the 
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  Information on vacant positions of state employees is 
subject 
to publication and dissemination through the mass media no later 
than one month before the holding of the competition. 
  The submission of information and documents whose submission 
is not envisaged by the legislation of Ukraine from candidates 
for state service is prohibited. 
  The President of Ukraine, the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet 
of Ukraine, the members of the Government of Ukraine, and the 
heads of local state administrations have the right to choose 
and hire individuals independently for the positions of their 
assistants, the heads of press services, counselors and 
secretaries in accordance with the standard schedule and 
category that corresponds to the position (patronage service). 
The procedure for such individuals to be in state service is 
established by the corresponding bodies. 
  Article 16. Restrictions associated with the 
performance of state service 
  A state employee does not have the right: 
  --to engage in entrepreneurial activity either directly or 
through intermediaries, aside from the cases envisaged by 
prevailing legislation, or to be a representative for third 
parties in the affairs of a state body where he works, as well 
as to perform work in related fields (except for scientific, 
instructional or creative activity, as well as a medical 
practice); 
  --to promote, or make use of his official position for, 
physical or legal persons in entrepreneurial activity they have 
undertaken with the aim of obtaining recompense for it in 
monetary or other form, services or concessions; 
  --to be a part of the composition, either independently or 
through a representative, of the supervisory bodies of 
enterprises, business companies etc., organizations, unions, 
associations or cooperatives that are carrying out 
entrepreneurial activity; 
  --to accept gifts or services from physical or legal persons 
in connection with their official activity. 
  State employees may not take part in strikes or undertake 
other actions that hinder the normal functioning of a state 
body. Other restrictions connected with the performance of state 
service by certain categories of state employees are established 
exclusively by the legislation of Ukraine. 
  Article 17. The oath of state employees 
  Citizens of Ukraine who are entering into state service for 
the first time take an Oath with the following content: 
  "Being fully aware of my great responsibility, I knowingly 
swear that I will faithfully serve the peoples of Ukraine, 
strictly uphold the Constitution and laws of Ukraine, promote 
their incarnation, strengthen their authority, protect the 
rights, freedoms and legal interests of citizens, carry the 
lofty title of state employee with honor and conscientiously 
perform my duties." 
  A state employee signs the text of the Oath, which is kept 
at 
his place of employment. An entry is made in the work log that 
the Oath was taken. 
  Article 18. Probationary period for acceptance 
into state service 
  A probationary period of up to six months may be established 
for acceptance into state service. 
  Article 19. Internships of state employees 
  For the purpose of gaining practical experience and 
verifying 
the professional level and business qualities of an individual 
who wishes to take the position of state employee, an internship 
may be conducted at the corresponding state body for a term of 
up to two months with the preservation of pay for the basic job. 
  Article 20. Work period 
  The duration of the working period of state employees is 
defined in accordance with the labor legislation of Ukraine with 
a regard for the specific features envisaged by this Law. 
  State employees are required to perform unexpected and 
unforeseen work at the directive of the head of the body at 
which they work, and to come in to work on days off, holidays or 
non-working days; this work is compensated in accordance with 
prevailing labor legislation. 
  State employees may be recalled from annual or supplemental 
time off by decision of the head of the body. A portion of the 
unused time off that remains is granted to the state employee at 
some other time in the corresponding year or is combined with 
the time off for the coming year. 
  Article 21. Official trips 
  State employees are reimbursed for the cost of official 
trips, and are paid other compensation in accordance with the 
labor legislation of Ukraine. 
  State employees on a trip enjoy the right of reservation of 
places in hotels and on all means of transport, as well as the 
priority acquisition of travel documents. State employees at a 
trip destination are granted a place to work and the opportunity 
to make use of communications, transport, reproduction equipment 
and other services of a technical nature. 
  Article 22. Suspension from the performance of the 
duties of a position 
  A failure to perform official duties that leads to human 
casualties or causes significant material or moral damages to 
citizens, the state, an enterprise, institution, organization or 
association of citizens, is grounds for the suspension of a 
state employee from the performance of the duties of his 
position with the retention of pay. The decision to suspend a 
state employee from the performance of the duties of his post is 
made by the head of the state body at which that employee works. 
  The duration of the suspension from the performance of the 
duties of a position shall not exceed the time for official 
investigation. The official investigation is performed within a 
period of two months under the procedure stipulated by the 
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  If the legitimacy of a decision to suspend a state employee 
from the performance of the duties of his position is not 
confirmed by the results of an official investigation, the 
decision is abrogated. 
  Article 23. Maximum age for state service 
  The maximum age for being in state service is 60 years for 
men and 55 years for women. The head of a state body, with the 
consent of the Chief of the Main Administration for State 
Service of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, may extend the 
maximum age of state service when necessary, but not for more 
than five years. 
  State employees may remain in state service or in the 
positions of advisors or consultants after this time period in 
exceptional cases, by decision of the head of the corresponding 
state body. 
<H6>  Part V </H6>
<H6>  The Service Career </H6>
  Article 24. Completion of service 
  Acceptance for state service, the advancement of employees 
in 
it, incentives for their work and the resolution of other issues 
connected with service are accomplished in accordance with the 
categories of the positions of the employees, as well as in 
accordance with the grades awarded to them. 
  Article 25. Classification of positions 
  The principal criteria for the classification of the 
positions of state employees are the organizational-labor level 
of the body that is taking them on, the amount and nature of the 
powers of a specific position and the role and place of the 
position in the state body. 
  The following categories are established for the positions 
of 
employees: 
  Category one--the positions of the chairmen of state 
committees who are not members of the Government of Ukraine, the 
heads of other central bodies of state executive power under the 
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, the Permanent Representative of 
the President of Ukraine in the Republic of Crimea, 
representatives of the President of Ukraine in the oblasts and 
the cities of Kiev and Sevastopol, first deputy ministers, the 
first deputy chairmen of state committees that are part of the 
Government, the heads of the Administration of the President of 
Ukraine, the Secretariat of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine and 
other positions equivalent to them; 
  Category two--the positions of deputy heads of the 
Administration of the President of Ukraine, deputy heads of the 
Secretariat of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine, deputy heads of 
the apparatus of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, heads of 
structural subdivisions of the Secretariat of the Supreme Soviet 
of Ukraine, secretariats of the standing commissions of the 
Supreme Soviet of Ukraine, the Administration of the President 
of Ukraine, the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine, the 
Prime Minister of Ukraine, deputy ministers, deputy chairmen of 
state committees that are part of the Government, first 
deputies, deputy chairmen of committees and other central bodies 
of state executive authority under the Cabinet of Ministers of 
Ukraine, the first deputy of the Permanent Representative of the 
President of Ukraine in the Republic of Crimea, the first deputy 
heads of oblast and the Kiev and Sevastopol city state 
administrations and other positions equivalent to them; 
  Category three--the positions of deputy heads of structural 
subdivisions, the managers of sectors, lead specialists, experts 
and consultants of the Administration of the President of 
Ukraine, the Secretariat of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine and 
the apparatus of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, the 
deputies of the Permanent Representative of the President of 
Ukraine in the Republic of Crimea, the deputy heads of oblast 
and the Kiev and Sevastopol city state administrations, 
representatives of the President of Ukraine in the rayons, the 
rayons of the cities of Kiev and Sevastopol, the chiefs of 
administrations, independent departments that are part of 
ministries and other central bodies of state executive authority 
and other positions equivalent to them; 
  Category four--the positions of specialists of the 
Administration of the President of Ukraine, the Secretariat of 
the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine and the apparatus of the Cabinet 
of Ministers of Ukraine, the deputy chiefs of administrations, 
independent departments or subdepartments of ministries and 
other central bodies of state executive authority, the 
supervisors of administrations, departments and services of 
oblast and the Kiev and Sevastopol city state administrations 
and other positions equivalent to them; 
  Category five--the positions of specialists of ministries 
and 
other central bodies of state executive power, the deputy 
representatives of the President of Ukraine in the rayons and 
the rayons of the cities of Kiev and Sevastopol, the deputy 
supervisors of administrations, departments and services of 
oblast and Kiev and Sevastopol city state administrations, 
specialists of the apparatus of those administrations and other 
positions equivalent to them; 
  Category six--the positions of heads of administrations, 
departments and services of rayon and Kiev and Sevastopol city 
rayon state administrations, the specialists of administrations, 
departments and services of oblast and Kiev and Sevastopol city 
state administrations and other positions equivalent to them; 
  Category seven--the positions of specialists of rayon and 
Kiev and Sevastopol city rayon state administrations, their 
administrations and departments and other positions equivalent 
to them. 
  The relegation of existing positions of state employees that 
are not enumerated in this article, as well as the relegation of 
new positions of state employees to the corresponding category, 
is performed by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine in 
coordination with the corresponding state body. 
  Article 26. Grades of state employees 
  The following grades are established for state employees: 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category one 
may be awarded grades 3, 2 and 1; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category two 
may be awarded grades 5, 4 and 3; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category three 
may be awarded grades 7, 6 and 5; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category four 
may be awarded grades 9, 8 and 7; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category five 
may be awarded grades 11, 10 and 9; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category six 
may be awarded grades 13, 12 and 11; 
  --employees who occupy positions relegated to category seven 
may be awarded grades 15, 14 and 13. 
  The statute on the grades of employees is approved by the 
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  A grade is awarded to accordance with the position held, the 
level of professional qualifications and the results of work. 
  Grades that correspond to positions in category one are 
awarded by the President of Ukraine. 
  Grades that correspond to positions in category two are 
awarded by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  Grades that correspond to positions in categories three 
through seven are awarded by the head of the state body in whose 
system the state employee works. 
  An employee is awarded a grade within the limits of the 
corresponding category of positions upon acceptance into state 
service. 
  A state employee shall successfully work at the post 
occupied 
for two years in order to be awarded the next grade within the 
limits of the corresponding category of positions. A state 
employee may be awarded the next grade ahead of schedule within 
the limits of the corresponding category of positions for the 
performance of especially crucial tasks. 
  The next grade may be awarded to a state employee for 
conscientious work upon retirement, above and beyond the 
corresponding category of the positions. 
  A state employee may be stripped of a grade by the body that 
awarded him that rank only by verdict of a court. 
  If a state employee has transferred to a position of a lower 
category or has left state service and then returned, the grade 
awarded to him is preserved. 
  People's deputies of Ukraine that were in state service 
before their election count the period of the fulfillment of 
their duties toward their time of state service. 
  An entry is made in the work logs of a state employee on the 
awarding, alteration or removal of the corresponding grade. 
  Article 27. Advancement in the service 
  Advancement in the service by a state employee is 
accomplished by means of the holding of higher positions on a 
competitive basis, aside from cases where it is stipulated 
otherwise by the laws of Ukraine and the Cabinet of Ministers of 
Ukraine, or by means of the granting of a higher grade to a 
state employee. 
  A state employee has the right to take part in competitions 
to fill a vacant position. State employees who have achieved the 
best results in their work and display initiative, are 
constantly raising their professional level and are counted 
among the cadre reserve enjoy a preferential right to 
advancement in the service. 
  Article 28. The cadre reserve of state service 
  A cadre reserve is created at state bodies to take positions 
of state employees, as well as for their advancement in the 
service. 
  The cadre reserve is composed of: 
  --specialists of local and regional self-government, 
production, socio-cultural, scientific and other spheres, as 
well as the graduates of educational institutions of the 
corresponding fields; 
  --state employees who have raised their qualifications or 
have completed an internship, and have been recommended for 
advancement to a higher position. 
  The procedure for the formation and organization of work 
with 
the cadre reserve is regulated by the Statute on the Cadre 
Reserve of State Service, which is approved by the Cabinet of 
Ministers of Ukraine. 
  Article 29. Education and skills enhancement of 
state employees 
  Conditions are created for the education and skills 
enhancement at the corresponding educational institutions 
(departments) and by means of self-study. 
  State employees raise their qualifications constantly, 
including through education at the corresponding educational 
institutions, as a rule, no less often than once every five 
years. The results of education and skills enhancement are one 
of the foundations for advancement in the service. 
<H6>  Part VI </H6>
<H6>  Curtailment of State Service </H6>
  Article 30. Grounds for curtailment of state 
service 
  Aside from the general grounds envisaged by the Code of 
Labor 
Laws of Ukraine, state service is curtailed in the case of: 
  1) violation of the terms for realization of the right to 
state service (Article 4 of this Law); 
  2) failure to uphold the requirements envisaged by Article 
16 
of this Law for the performance of state service; 
  3) the attainment by a state employee of the maximum age for 
the performance of state service (Article 23 of this Law); 
  4) the resignation of state employees who hold positions in 
categories one or two (Article 31 of this Law); 
  5) the ascertainment or appearance of circumstances that 
keep 
a state employee from being in state service (Article 12 of this 
Law); 
  6) the refusal of a state employee to take the Oath or a 
violation of it, as envisaged by Article 17 of this Law; 
  7) the failure to submit, or the submission of incorrect, 
information by a state employee pertaining to his income, as 
envisaged in Article 13 of this Law. 
  A change in the heads or composition of state bodies cannot 
be grounds for the curtailment of state service by a state 
employee in his post at the initiative of newly designated 
heads, aside from state employees in patronage service. 
  State employees who have occupied a category one position 
for 
no less than three years and have been dismissed in connection 
with a change in the composition of the body where they were 
working, or the end of the term of authority of that body, 
retain their average monthly pay for the period of job search, 
but not for more than one year. 
  Article 31. Resignation of a state employee 
  Resignation is the curtailment of state service by an 
employee who holds a position in categories one or two, by his 
written request. 
  Grounds for resignation are: 
  --a fundamental disagreement with the decision of a state 
body or official, as well as ethical impediments to being in 
state service; 
  --the forcing of a state employee to fulfill the decision of 
a state body or official that contradicts prevailing 
legislation, which could cause significant material or moral 
harm to the state, enterprises, institutions, organizations or 
associations of citizens or a citizen; 
  --a state of health that impedes the exercise of official 
authority (with the presence of medical findings). 
  A resignation is accepted, or a well-founded refusal is 
given, by the state body or official that named the state 
employee to that position. The decision to accept a resignation 
or refusal of it is made within a month's time. A state employee 
shall continue to fulfill his official duties in the case of a 
refusal of his resignation, and has the right to discharge under 
the procedure stipulated by the Code of Labor Laws of Ukraine. 
  In a case of the resignation of a state employee who has not 
reached pension age, but has sufficient time of service for the 
granting of a pension (25 years for men and 20 for women) and 
has worked in category one or two positions for no less than 
five years, he is paid 85 percent of his official salary monthly 
with allowance for additional payments for grade and for time 
served until he reaches pension age. 
  A state employee who is retired, upon attaining pension age, 
is granted a pension as a state employee. 
  In the case of the granting of an age-based pension, the 
finding of a job or conviction for committing a crime, the 
payments stipulated in Part Four of this Article are curtailed. 
  Article 32. Appeal of a decision to curtail state 
service 
  A decision to curtail state service may be appealed by a 
state employee directly in the courts. 
<H6>  Part VII </H6>
<H6>  Material and Social Support for State Employees </H6>
  Article 33. Pay 
  The pay of state employees shall provide for sufficient 
material conditions for the independent performance of official 
duties, facilitate the staffing of the apparatus of state bodies 
with competent and experienced personnel, and provide incentives 
for their conscientious work with initiative. 
  The pay of state employees comprises salaries, bonuses, 
additional payments for grade, supplements for time in state 
service and other supplements. 
  The salaries of state employees are established depending on 
the difficulty and level of responsibility of the official 
duties they perform. 
  Additional payments for grade are made according to the 
grade 
awarded to the state employee. 
  The supplements for time of service are paid to state 
employees on a monthly basis as a percentage of their salary, 
with allowance for additional payments for grades and depending 
on the time of state service, in the following amounts: more 
than 3 years--10 percent, more than 5 years--15 percent, more 
than 10 years--20 percent, more than 15 years--25 percent, more 
than 20 years--30 percent, and more than 25 years--40 percent. 
  Supplements may be established for state employees for good 
results in their work and the performance of especially 
important work, additional payments for the performance of 
duties of temporarily absent employees and other supplements and 
additional payments, as well as the granting of material 
assistance to resolve social and domestic issues. 
  The terms for the pay of state employees, the amounts of 
their salaries, supplements, additional payments and material 
assistance are stipulated by the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  The source for the formation of the pay allocation for state 
employees is the State Budget of Ukraine. 
  A cutback in state appropriations cannot be grounds for a 
reduction in salaries, supplements to them or the financing of 
other guarantees, benefits and compensations as envisaged by 
this Law. 
  Article 34. Incentives for conscientious work 
  State employees are given monetary remuneration in an 
amount, 
and under the procedure, established by the Cabinet of Ministers 
of Ukraine for conscientious, uninterrupted work at state bodies 
and the exemplary performance of their labor duties. 
  State employees are submitted for state decorations and the 
conferring of honorary titles for special labor merit. 
  Article 35. Annual and additional vacations of 
state employees 
  State employees are granted an annual vacation of 30 
calendar 
days, if a longer vacation is not stipulated by legislation, 
with the payment of health assistance in the amount of their 
salary. 
  State employees that have a term of service at state bodies 
of more than ten years are granted an additional paid vacation 
of 15 calendar days. The procedure and conditions for the 
granting of the additional paid vacation are established by the 
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  Article 36. Social security for state employees 
  State employees are provided with housing from the state 
stock under established procedure. 
  State employees who hold positions in categories one through 
four have the right to priority installation of apartment 
telephones. 
  A plot of land and interest-free credit for a term of 20 
years are granted to state employees who require improvement in 
their housing conditions in accordance with prevailing 
legislation, for individual and cooperative housing construction 
or for the acquisition of apartments or individual residential 
housing. The terms for the granting of credit are established by 
the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. 
  State employees and the members of their families who are 
living with them enjoy free medical care at state health-care 
institutions under established procedure. They are supported by 
the same institutions after retirement. 
  Article 37. Pension support and monetary 
assistance for state employees 
  The pension is paid to state employees at the expense of the 
state. 
  Individuals who have reached pension age as stipulated by 
the 
legislation of Ukraine, with overall labor service of no less 
than 25 years for men and 20 years for women, including state 
service of no less than 10 years, are entitled to receive 
pensions for state employees. These individuals are granted 
pensions in the amount of 80 percent of their (official) salary, 
with allowance for the supplements envisaged by this Law and 
without restriction on the maximum size of the pension. 
  The pension is paid to the state employee in the full 
amount, 
regardless of his earnings (or profits) received after 
retirement. 
  The pension is increased by one percent for every full year 
of work over ten years in state service, but not more than 90 
percent of the (official) salary, with allowance for the 
supplements envisaged by this Law and without restriction on the 
maximum size of the pension. 
  State employees are paid monetary assistance in the amount 
of 
10 month's salary in case of retirement with a term of state 
service of no less than ten years. 
  The terms pertaining to municipal and domestic support as 
envisaged by this Law are used in the case of the retirement of 
a state employee with a term of state service of no less than 10 
years. 
<H6>  Part VIII </H6>
<H6>  Liability for Violations of Legislation on State Service </H6>
  Article 38. Liability for violations of 
legislation on state service 
  Individuals who are guilty of violations of legislation on 
state service bear civil, administrative or criminal liability 
in accordance with prevailing legislation. 
  President of Ukraine L. Kravchuk 
  City of Kiev, 16 December 1993 

