BFN 

<F P=106> ["Report" by Li Kemu (2621 0344 4476), Lu Chunheng (4151 </F>
2504 1854), Li Qiming (2621 0796 2494), Chen Dongsheng (7115 
2639 0581), Zhao Minshan (6392 1488 1472), Zhang Shouqing (1728 
1343 3237), Xie Yue (6200 1878), Fang Yu (2455 1342), Yan 
Changle (7051 7022 2867), Liu Fujiang (0491 1381 3068), Xing 
Junling (6717 0193 3781), and Jiang Dongsheng (5592 2639 3932), 
with Fang Yu taking overall charge of the writing; the report, 
15,000 characters in length, has been "slightly abridged" for 
publication] 
  [Text] The basic subject of the research project 
"Evaluation of the 500 Largest Industrial Enterprises and the 50 
Largest Trades in China," is that large enterprises or 
conglomerates which have been formed in the course of a 
country's economic development are always central to economic 
development. 
  In the development process of modern economies and also in 
future economies, large enterprises or conglomerates will play 
an increasingly important role, both in the domestic and 
international economies. Professor Michael Porter from Harvard 
University Business School has pointed out that most countries 
rely on a few score of concentrated industrial areas and several 
hundred large corporations to provide most of the exported goods 
and raise their productivity and living standards. 
  Based on this proposition, the research project will focus 
on 
the following: 
  1. Mapping out the changes and development trends of 
Chinese enterprises and Chinese industries; 
  2. Conducting an investigation into the external 
environment of the enterprises during their development and its 
influences; 
  3. In a period of high-speed economic growth, determining 
effective ways of readjusting the industrial organizational 
structure to accelerate technical progress in Chinese 
enterprises, to lessen the negative effects brought about by 
cyclical economic fluctuations, and to lead national economic 
development onto the track of a benign cycle as soon as possible; 
  The research project will provide an important foundation. 
  When interviewed recently by a journalist from the Japanese 
weekly DIAMOND, the well-known American scholar Deluk [de lu ke 
1795 7627 0344] pointed out that "the depression in some 
advanced countries is in fact a depression in their large 
enterprises." He added that he thought "such a situation could 
last for 10 to 20 years." 
  If we consider that the Western industrialized nations are 
now in the trough of a long economic cycle, then the way out is 
the arrival of a period of technological innovation. However, 
the Chinese economy is now in a period of growth, the major 
feature of which is the search for a great abundance of goods, 
i.e., a time of mass production in pursuit of economy of scale. 
Therefore, the times require that large Chinese enterprises 
have increasingly greater markets while they are building 
themselves up. 
  Over a relatively long period, it should be a major task for 
our economic policymakers and administrators to bring into full 
play the backbone leading role of the large enterprises in the 
development of the national economy and to create a totally new 
external environment for their development, enabling them to 
increase their economic yields. 
  It should be especially emphasized that it is of great 
significance to the development and reform of our economy that 
we bring into full play the role of large enterprises in 
readjusting the industrial structure, transforming industrial 
organizations, and carrying out state industrial policies. At 
present, the Chinese economy is going through a period of great 
change, during which the large enterprises will play a major 
historic role. 
  This year's research report will mainly analyze the general 
development trend of Chinese large enterprises from 1988 to 
1992, based on their performance over the five year period in 
order to indicate the future. [preceding paragraphs introduction 
by the China Enterprises Assessment Center of GUANLI SHIJIE 
(MANAGEMENT WORLD) and the Industrial and Communications 
Statistical Department of the State Statistical Bureau] 
  China's 500 largest industrial enterprises have achieved 
considerable progress in the past five years and they will make 
signal contributions to the development of China's economy in 
the 1990's. 
  Only by following the principle of regional coordination in 
terms of comparative advantage and the advanced level of product 
mix can the division of labor and coordination among regions be 
rationally organized. 
<H5>  China's Enterprises Have Already Entered an Era of Great </H5>
Development 
  From 1988 to 1992, China's 500 largest industrial 
enterprises 
achieved considerable progress, becoming outstanding symbols of 
great enterprise development. 
  First, their operation scale has doubled or redoubled. The 
total sales value of the 500 largest enterprises has increased 
from 292.467 billion yuan in 1988 to 634.394 billion Yuan in 
1992, an increase of 116.9 percent. The 500 enterprises have 
more than doubled their operation scale. It should be stressed 
that the development of the 500 largest enterprises has not only 
been quicker than that of state-owned enterprises (70.1) and 
collectively-owned enterprises (80.1), but also quicker than 
that of all independent enterprises (84.7). This shows that 
the strength of large enterprises has been further enhanced, 
their degree of concentration has been raised, and their role in 
the national economic development has become more conspicuous. 
  Second, the net value of fixed assets has also been doubled 
or redoubled. In 1992, the net value of the fixed assets of the 
500 largest industrial enterprises reached 389.627 billion yuan, 
or 27.6 percent of the 1411.832 billion yuan of the total net 
value of fixed assets of national independent accounting 
enterprises. Compared with the total assets of 189.967 billion 
yuan in 1988, this is an increase of 105.1 percent. The 
increase of the net value of fixed assets is the in evitable 
outcome of getting rid of the traditional system of a planned 
economy and seeking market share. 
  Third, the rapid development of the Sino-foreign joint 
ventures, foreign cooperative enterprises, and wholly 
foreign-owned enterprises has become an increasingly important 
factor in the development of China's large enterprises. Five 
years ago, only six of the 500 enterprises were foreign-funded 
but now there are more than 30. Though the proportion of 
foreign-funded enterprises is still limited in the national 
economy, they have played an increasingly important role in 
absorbing foreign capital, introducing technology and management 
expertise, increasing exports, and adjusting the industrial 
structure. 
<H5>  The Competitive Rule of Survival of the Fittest Has Become </H5>
an Important Principle for Promoting the Development of 
Enterprises and for Reorganizing the Structure of Enterprises 
  From the results achieved by the 500 largest enterprises 
during the period 1988 to 1992, one can see that they were 
following the rule of the survival of the fittest. Of the 500 
enterprises which had joined the ranks of the 500 largest 
enterprises in 1988, only 342 still remained in 1992. 86 were 
eliminated in 1989, 69 in 1990, and 61 in 1991. This market 
competition will be fiercer in the next few years as the economy 
grows at a high rate. The principle of survival of the fittest 
will further strengthen China's industrial enterprises, enabling 
the economy to enter a period of healthier development. 
  The expansion of the scale of operation in enterprises and 
the competitive mechanism of survival of the fittest will 
inevitably bring changes to the scale structure in enterprises. 
In 1992, 7 enterprises had a sales volume in excess of 10 
billion yuan, 19 exceeded 5 billion yuan, 61 exceeded 2 billion 
yuan, 167 exceeded 1 billion yuan, and 351 exceeded 0.5 billion 
yuan. The rest were between 0.5 and 0.36 billion yuan. In 
1988, however, the corresponding numbers of enterprises were 3, 
2, 53, 163 respectively (there were none exceeding 10 billion 
yuan). The other 337 enterprises were between 0.5 and 0.2 
billion yuan. In the five years between 1988 and 1992, the 
scale of enterprises has obviously changed but most of the 
enterprises are still engaged in unitary production. 
Comprehensive enterprise groups, which combine production, 
operation, managing, marketing, and technological development, 
and have a global strategy, are still in an early stage. 
<H5>  Establishing Rational Production Divisions of the East, </H5>
Central and West Is the Basis for the Coordinated Development of 
Regional Economies 
  The regional distribution of the 500 largest enterprises 
still tend to concentrate on the eastern and coastal areas. Of 
the 500 largest enterprises, the 12 provinces and cities in the 
eastern and coastal areas contained 317 in 1988, accounting for 
63.4 percent of the total, their total sales value accounted for 
66.7 percent, and their total profits and taxes accounted for 
60.1 percent. In 1992, these areas had 328 enterprises, 
accounting for 65.5 percent of the total, their total sales 
value accounted for 65.86 percent, and their total profits and 
handed-in taxes accounted for 57.29 percent. Judging from the 
tendency in current economic development, this basic pattern of 
graded regional division will not greatly change in the short 
term. In the above general tendency, however, the total sales 
value and total profits and taxes of the central and western 
areas did not drop but increased slightly instead. This shows 
that the operation scale and quality of the enterprises in the 
central and western areas are also increasing during the reform 
and opening economic tide. As regards the tendency for change 
in specific provinces and cities in the past five years relative 
to the distribution of the 500 largest industrial enterprises: 
The provinces and cities which saw the greatest increase in the 
number of enterprises in the national 500 were Guangdong (by 
21), Shanghai (8), Shandong (5), and Anhui (5); the provinces 
and cities which registered decreases were Liaoning (by 13), 
Jilin (6) and Tianjin (5). The change in the distribution of 
enterprises in the above areas shows that the regional flow of 
natural resources to the east is very obvious, some new 
industrial bases are forming, and old industrial bases have 
become inferior for various reasons. 
  There are great differences in the scale of industrial 
enterprises in different regions. These differences are 
determined by resources, industrial structure, and the 
industrial development level. Under the same conditions, 
generally speaking, in the region which has heavy industry as 
its main industry, its industry has a higher degree of 
concentration and larger enterprises. In the region which has a 
higher economic development and highly diversified industry, its 
industry has a lower degree of concentration and smaller 
enterprises. Liaoning, Shanghai, and Guangdong are typical of 
the above economic types. It should be pointed out that China's 
old industrial bases like Shanghai and Liaoning are still 
playing important roles in the national economy. In 1988, 
Shanghai and Liaoning had 55 and 58 respectively of the 500 
largest enterprises and, in 1992, they had 63 and 45 
enterprises. Compared with 1988, Shanghai had increased by eight 
and Liaoning had decreased by 13 in 1992. As for the proportion 
of their total sales volume and total value of profits and tax, 
Shanghai increased from 11.8 percent and 11.0 percent in 1988 to 
15.26 percent and 14.68 percent in 1992; but Liaoning decreased 
from 13.3 percent and 13.2 percent in 1988 to 10.67 percent and 
8.59 percent in 1992, the differences being very notable. As a 
new industrial processing base, Guangdong has greatly expanded 
the scale of its industrial enterprises. It had 21 more 
enterprises among the 500 in 1992 as compared with in 1988. To 
compare with the rapid development of the scale of industrial 
enterprises in Shanghai and Guangdong in recent years, Liaoning, 
as China's basic industrial base, has shown some signs of 
declining. This is not in keeping with its position and proper 
role in the development of the national economy. How to reform 
and reinvigorate this old industrial base in Liaoning is one of 
the major issues in the present economic development of China. 
  The regional distribution of the 500 largest industrial 
enterprises continues to move towards the east and natural 
resources are further concentrated in the east and the coastal 
areas. This will certainly widen the differences in economic 
development among the eastern, central, and western regions. At 
the same time, the calculation and analysis of corresponding 
regional industries show no notable advantage for industries 
from one region to another and their industrial structures are 
more or less the same. This shows that the level of cooperation 
on the basis of specialization among different regions is still 
very low and self-circulation in regional industries is fairly 
serious. This will no doubt cause the national economy to lose, 
to a certain extent, the advantage of regional differences and 
the benefit of large scale economies. For many years, most of 
China's industrial policies have been replaced by regional 
policies so that the industries in the east, central, and west 
became further imbalanced, the respective regional advantages 
were difficult to bring into full play, and rational labor 
division and cooperation among different regions were hard to 
organize and implement. Therefore, in order to rationally 
organize division of labor and cooperation among the different 
regions, to eliminate any conflicts between them in industrial 
production and the circulation realm, and to promote and 
coordinate regional economic development, while defining 
regional divisions and formulating regional policies, we must 
follow the principle of regional cooperation in terms of 
comparative advantages and the advanced level of product mix 
and, to rationally regulate the economic cooperation between 
developed and undeveloped regions and to promote the development 
of cooperation among the east, central and west follow the laws 
of large scale economy, to rationally coordinate and promote the 
cooperation between developed and undeveloped regions. 
<H5>  Formulation of an Industrial Policy Appropriate to China's </H5>
Conditions 
  --From the shift in industrial distribution among 
China's top- 500 industrial enterprises during the 1988-1992 
period, the current state of China's industrial development and 
the direction of change in the industrial structure can be 
clearly seen. 
  --The main target of the macroeconomic policy is to 
maintain sustained, stable and coordinated development [chi xu 
wen ding xie taio di faz han 2170 4958 4489 1353 0588 6148 4104 
4099 1455] of the national economy. It is essential to proceed 
from China's national conditions in formulating industrial 
policies appropriate to China's fundamental realities. 
  In a developing country it is important to foster and 
develop 
the nation's own industries, and to make them the major props of 
economic modernization. 
  China's industries have been developed for more than 40 
years, and a relatively complete industrial system has been 
established. Especially during the last 10 years or so, the 
Chinese economy has taken off, with an acceleration of the 
industrialization process and a very rapid shift in the 
industrial structure. From the shift in the industrial 
distribution among the top-500 industrial enterprises, the 
current state of China's industrial development and the 
direction of change in the industrial structure can be seen 
clearly. 
  A rough classification of the industrial distribution among 
China's top-500 industrial enterprises in 1988 is as follows: 
The ferrous-metal industry (78 enterprises), the 
tobacco-processing industry (56), the machine industry (45), the 
coal-mining and dressing industry (41), the electronics and 
telecommunications equipment producing industry (38), the 
chemical industry (35), and the transportation equipment 
producing industry (31). Distribution in 1992 was: The 
ferrous-metal industry (85 enterprises), the tobacco-processing 
industry (50), the transportation equipment producing industry 
(47), the machine industry (46), the chemical industry (38), and 
the coalmining and dressing industry (31). From the shift in 
industrial distribution over the five years among the top-500 
enterprises, the following are the industries within which 
industrial giants have increased in number to a greater extent 
than those not listed: The transportation equipment producing 
industry (plus 16), the ferrous-metal industry (7), the 
forage-processing industry (7), the pharmaceutical industry (5), 
the chemical industry (4), and the rubber industry (3). There 
have been great changes in the transportation equipment 
producing industry and in the forage- processing industry. In 
the same period, the industrial giants in the following 
industries decreased in number to a greater extent than those 
not listed: The textile industry (11 less), the coalmining and 
dressing industry (10), and the electronics and 
tlecommunications equipment producing industry (9). Other 
industries worth mentioning are the oil and gas exploration 
industries and the oil refining industry. Although they have 
13 and 30 enterprises respectively, virtually all of them are 
in the top 500. This will certainly be reflected very clearly 
in the overall shift in the scale of operations during the 1988 
to 1992 period among China's top 500 enterprises. Among the top 
500 enterprises, the following industries have more than doubled 
their total sales during the five year period: The 
forage-processing industry (a rise of 622.18), the oil and gas 
extraction industry (471.14), the ferrous-metal mining and 
dressing industry (450.19), the transportation equipment 
producing industry (350.39), the sewing industry (261.30), the 
beverage industry (242.34), the ferrous-metal smelting industry 
(232.26), the pharmaceutical industry (223.13), the oil 
refining industry (209.52), the chemical industry (206.39), 
the construction materials producing industry (202.36), and the 
chemical fiber industry (202.31). 
  The shift in industrial distribution among the top 500 and 
the increase in the scope of business operations strongly 
suggests that in the short term competition is mainly between 
enterprises within the same industry, i.e., a re-adjustment 
among enterprises of their market share. On the other hand, 
enterprise mergers, based on the principal of preserving the 
best and discarding those which are obsolete will be the 
mainstay of enterprise reorganization. Reallottment of market 
shares and enterprise mergers will result in resources flowing 
from obsolete enterprises or industries to new enterprises or 
industries. It will take a relatively long time to complete the 
process of redistributing resources among industries, but this 
will eventually result in an updating of the industrial 
structure (or the productionindustrial structure, including a 
comprehensive reform of the product structure, technology, 
production, and enterprise scale). 
  However, as a developing country, China is in the process of 
violent changes in terms of economic development and the demand 
structure. However, during this process of transition of the 
economic structure, the market system and the market operation 
mechanism are both far from mature or perfected. Under such 
circumstances, it is impossible to achieve a more effective or 
more rational disposition of resources merely by means of free 
competition in the market. While overall social efficiency 
remains low, it is impossible to realize sustained, stable, and 
coordinated development of the national economy. It is 
therefore vital to bring into full play the role of the 
industrial policy, the key to China's macroscopic management, 
and turn it into one of the major policies during the entire 
period of high-speed development. 
  Among China's top 500 industrial enterprises, the textile, 
coalmining and dressing, and the electronics and 
telecommunications equipment production industries lost most 
enterprises. The lot of these three, all important industries 
in the national economy, is not in accordance with their role in 
economic development and is thus worthy of attention. The main 
reason is that in the process of the transition in the economic 
structure, the state industrial policy, particularly that 
related to the industrial structure, has not played its due 
role, resulting in an imbalance in the industrial structure. 
  The reasons for the setbacks in the three industries are 
not exactly the same. The textile industry is a relatively 
mature traditional Chinese industry and accounts for the largest 
portion of China's export trade. However, a relatively high 
proportion of textile exports comprises grey cloth, meaning a 
total loss of high added value. Even in the garment exports, 
both major and auxiliary materials are mostly imports, also 
resulting in the loss of most of the high added value. To 
revitalize China's textile industry, top priority should be 
given to reexamining and rearranging the internal distribution 
of resources, and the situation wherein intermediate products 
are given priority should be changed so that priority is given 
to products most closely related to the market. Such a 
rearrangement will be the basis for reallocating resources. 
Second, the internal structure of the textile industry should 
be adjusted and the "mass spinning and weaving and mass printing 
and dyeing" changed to "mass spinning and weaving and 
small-batch printing and dyeing," to meet the demands of 
individual consumption both at home and abroad. Third, whether 
adopting an export-substitution or import-substitution strategy, 
the textile industry should basically aim to upgrade technology 
and raise the standard of its products. The coalmining and 
dressing industry is one of China's key basic industries, while 
the electronics and telecommunications equipment industry is 
only in its infancy. 
  The problems facing the former are still primarily due to 
the 
price system and the organizational structure of the 
enterprises. If domestic coal prices are gradually brought in 
line with those of the international market, most coal producing 
enterprises should be turned comprehensive transportation and 
sales groups to reduce intermediate costs can be reduced, reduce 
to a minimum the repercussions on the market, and change the 
long-standing situation whereby the coal industry depended on 
financial subsidies. This involves strategic options, i.e., how 
to develop China's newest high technology and the fundamental 
sectors of China's electronics industry. 
  The main target of the macro economic policy is to maintain 
a 
sustained, stable, and coordinated development of the national 
economy. It is essential to proceed from China's national 
conditions in formulating industrial policies appropriate to 
China's realities and make them the practical development 
guidelines for Chinese industry. Guided by industrial policy, 
enterprise groups should be established in conjunction with 
industrial reorganization and development, so that the 
enterprise organization and industrial structures are 
rationalized in coordination with the effective allocation of 
resources. As the organizations responsible for realizing 
industrial objectives, enterprise groups will assist the 
adjustment of the industrial structure and the industrial 
technology structure. In some countries, the history of 
economic development reveals that each transformation of the 
industrial structure is achieved through the conglomeration of 
enterprises and the reoptimization of resource allocation. For 
example, during Japan's rise in the post-war years, and South 
Korea's prosperity in the 1970's as one of the "four lttle 
economic tigers," both fostered aid-industry policies which 
resulted in substantial changes in the industrial structure and 
organization. Among the top 500 international industrial 
corporations in 1992, 128 were Japanese firms, accounting for 
25.6 percent of the total. There were also 12 South Korean 
companies included in the top 500. Although 12 is a relatively 
small number, the Samsung Corp., No.1 in South Korea, achieved 
sales of $495.6 billion, making it No. 18 in the top 500. 
  In selecting policies for industrial organization, we should 
not only make use of the spontaneous functions of market 
mechanism but also apply many macroeconomic regulation and 
control methods, to bring into play the state's role in 
optimizing the industrial organizational structure. We should 
not follow in the footsteps of some developed countries wherein 
the optimization process was mainly based on market mechanisms. 
  It is not in accordance with the laws of a commodity economy 
to simply transplant industrial organization formats from 
developed ocountries, or regard a certain scale as a rational 
standard. Developing countries should focus their attention on 
their own realities in selecting industrial-organization formats 
so that, through the entrepreneurs' creative activities, the 
industrial organizations can develop into a series which can 
constantly increase their own value and constantly upgrade and 
improve themselves. 
  The Business Cycle and the Development of Large 
Enterprises 
  --Since the adoption of the policy of reform and 
opening to the outside world, China's economic growth has 
gradually shifted to a stage dominated by a growth cycle. The 
major feature of the business cycle is economic growth. 
  --Adopt active macroeconomic policies and reduce the 
magnitude of fluctuations in the economic cycle and their 
calamitous effects. "Anticycle" should become the main contents 
of macroeconomic regulation and control. 
  --Active adjustment of the business cycle by the state 
is the most effective means of easing the contradictions between 
supply and demand. Enterprises should also take effective 
measures to dampen the repercussions caused by such swings on 
their business activities and development. 
  In any economic society, the operational state and 
developmental tendency of an enterprise, as the subject of a 
market economy, are decided by the following two basic elements: 
The enterprise's business conduct and its operational 
environment. 
  An enterprise's business conduct are not only decided by its 
internal structure (such as the nature of ownership, management 
system, and methods of operation) but are also inevitably 
restricted and influenced by the operational environment, both 
in terms of quantitative stipulations (i.e. the extent of 
realization) or in terms of qualitative stipulations (i.e. 
operational direction). Especially when an enterprise has not 
become an independent legal person, the operational environment 
greatly influences its development. Because of space 
limitations, this article will only present a preliminary 
analysis of the economic environment (market environment), in 
particular the business cycle, which is directly related to 
changes in the operational scale and efficiency of large scale 
enterprises. 
<H5>  The Relationship Between the Business Cycle and the </H5>
Development of Large Enterprises 
  The business cycle is a combination of alternating economic 
contraction and expansion. An investigation of China's current 
economic development reveals that since the implementation of 
the reform policy, China's economic growth has gradually shifted 
into a period dominated by growth. 
  At this stage economic expansion is accrued growth and 
economic recession is accrued recession; economic growth 
dominates and is realized in the business cycle. Due to 
restricted supply of economic resources, the unitary or 
imperfects means of macroeconomic regulation and contreol, and 
the immaturity of macroeconomic regulation and control, economic 
expansion can very easily be achieved in the short term. 
  In order to guarantee the sustained, stable, and coordinated 
development of China's economy, and to guard against greater 
repercussions on economic development brought about by 
overheating, a new cycle of adjustment is unavoidable. 
  During the 1988 to 1992 Period, China's economic development 
passed through the following phases: Rapid growth with 
inflation; economic improvement, rectification and macroscopic 
austerity; and resumption of economic growth and rapid growth. 
It is within such a complete economic cycle that the 
development of China's large enterprises has been realized 
within the five years. 
<H5>  A Review of the Increases in the Domestic Total Output Value </H5>
Shows Obvious Business Fluctuations During This Period 
  The GDP in 1989 was 4.3 percent higher than in 1988; 
corresponding rates of increase in 1990, 1991 and 1992 were 3.9 
percent, 8.0 percent and 13.2 percent, respectively. Because 
secondary industries constitute the bulk of China's economy 
(48.2 percent in 1992), the macroscopic business cycle is caused 
mainly by industrial cycling. The total industrial output value 
in 1989 was 8.5 percent higher than in 1988 and the 
corresponding rates of increase in 1990, 1991 and 1992 were 7.8 
percent, 14.8 percent and 27.5 percent, respectively. 
Fluctuations in the external economic environment inevitably 
lead to fluctuations in enterprise growth and vice versa. 
  Take as an example the trend towards increased in total 
sales 
among China's top 500 enterprises. The sales total in 1989 was 
19.82 percent higher than in the previous year and corresponding 
rates in 1990, 1991 and 1992 were 9.73 percent, 24.70 percent 
and 33.36 percent, respectively. Change in enterprises' 
operational scale has an even greater impact on their economic 
efficiency. For example, the total pre-tax profits of China's 
top 500 enterprises. If the total for 1988 is set at 100, the 
totals for 1989 and 1990 were both under 100 (1989: 95.67; 1990: 
97.93), and it was not until 1991 that the total surpassed 100 
to reach 114.77. 
  This situation demonstrates that the business cycle is 
completely synchronized with the development of China's large 
enterprises and that there is a very close link between their 
development and the macroscopic economic environment. 
  In the new historical situation of further reforms and more 
openness, enterprises which have experienced macroscopic 
austerity will pay more attention to shifts in the development 
of the macroscopic economy, studying the macroeconomic 
regulation and control which the government possibly initiates. 
They can thus take prompt emergency measures in another 
business cycle and their development can more swiftly adapt to 
external changes in the economic environment and be more 
flexible. 
  On the other hand, with the establishment and improvement of 
China's socialist market economy, the influence of the 
government's direct decisionmaking on economic fluctuations may 
be less than ever. However, in order to maintain the stable, 
sustained, and coordinated development of the national economy; 
to deepen reforms; and to adjust the economic structure so that 
the economy can continue to grow, the state should do everything 
possible to reduce the enormous repercussions on the 
enterprises' operation and development when adopting 
macroeconomic regulation and control measures toward economic 
development. 
<H5>  "Anticycle" Should Become the Main Contgents of China's </H5>
Macroeconomic Regulation and Control Policy 
  To ensure a sustained, stable economic development, the 
extent of the economic cycle should be reduced to a minimum and 
the ascending period of each cycle should be prolonged as far as 
possible. 
  Nevertheless, we cannot completely flatten these economic 
fluctuations. We can only adopt positive macroeconomic policies 
to reduce their magnitude and any catastrophic impact. We can 
meet the "anticycle" target by relatively stabilizing the money 
supply and by reducing the violent fluctuations in investment 
demand and consumption demand. 
  The history of economic development in other countries 
illustrates that an "anticycle" policy is of major significance 
in stabilizing economic development. During the period of 
Japan's swift economic development, particularly in the 1950's 
and 1960's, Japan's economy grew too fast, while production 
depended heavily on imported raw materials and energy resources. 
Under such circumstances, increases in production were 
dependent on imports, which in turn resulted in Japan's 
worsening international balance of payments. Consequently, this 
international balance of payments problem constituted the 
critical point in Japan's economic growth. When economic 
development was sufficiently overheated to reach or approach 
this critical point, the Japanese Government began to raise 
interest rates to depress the overheated investment. Once the 
international balance of payments returned to normal, interest 
rates were gradually decreased so that the economy could climb 
from the trough to a peak. The business cycles in 1957, 1962 
and 1964 can all fit such a model. 
  In summary, the international balance of payments, which was 
the critical point, was an important early warning sign in 
Japan's economic development during its period of rapid growth 
and the interest rates policy became an important means for 
macroeconomic regulationa and control and an important aspect of 
the "anticycle." 
  China's current economic cycle is more complicated. 
According to research conducted by the State Statistical Bureau 
Department of Integrated Statistics of the National Economy, 
because of the dual effect of investment in fixed assets on 
China's total supply and demand, the violent fluctuations in 
China's economic growth are always preceded by swings in 
investment in fixed assets. Large increases or large decreases 
in investment in fixed assets both cause violent economic 
fluctuations. 
  Generally speaking, overexpansion of investment demand 
inevitably leads to the oversupply of money, pulling the economy 
into overexpansion and resulting in an expansion of consumer 
demand, a drop in commodity stock, and an upswing in price 
indexes. 
  Conversely, excessive contraction of investment demand 
inevitably leads to a shortage in the supply of money, which 
causes economic recession, reduction in consumer demand, an 
increase in commodity stock, and a downswing in price indexes. 
However, these are only the general conditions of the business 
cycle. 
  Observing the reality of China's economic development 
reveals 
that there are insufficient macroscopic conditions in the 
economy in terms of firm restrictions on the retarded 
development of basic industries. This is characterized by the 
undersupply of key raw materials, shortages in the supply of 
energy resources, grossly inadequate transportation, and 
shortages in hard currencies. Undersupply will hold up China's 
economic development and seriously constrain economic growth 
throughout what should be a period of fast economic growth. 
  Enterprise development orientation in recent years indicates 
that from now on China's industrial development will mainly be 
restricted by the structural contradiction between rapidly 
growing processing industries and the slow growth of basic 
industries. 
  In contrast to the increase over the five year period in 
the per capita equipment-rate in China's top 500 enterprises, 
the equipment-rate fell in most basic industries, with the 
exception of the oil and gas exploration industries which 
enjoyed a significant increase. In most of the processing 
industries there was an increase in the per capita 
equipment-rate. In the coming years, the development of basic 
industries will still be limited, in contrast to the further 
growth of the processing industries. It will be very difficult 
to reconcile the contradiction between the development of the 
two economic sectors, which will in turn restrict the growth of 
the processing industries. The resulting economic repercussions 
can only be eased by the "anticycle" policy. 
  It is therefore necessary to take the "anticycle" policy as 
the main contents of the macroeconomic regulation and control 
policies. If the "early warning" point of "anticycle" is only 
set on fixed assets investment, excellent opportunities for 
economic and industrial development will undoubtedly be lost, 
delaying development of the modernization drive. It is also 
extremely impractical to regard strengthening supply 
capabilities as the major policy. 
  When summarizing the rapid growth of Japan's economy, 
Kanamori Hisakata, a famous Japanese economist, pointed out that 
nongovernmental investment in equipment, which had a 3.5-fold 
increase within a decade, was the primary force behind Japan's 
rapid growth. He believes that heavy investment in equipment 
has played a major role in promoting Japan's economic growth in 
terms of enlarging Japan's production capabilities, expanding 
consumption demand, promoting adjustment of the industrial 
structure (such adjustment would be difficult to carry out 
without added investment), and strengthening global 
competitiveness which, in turn, has resulted in increased 
exports and an improved international balance of payments. The 
increase in equipment investment has led to higher productivity, 
lower payroll costs, and stronger price competitiveness. In 
view of China's practical conditions, and in response to the 
demand to buttress the high-speed economic development by means 
of strengthening supply capabilities, it is necessary to 
maintain a relatively high equipment-investment level for a 
certain period of time to increase industries' supply capability 
and raise global competitiveness. It is also necessary to link 
the domestic market more closely to international markets and 
increase the role of import substitutes. Increased supply 
capability is needed to sustain high growth. 
  Voluntary adjustment of the business cycle by the state is 
the most effective means of easing the supply-demand 
contradiction. Meanwhile, the state should also use the economic 
cycle-adjustment policy as an important means of adjusting the 
organizational structure of enterprises and discarding obsolete 
enterprises, which are like a cancer adversely affecting 
economic quality and, therefore, should be eliminated. No 
matter which "anticycle" policy is adopted, however, an 
"early-warning" system should be used so that enterprises can 
take emergency measures as soon as possible and reduce the 
repercussions from economic fluctuations on the operation and 
development of enterprises. 

