Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: Prepared by </F>
Andrey Pershin, Andrey Petrovskiy, and Vladimir Shishlin, edited 
by Boris Grishchenko] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Nuclear Posture and Pledges Friendship With Moscow </H5>
  Ukraine's President Kravchuk believes that the Russian 
President Yeltsin's remarks that "Ukraine fools the whole world 
on nuclear arms" have not affected and will not affect "the 
process of signing bilateral accords." 
  IF Note: Commenting on Kiev's nuclear stand at the recent 
meeting with U.S. Vice President Gore in Moscow, Yeltsin 
declared: "Ukraine is fooling us all. It is fooling the U.S., 
Russia, Europe, it is fooling the whole world, and we are so 
weak that we cannot do anything about it." 
  "There are obvious processes--he told journalists in 
Kiev--that no one can stop--neither Yeltsin, nor Kravchuk nor 
Zhirinovskiy. Any attempt to stop them is doomed to failure." 
  In the meantime, he remarked "I did not hear the president's 
voice." "What you sometimes write or say--he told 
journalists--is still not the reason for me to make any 
statements." 
  However, he admitted that Yeltsin "might have said so in a 
special situation, among certain persons." "I do not believe 
that the president meant precisely that by his remark, he 
declared. Nor can I believe that Boris Nikolayevich regards our 
state as deceptive." "Ukraine's relations with Russia have 
always been friendly and will remain such," Kravchuk stressed. 
  At the same time, he suggested that "it might have simply 
been a slip of the tongue or he might have said so in duress." 
In the current complex political situation, it is hard to 
restrain oneself from poignant statements, he remarked. 
  In his words, Ukraine has never given any pretext for such 
accusations. 
  U.S., Ukrainian, and Russian delegates discussed nuclear 
disarmament and relations between their countries at tripartite 
consultations last weekend. According the Ukrainian Foreign 
Ministry, the sides discussed the possibility of paying 
compensation to Ukraine for the uranium that fills the nuclear 
weapons withdrawn from the republic. 
  As the Foreign Ministry's Spokesman Yuriy Sergeev has told 
INTERFAX, the U.S. is beginning to act as a mediator in 
Ukrainian-Russian negotiations on the problem of nuclear arms 
deployed in Ukraine. 

