BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "ACIR Radio News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] This morning, the U.S. Government announced 
modifications to visas issued for travel to the United States. 
I am going to explain the communique they sent us, which has 
somehow led to confusion. I will explain what will happen with 
the so-called border-crossing visas [mica]. There will not be 
changes with regard to indefinite border-crossing visas. 
[sentence as heard] All other visas stamped on your passports, 
even those that read indefinite, will no longer be so. 
  In keeping with a worldwide effort to make the automatic 
handling of visas more efficient, three years ago the U.S. 
Embassy began issuing nonimmigrant visas which are read by 
computers. These have a maximum validity of 10 years. 
  Therefore, starting on 1 January 1995, all indefinite 
validity visas issued before 1 January 1995 will be canceled. 
In addition, after 1 January 1995, indefinite visas will not be 
valid after 10 years of their issue date. Nonimmigrant visas 
are those issued to tourists, businessmen, students, and other 
persons who travel temporarily to the United States. 
  In their communique, they posed some questions to try to 
clarify the doubts the public may have. One says: What will 
happen with the indefinite visas already issued? Beginning on 1 
January 1995, indefinite visas stamped on passports will be 
canceled 10 years after their issue date. For instance, visas 
issued before 2 January 1985 will not be valid as of 1 January 
1995, and an indefinite visa issued in 1990 will be valid until 
the year 2000. 
  Another question formulated is: What must people holding 
indefinite visas on their passports do? They must revise their 
date of expiration, which will not exceed 10 years, and take 
steps to obtain a visa for only 10 years, if expired. I repeat, 
indefinite visas will no longer exist. 
  Will this policy affect border-crossing visas, Form I-186? 
No. This measure only affects those whose indefinite visas are 
stamped on their passports. If you are holding an indefinite 
border-crossing visa, there is no problem. 
  Evidently, this has generated reaction. Why has the U.S. 
Government taken this position? Here in our country, some 
pronouncements were made on the issue. Foreign Relations 
Secretary Manuel Tello ruled out the restriction of U.S. visas 
to 10 years starting in 1995 as being an anti-immigration 
measure, which is obviously what people thought at first. 
  Let us listen to Marcela Gutierrez: 
  [Begin recording] [Gutierrez] Foreign Relations Secretary 
Manuel Tello ruled out the 10-year limit of U.S. visas as being 
an anti-immigration measure by the United States. On the 
contrary, he indicated, the U.S. visa policy is very generous. 
  [Tello] If I receive a visa that is valid for 10 years to 
visit a country, I would think it is a very generous visa. I 
repeat once more, we grant foreigners visas to visit Mexico for 
only 180 days. 
  [Gutierrez] The foreign minister reiterated our country will 
not modify the duration of the visas issued to foreigners. 
Interviewed at the Foreign Relations Secretariat, Manuel Tello 
stated it is the exclusive responsibility of the U.S. Government 
to decide the duration of the visas. 
  Finally, he concluded it is not irregular that with the 
commercial opening, the government of the neighboring country 
decided to limit indefinite tourist visas to 10 years. [end 
recording] 

