BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, May 21 (KCNA) -- An anti-U.S. joint 
meeting of youth and students in the North and South of Korea 
and abroad took place here today. 
  The meeting was addressed by Ho Chang-cho, chairman of the 
North side headquarters of the National Alliance of Youth and 
Students for the Country's Reunification (Pomchonghaknyon), and 
representatives of students and working youths. 
  Noting that the South side headquarters of Pomchonghaknyon 
proposed to the North side headquarters to hold an anti-U.S. 
joint meeting of youth and students in the North and South of 
Korea and abroad to denounce the U.S. imperialists, the chief 
culprit in the brutal Kwangju massacre, on the occasion of the 
14th anniversary of the heroic Kwangju popular uprising, the 
speakers said if the Chon Tu-hwan-No Tae-u group was the 
blood-stained blade of the sword that murdered more than 5,000 
citizens and wounded some 14,000 others in Kwangju, its hilt was 
the United States. 
  Denouncing the U.S. imperialists' persistent moves to 
isolate 
and stifle the DPRK over its fictitious "nuclear issue", they 
stressed the need for an unremitting struggle to check the U.S. 
imperialists' nuclear racket, remove the danger of nuclear war 
hanging over the nation and get the U.S. Forces and nuclear 
weapons withdrawn from South Korea. 
  They also emphasized that the South Korean youth and 
students 
should daringly wage mass struggles to overthrow the Kim 
Yong-sam puppet regime, a group of despicable 
flunkeyist-traitors, and establish a genuinely independent 
democratic government in firm solidarity with the workers, 
peasants and other sections of people. 
  They warned that the U.S. imperialists should look squarely 
at the fighting will of the South Korean youth and students and 
immediately withdraw from South Korea and that the traitor Kim 
Yong- sam should step down without delay before facing a stern 
punishment by the people. 
  A joint declaration of youth and students in the North and 
South of Korea and abroad for defending the sovereignty of the 
nation was read out at the meeting. 
  The joint declaration says the United States should stop at 
an early date its nuclear racket against the North and rice 
market and arms market opening pressure on the South and no 
longer create difficulties in the Korean people's way for 
national reunification. 
  It stresses that the South side's authorities must honestly 
repent before the whole nation of their policy of dependence on 
outside forces and flunkeyist treacheries, cancel at once their 
measure for "tough countermove" against the North and the move 
to establish an "international cooperation system" with the 
United States, Japan and other countries, and unconditionally 
stop suppressing the struggle of youth and students and other 
people in the South for independence, democracy and national 
reunification. 
  The 70 million fellow countrymen should make strenuous 
efforts for the convocation of a national conference, an arena 
for the great unity of the whole nation, transcending the 
differences in political view, religious belief, property status 
and residence, says the declaration. 

