Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ivan Seges, director of the Criminal Law </F>
Department at the General Prosecutor's Office of the Slovak 
Republic, by Juraj Handzo; place and date not given: "Will We Be 
Able To Cope With Mafias?; Law on Combating Organized Crime 
Being Drafted"] 
  [Text] A few days ago, the government's Legislative 
Council approved with comments the draft of a law on uncovering 
and punishing the most serious, especially organized, forms of 
crime. The draft has been prepared by the General Prosecutor's 
Office of the Slovak Republic. We discussed the purpose and the 
contents of the new law with one of its authors, Ivan Seges, 
LL.D., director of the Criminal Law Department at the General 
Prosecutor's Office of the Slovak Republic. 
  [Handzo] Could you briefly characterize the contents of the 
law under preparation? 
  [Seges] In drafting the law, we strove to have it contain, 
on the greatest scale possible, such elements as would make it 
possible to vigorously crack down on manifestations of organized 
crime. The draft consists, in fact, of two parts. The first 
concerns legal means that make it possible to uncover attempts 
at an unlawful legalization of income stemming from serious 
criminal activity--that is, the so-called laundering of dirty 
money. The second part defines legal means and procedures that 
would make it possible to expose and document serious criminal 
activity in a way that could be used as evidence in court [s 
procesnou posobnostou]. The course of action by the bodies 
involved in criminal proceedings has until now been formal, in a 
certain way, so that findings by the criminal police that were 
not obtained by the set procedures could not be used as evidence 
in court. 
  [Handzo] What is the purpose of the proposed legal means? 
  [Seges] We would like to break through the principle that is 
valid now, according to which it is possible to start collecting 
evidence, for it to be recognized in court, only after criminal 
prosecution has been formally initiated. In the case of listed 
criminal acts (which are enumerated in the draft law), the 
bodies involved in criminal proceedings should be permitted to 
collect evidence that will be recognized in court before the 
initiation of criminal prosecution. These bodies should be 
endowed with such powers as would allow them to investigate 
effectively, in a way that will be recognized in court, when 
their crime-solving experience and other indications suggest 
that they are confronted with organized crime, even if they do 
not avail themselves of findings signaling a specific criminal 
act. 
  [Handzo] Could the application of legal means permitting the 
start of investigations in the event of a mere suspicion not 
constitute encroachment upon basic human rights in certain cases? 
  [Seges] The draft law makes it possible for bodies involved 
in criminal proceedings to secure evidence, in the case of 
listed (enumerated) criminal acts, without there being a formal 
resolution on the initiation of criminal prosecution. 
Therefore, should a charge be raised, the effects of the start 
of criminal prosecution would retroactively authorize even the 
deployment of operational technical devices 
[operativno-technickych prostriedkov], telephone tapping, or the 
use of a secret agent operating under an assumed identity 
(alias), who would penetrate into the criminal environment with 
the aim of obtaining evidence. 
  It is self-evident that, in view of this being a very 
serious 
encroachment upon citizens' civil rights and liberties, all of 
these means could be used only with the consent of the judge or 
prosecutor. Opponents of this regulation argue that it is 
anticonstitutional or that it restricts basic human rights. 
However, the Constitution expressly states that these rights 
can be restricted by law if the interest of society so requires. 
And it is in the interest of society that the relevant bodies 
be provided with the possibility to crack down effectively on 
organized crime. No one is going to restrict the rights of 
decent people.... 
  [Handzo] The specific criminal acts authorizing the 
application of the aforesaid legal means are listed in the draft 
law. Which criminal acts are involved? 
  [Seges] This would apply, for example, to the criminal acts 
of terrorism, sabotage, counterfeiting and altering money and 
securities, general endangerment, endangering the safety of an 
aircraft or a civilian vessel, unauthorized armament, and other 
grievous criminal acts. Apart from this, we propose a provision 
under which, in certain cases and with the prosecutor's consent, 
the law would also apply to deliberate criminal acts, for which 
the minimum sentence is five years of deprivation of freedom, 
provided the circumstances of the case justify the assumption 
that the act had been committed by an organized group, as 
defined by this law. 
  [Handzo] Let us return to the issue of "dirty-money 
laundering." What will the adoption of the law mean in 
practice, from that point of view? 
  [Seges] The draft provides for several basic principles, the 
application of which would help expose attempts at the unlawful 
legalization of income stemming from serious criminal activity. 
First of all, it lays down the obligation for juridical persons 
and entrepreneurs to report facts suggesting the existence of 
such activities. At the same time, the anonymity in relation to 
financial institutions should be eliminated in a certain way, to 
make it possible to identify people carrying out suspicious 
banking operations. Financial institutions should be placed 
under the obligation to report to the Prosecutor's Office or to 
the Slovak Republic Police Corps not only instances of suspected 
legalization of income stemming from organized criminal activity 
but also cash deposits and withdrawals exceeding a certain sum 
(for example, 100,000 Slovak korunas). The second principle is 
that juridical persons and entrepreneurs are obliged to refuse 
to perform acts (such as the conclusion of a contract) that 
could, without doubt, be conducive to the legalization of income 
stemming from serious criminal activity. Furthermore, the draft 
law sets out the right, in the event of any suspicious 
transactions, to ascertain the origin of the property that these 
transactions concern. The last proposed provision is that a 
citizen or an organization that helps uncover attempts at the 
legalization of income stemming from organized criminal activity 
is entitled to a reward in the amount of 10 percent of the 
uncovered sum. Naturally, all of these provisions would be 
applied also to machinations associated with the privatization 
process. 
  [Handzo] Does the draft law also provide for manifestations 
of organized crime associated with the criminal act of the 
unauthorized production and possession of narcotic and 
psychotropic substances and toxins--that is, drug-trafficking? 
  [Seges] As we know, existing legislation did not make it 
possible, in fact, to combat more effectively these expressions 
of organized crime. If a person was found to carry such a 
substance and wanted to avoid criminal prosecution, often this 
person only had to say that it was for his or her own need. The 
draft law contains provisions under which it would be possible 
to prosecute criminally everyone possessing these substances, 
regardless of whether he keeps them for his own needs or for 
someone else. Of course, it is up to the relevant specialized 
bodies to assess in each specific case, considering the quantity 
of the seized addictive substance, whether the person in 
question could keep it for his or her own use. 
  [Handzo] What makes the struggle against organized crime 
exceptionally difficult is the inadequate protection of 
witnesses. Does the proposed law provide for any changes in this 
regard? 
  [Seges] The provision of essential protection to witnesses 
is one of the pillars of the draft we propose. Intimidation of 
potential witnesses is one of the common practices of organized 
crime. The protection of witnesses should be secured in three 
ways. First, under strictly defined conditions, the law will 
make it possible for them to remain anonymous; second, on the 
basis of a provision in the law, it will be possible to question 
them during court proceedings with the public excluded; and, 
finally, when agents are concerned, their true identity will not 
be revealed even during criminal proceedings. 

