Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporters Wu Xiangzhong (0702 0686 0022) and Yan Liqiang </F>
(0917 0500 1730): "Municipal Leaders Chen Xitong, Li Qiyan, 
Others Salute Financial, Tax Workers"] 
  [Excerpts] On New Year's Eve, Chen Xitong, secretary of the 
municipal party committee; Li Qiyan, mayor of Beijing; and other 
municipal leaders visited the brightly illuminated municipal 
people's bank of China, tax bureau, and finance bureau to 
express thanks and to salute the cadres, staff members, and 
workers who were working hard all night to make year-end final 
accounts. 
  Although the price hikes for energy resources and raw 
materials were higher than in previous years and enterprises 
encountered fund shortages for some time, Beijing's revenues 
totaled 8.41 billion yuan in 1993, 0.7 percent higher than the 
municipal budget and 4.8 percent higher than in the preceding 
year, thus achieving a revenue increase for 11 years in a row. 
All tax revenues surpassed those of the preceding year, of 
which industrial and commercial tax totaled 14.48 billion yuan, 
up 31.5 percent from the preceding year in terms of comparable 
standards. Bank savings deposits in the municipality increased 
by more than 30 billion yuan, and loans by more than 20 billion 
yuan. 
  Chen Xitong, Li Qiyan, and Executive Vice Mayors Zhang Baifa 
and Wang Baosen came to the municipal people's bank of China to 
hear its Governor Lu Xueyong's report and cordially meet with 
leaders of various specialized banks and insurance companies in 
an atmosphere characterized by festive joy and busy work. 
[passage omitted] 
  After this, Chen Xitong, Li Qiyan, and others came to the 
municipal tax bureau to hear its Director Sun Zhiqiang's report. 
According to initial statistics, the municipality's tax revenues 
totaled 23 billion yuan in 1993, of which 13.5 billion yuan was 
local tax revenues, up 3.2 billion yuan, or 31 percent, from the 
previous year. The municipal leaders extended thanks and 
saluted the cadres, staff members, and workers of tax 
departments who had worked hard. Chen Xitong said: Tax 
departments fulfilled their 1993 tasks successfully. They 
should continue efforts in 1994 and take greater steps. They 
should remember that "development is the essential criterion," 
and that without a developed economy, there is no hope for tax 
collection. Tax work should be focused on promoting production. 
Only when "there is a way to create wealth," will there be "a 
way to accumulate wealth," and will there be financial resources 
for economic construction. Li Qiyan said: The overfulfillment 
of the 1993 tax tasks by tax departments despite numerous 
difficulties should be attributed to the concerted efforts of 
their cadres, staff members, and workers. It is hoped that in 
the new year they will exert greater efforts to train cadres 
well. Wang Baosen said: As the tasks of tax reform in the new 
year will be very heavy, it is hoped that continuous efforts 
will be made to win greater achievements. [passage omitted] 

