BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Castro Turns Down Iranian Invitation </F>
To Form Axis To Confront United States"] 
  [Text] Tehran, London, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Well-informed 
Iranian sources said yesterday that Cuban President Fidel Castro 
has "diplomatically" turned down an Iranian invitation to form a 
new axis "to confront what the invitation termed U.S. 
imperialism's domination of the world." 
  The sources added that Castro proposed selling sugar and 
tobacco to Iran at low prices in return for 500,000 barrels of 
oil a year. 
  The Iranian proposal was submitted to Cuba by Construction 
Jihad Minister Gholam Reza Foruzesh, who has just concluded his 
visit to Havana, where he met with Castro for 40 minutes. 
During the meeting he handed Castro a message from Iranian 
President Hashemi-Rafsanjani. 
  The content of Hashemi-Rafsanjani's message has not been 
revealed. sources in Tehran, however, pointed out that the 
message reflected the new policy drawn up by Iran aimed at 
creating a new bloc of what it termed "struggling states" under 
its own leadership. In addition to Cuba, the countries 
concerned include North Korea, Iraq, Libya, Yemen (Sanaa), 
Sudan, Jordan, and Qatar. The idea came first from extremist 
elements associated with 'Ali Khamene'i, guide of the Iranian 
republic, who believes that Hashemi-Rafsanjani's policy of 
seeking to achieve accord with the West has produced no positive 
results. 
  The aim of forming this bloc, which -- according to the 
extremist elements -- seeks to extend its authority over the 
Nonaligned Movement, is to force the West in general and the 
United States in particular to reconsider its policy aimed at 
isolating Iran. 
  Support for the Pyongyang-Havana-Tehran axis comes from a 
group of black U.S. Muslims who set up offices in Tehran in 
1980. This group owns one of the English dailies published in 
Tehran by the "KEYHAN companies group," stronghold of extremists 
in Iranian media services. 
  The idea of forming an axis with Tehran was not, however, 
taken seriously in the Cuban capital, where Castro has on 
numerous occasions criticized the backward cultural and social 
policy of the Iranian mullahs. 
  Castro also rejected Iranian claims that Tehran would fill 
the "gap" left after the breakup of the Soviet Union, describing 
this as arrogant. 
  It is noted that the Cuban president is currently seeking to 
initiate a dialogue with the administration of U.S. President 
Bill Clinton to rescue Cuba from the economic deterioration and 
political chaos dominating it, according to analysts. 

