BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Kh. Kharalambidhis] </F>
  [Text] The Turkish Secret Services agents who act in the 
free areas, have pulled back. After the spy incident at Larnaca 
Airport and the arrest of Turkish Cypriot smuggler Halil Goskun, 
the agents have suspended all activities. The Security 
Authorities believe that the Turkish Secret Services 
headquarters have ordered all agents to suspend every activity 
until further notice. This action was considered necessary 
because basic MIT [National Intelligence Organization] agents 
who act in the free areas have already been identified and 
inactivated while others are being monitored to identify their 
associates. 
  Foreign diplomats and military attaches consider a great 
success the Security Authorities' identification of British and 
U.S. military officers at Larnaca Airport when the National 
Guard was on an extremely confidential mission. Diplomatic and 
military circles stressed that British and U.S. claims, that 
they were at the airport supposedly to watch airplanes land and 
take off, are unfounded. 
  Our own Security Authorities made the same evaluation. The 
National Guard and the police believe beyond any doubt that the 
American and Britons who were arrested at the Airport were 
observing National Guard work and were recording everything for 
the Turks. 
  It is noted that their moves, their pursuit by the police, 
their return to the airport, and their arrest disavows each of 
their claims. This is why demarches were made to the British 
High Commission and the U.S. Embassy, whose members were 
identified and interrogated following the airport incident. 
From the interrogations of the British and American military 
officers, the Cypriot Security Authorities drew their own 
conclusions, which will help them identify Turkish Secret 
Services agents acting in the free areas. 
  The continuing interrogations have not yet determined who 
leaked the information that the National Guard would perform a 
predefined mission at Larnaca Airport at that specific time. I 
SIMERINI reported exclusively that the spy incident in Larnaca 
Airport concerned Greece. The Greek National Defense General 
Staff asked YEEF [National Guard General Staff] to submit all 
relevant information and evidence of the case so that 
investigations could be held in Greece as well. 
  In a statement to I SIMERINI yesterday, reliable circles 
said 
that all evidence and conclusions from the investigations and 
interrogations are being evaluated and they will constitute the 
basis for the missions of the relevant National Guard and police 
services against Turkish agents and their associates who act in 
the free areas against Cyprus' defense and internal security. 

