BFN 

<F P=106> [Gunnar Magnus report: "Hagen Urges Fight Against Muslims"] </F>
  [Text] Bolkesjo -- A battle against Muslim fundamentalism 
with the New Testament as the ideological foundation is the 
course Carl I. Hagen has plotted for the Progress Party [FrP]. 
  In his speech to the FrP's national conference, Hagen put 
great emphasis on immigration policy. He sees a particular 
danger of conflicts in the wake of Muslim fundamentalism. 
  The FrP chairman also spoke out in favor of reduced support 
for single breadwinners. He made fun of other parties -- with 
the exception of the Labor Party, which received praise. He 
sketched a vision of a harmonious society. He also launched a 
political campaign for the reorganization of the public sector, 
with increased use of private services. 
  The delegates repeatedly rewarded Hagen with applause -- 
particularly when he proposed expelling the leader of the Muslim 
Association in Stavanger who in the past has threatened to kill 
writer Salman Rushdie. "It must be made completely clear that 
Norway must not be a refuge for Islamic fundamentalists," Hagen 
said. Deputy chairman Ellen Wibe and some of her allies failed 
to take part in the roar of enthusiasm. 
  Prior to the party chairman's speech there was a short 
debate 
about whether the national conference should voice a 
recommendation on EU [European Union] membership. 
  By 113 votes to 44 the conference adopted a proposal from 
Hagen that the decision be left to a national executive meeting 
at a later date. Wibe wanted a yes vote at the national 
conference. 
  Carl I. Hagen said that he is glad that immigration, asylum, 
and refugee policy "has again become an important issue for the 
Progress Party." He stressed the prevention of violent social 
conflict. Hagen wants better integration of immigrants and 
tougher restrictions on family reunification. He wants to end 
the possibility of asylum in churches, begin the large-scale 
repatriation of refugees to safe countries, and refuse entry to 
all those who put Islamic law above Norwegian law. 
  As far as single breadwinners are concerned, Hagen wants to 
look at removing transitional benefits, additional child support 
benefits, and other special payments. He said that it must be a 
main ideological principle that everyone should take 
responsibility for the choices they make. "The time has come 
for a much clearer emphasis on individual responsibility," Hagen 
said, pointing both to the theory of liberalism and the New 
Testament that is "chock-full of liberal ideas about freedom." 
  He said the following of the other parties: Christian 
People's Party leader Kjell Magne Bondevik is "the greatest ally 
of organized crime," the Conservative Party is a passive 
bystander in political developments, while the Labor Party 
commands respect. Hagen described party leader Thorbjorn Jagland 
as a capable strategist and tactician and praised aspects of 
Labor Party policy. He also strongly attacked the interests of 
professional groups and the power of organizations in society. 

