Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] NASDA is currently conducting a microgravity 
experiment project using a small rocket (TR-IA, dubbed 
``Takesaki'') to develop techniques required for conducting 
various experiments on the space station. 
  In the implementation of this microgravity experiment 
project, we have selected experiment themes suitable for the 
technical development objective of each piece of experimental 
equipment and have been supported by representatives of various 
national test and research organizations, universities, and 
private research organizations. 



<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007LC-08A>  Experimental system/rocket (onboard equipment) general performance test </FIG>


  We launched TR-IA 1 in September 1991, and TR-IA 2 in August 
1992 from the Takesaki Range of the Tanegashima Space Center; we 
successfully conducted experiments on a total of 10 themes and 
achieved the expected results using six minutes of microgravity. 
  We will launch TR-IA 3 on 8 September 1993 as the third 
experiment of the series. TR-IA 3 will carry the experimental 
equipment unit (II) in joint research conducted by NASDA and the 
Society of Japanese Aerospace Companies, Inc., in addition to 
the experimental equipment unit (I), carried in tests Nos. 1 and 
2, for the development of the space experiment technique. As a 
result, the total length of the rocket is about 0.6 meters 
greater than that of Nos. 1 and 2. 
  The experiments to be conducted on TR-IA 3 consist of the 
following seven items: 


  [Experimental Equipment Unit (I)] 
  1) Crystal growth experiments, beginning with solutions 
under 
high pressurization 
  Experimental device: Observation experiment device 
Experiment 
coordinator: Tsutomu Sawada, Chief Researcher, No. 13 Research 
Group, Inorganic Material Laboratory 
  2) Experiment on the control of Marangoni convection using 
electric force 
  Experimental device: Fluid-physics basic-characteristics 
measuring device Experiment coordinator: Keiichi Kuwabara, 
Section Manager, Engineering Research Laboratory, 
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries 
  3) Bubble manipulation experiment 
  Experimental device: Microgravity-sustaining technology 
experiment device Experiment coordinator: Shinya Ishii, 
Assistant Section Manager, Takasago Research Laboratory, 
Mitsubishi Heavy Ind. 
  4) Experiment on the synthesis of high-melting-point complex 
compound 
  Experimental device: General purpose heating device 
Experiment coordinator: Osamu Odawara, Assistant Professor, 
Faculty of General Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology 
  5) Experiment on the effect of microgravity on the shape of 
solid/liquid interface 
  Experimental device: Temperature-gradient-type heater 
Experiment coordinator: Kyoichi Kinoshita, Chief Researcher, 
Basic Research Laboratory, Nippon Telegraph &amp; Telephone 
  [Experimental Equipment Unit (II) 
  1) Experiment on visualization of liquid phenomena 
accompanying interfacial phenomena 
  Experimental device: Solidification visualization experiment 
device Experiment coordinator: Society of Japanese Aerospace 
Companies, Inc. 
  2) Experiment on measurement of gas-liquid two-phase heat- 
conduction flow characteristics on a swirl-type cold plate 
  Experimental device: Heat-conduction characteristics 
evaluation experiment device 
  Experiment coordinator: Society of Japanese Aerospace 
Companies, Inc. 
  The general operational test of the experimental system and 
the rocket was successfully completed at the Research and 
Development Center of Nissan Motor Co., Ltd., in Kawasaki City, 
in early July of this year. The preparation of the firing range 
began in late August, starting with the inspection and 
adjustment of the experimental devices, and the final 
preparation is proceeding on schedule toward the launch on 8 
September. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-007LC-09B>           Outline of TR-IA 3 Rocket </FIG>


