Current 

<F P=102>   94P60104A Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 5 Jan 94 p 
5 -- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94P60104A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] NEC has developed a new type of laser element whose 
current required for laser oscillation is the smallest in the 
world. Pulsed radiation at room temperature with a current 
[threshold] value of 190 microamperes was achieved and this 
broke the previous world record. By way of comparison, this is 
less than one-tenth of the current used by conventional elements 
and it means a large reduction in electrical power for 
semiconductor lasers. The new element is also structured to 
accommodate high density integration and it can be useful for 
the realization of such things as super high speed optical 
computers, which use optical signals to process information, and 
optical circuitry devices. 
  The developed element is a type of surface-emission laser 
which emits radiation in a direction perpendicular to the 
substrate of the semiconductor. It emits infrared laser 
radiation at a wavelength of about 1 micron. The structure is 
unique in that the active radiation layer is sandwiched on both 
sides by multilayered semiconductor films. One side of the 
multilayered film is finely cut into a cylindrical shape. The 
diameter of the cylindrical part is 5 microns and the height is 
4 microns. 
  The multilayered film plays the role of a reflecting mirror 
for laser oscillation and by designing the thickness of one 
layer so that it is equal to the size of the wavelength, 
radiation loss is considerably limited. The conventional film 
layer has a margin of error of around 1 percent but NEC, by 
successfully establishing conditions for molecular beam crystal 
growth technology [molecular beam epitaxy], held it down to less 
than 0.3 percent. Moreover, by using a cylindrical structure, 
the radiation is efficiently confined inside it, and a reduction 
of the current value necessary for laser oscillation was 
achieved. 
  It was experimentally confirmed that the new element began 
oscillation at 190 microamperes and, at 2 milliamperes, there 
was an optical output of 50 microwatts. The world's smallest 
previous semiconductor oscillation current value was 250 
microamperes. However, the element holding the world record was 
a conventional type that oscillates in a direction horizontal to 
the substrate and integration was difficult. Basically, since 
the newly developed element is a surface emission-type, it can 
be integrated and manufactured just like an ordinary transistor. 
  Currently, the resistance of the element is large and the 
efficiency is low, making continuous oscillation impossible. The 
next step will be to make progress toward continuous oscillation 
and improvement in the efficiency. 
  The semiconductor laser element is mostly used by itself as 
an optical source for compact disks and optical communications. 
However, if multiple integration can be accomplished, its uses 
will be expanded. For example, there is a possibility for using 
it for such things as optical computers, which process imagery 
data without conversion into electrical signals, or as an 
optical source for high-speed optical circuitry which switches 
multiple signals. 
  When the operating current per semiconductor laser is high, 
large electric power is necessary and integration is difficult. 
In order to make integration practical, the problem has been 
that of how to reduce the value of the oscillation current. 

