BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Admiral Eduard Baltin, commander of the </F>
Black Sea Fleet, by Captain First Rank Vladimir Pasyakin; date 
and place not given: "We Will Resolve the Black Sea Fleet 
Problem in Slavic Interests"] 
  [Text] [Pasyakin] Comrade Commander, the negotiations on 
the fate of the Black Sea Fleet are making heavy weather of it 
-- which is having a bad effect not only on Black Sea sailors 
but also on the residents of many of the garrisons where the 
fleet is deployed. Now, after so many meetings between the 
Russian and Ukrainian presidents, the two states' defense 
ministers, delegations, working groups, and military experts, it 
seems as though there is light at the end of the long and 
confusing negotiating tunnel. How do you view the situation as 
regards the division of the fleet, the separation of the Black 
Sea Fleet and Ukrainian Navy headquarters, and the possible 
leasing of Sevastopol and other bases? 
  [Baltin] The situation is deadlocked. In order to grasp 
this, let's look at what objectives Russia and Ukraine are 
pursuing. THey are totally different -- Russia has 
military-political objectives, while Ukraine has purely economic 
objectives. It is quite obvious that indirectly, by solving its 
economic problems, Ukraine will then seek to resolve also the 
tasks of the organizational development of its armed forces on 
the Crimean Peninsula. And at the Russian economy's expense. 
That is the fundamental difference. 
  Let us look further ahead. In order to achieve its 
objectives, what does Russia want to lease -- the Black Sea 
Fleet infrastructure or territory with Ukrainian citizens? What 
does it want to have -- a naval base or the city of Sevastopol 
with its impoverished population of many thousands and its 
ruined urban infrastructure? 
  [Pasyakin] That's a very unexpected way of looking at it.... 
  [Baltin] I agree -- insofar as I am aware, this approach has 
never been looked at by the expert groups in their work. For 
instance, I see the problem like this. 
  What would leasing Sevastopol and its suburbs mean? It would 
mean needing to accept jurisdiction over around 420,000 
Ukrainian citizens, including 127,000 pensioners, 78,000 of whom 
are still capable of working in the production sphere. Of 
these, up to 42,000 are employed at fleet enterprises or are 
directly connected with the sea -- fishermen, merchant seamen, 
ship repair workers. The rest are employed in the private 
commercial sector or in municipal services. There is no 
precedent in all of history for leasing a territory and its 
population. Although many countries -- including the United 
States -- have had dozens of bases abroad. At least until 1970. 
  Military bases, including naval bases, mean, above all, 
armed 
forces, all categories of men, and civilian service personnel 
from the local population living off-base. Good examples of 
such naval bases are Subic Bay in the Philippines, Okinawa in 
the Japanese islands, Guantanamo, Gibraltar, Hanko (which the 
USSR leased from Finland), and others. A naval base should meet 
certain conditions. Chief among these is that of being under 
the jurisdiction of the state leasing it. And, second, there 
should be no locals living on-base if they are not connected 
with servicing it. Finally, there should be no population 
growth. Officers, contract servicemen, and so forth discharged 
to the reserve should not remain permanently resident there. 
  [Pasyakin] Eduard Dmitriyevich, we know all about U.S. naval 
bases. Clearly, conditions here are different. 
  [Baltin] By leasing a territory with a population, Russia, 
it is now supposed, would conclude a treaty with Kiev and pay 
trillions [currency unspecified], above all in the form of its 
energy sources, thereby ensuring the viability of the Ukrainian 
economy. But, moreover, Russia would be forced to maintain the 
entire infrastructure of the leased territory and to meet the 
social needs of the population living there. Thus, under a 
treaty with Kiev neither the Crimea nor Sevastopol would gain 
anything directly and would at the same time be demanding extra 
appropriations from both Kiev and Moscow. They would be granted 
these appropriations by Kiev as subsidies funded out of Russia's 
lease payments. And Kiev would look like a benefactor in the 
public's eyes. 
  It is not hard to imagine that, with the current economic 
position of the two states, Ukraine's demands on Russia would 
constantly increase. Ukraine now sees Russia -- as Chornovil 
has frankly stated -- as a "milch cow." Moreover, Russia will 
be constantly in danger of having the agreement torn up for the 
slightest infraction, and it will have to pay for the upkeep of 
hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian citizens, and for the support 
of Ukrainian armed formations. 
  In short, such a lease would most probably very soon result 
in the emergence of discontent among the population owing to 
their low living standards at a time of economic recession. The 
people of Sevastopol and Crimeans are already profoundly 
impoverished, and they view the switch to Russian jurisdiction 
as a chance to improve their living standards. That can be 
understood, but what will Russia be like? It is exceptionally 
difficult to meet such intolerable conditions. I would 
reiterate that there is no precedent for such an agreement 
anywhere in the world.... 
  A short-term lease (of up to 30 years) would be 
impermissible 
anyway.... 
  [Pasyakin] Why? 
  [Baltin] Because then there would be no point developing and 
maintaining the existing infrastructure. There would be no 
point in investing funds -- because the short-term lease would 
not allow us to either preserve or develop the leased 
territory's infrastructure. 
  [Pasyakin] What other problems of a future lease worry you? 
  [Baltin] Ukraine is already lodging numerous complaints 
about the fleet. For polluting the environment, for instance. 
You can imagine what would happen if the lease became a reality! 
  The recent visit to us by an environmental commission headed 
by the deputy chairman of the Ukrainian Environment Committee 
revealed a rather strange approach. The commission ascribed all 
the violations it discovered to the Black Sea Fleet without any 
investigation or cogent justification. This was graphically 
visible from the example of its work at Balaklava. It is common 
knowledge that the environmental damage done there was caused by 
the mining administration, not by the fleet. Old residents of 
Balaklava recall how, when two submarine brigades were based 
there, there used to be quite a clean city beach in the bay 
right alongside the submarines, and how there used to be 
commercial fishing operations. But, over the past 25 years, 
owing to the strip mining of alumina from the Balaklava Hills, 
the bay has become 15-18 meters shallower. The thick layer of 
silt that used to cover the bottom and was the basis of the life 
of the flora has been entirely clogged with alumina. The 
environmental balance has been upset. The food for the fish has 
disappeared. 
  However, these flagrant problems were for some reason 
outside 
the remit of the environmental commission, which latched onto 
something else: It photographed fuel oil spills -- "evidence" 
against the fleet. But these appeared after the ships were 
refueled by the Ukrainian 5th Border Brigade, because the 
refueling operation was not done properly -- with the fuel being 
pumped from fuel tanker trucks without any special airtight 
devices. As a result, the entire surface [vershina] of the bay 
was flooded with diesel. And many examples of that kind of bias 
and juggling with the facts can be cited. 
  [Pasyakin] To return to the question of the lease, I would 
like you to explain once more why it is so advantageous to 
Ukraine? 
  [Baltin] The decision to lease Sevastopol was made at a 
closed session of the Ukrainian Security Council back in 
July-August 1993. But publicly it was decided to reject a 
lease, although in fact everything is being done precisely to 
force Russia to lease Sevastopol. The main aim being, as I have 
already said, to achieve the maximum economic benefit for 
Ukraine. Now, to judge from the results of the work of the 
intergovernmental commissions, the scenario devised by the 
Ukrainian Security Council is being implemented. 
  In addition, by becoming purely Russian, the Black Sea Fleet 
base will become similar in status to the 14th Army in the 
Dniester Region and will become a foreign grouping on Ukrainian 
territory. In that event, the Black Sea Fleet servicemen must be 
Russian citizens and will no longer be able to avail themselves 
of Ukrainian social benefits even though many of them were born 
and brought up on this territory. Then the infringement of 
people's rights will begin, deputies representing the Black Sea 
Fleet seamen will disappear, and there will be residence 
permits.... This is the familiar path taken by the Baltic 
states. Ukraine is copying them very closely now. It is not 
without reason that Ukrainian delegations have been visiting the 
Baltic and studying the experience of creating an ethnically 
pure state. 
  [Pasyakin] What solution do you see here? 
  [Baltin] The lease of the territory with its population is 
only possible if it is carried out directly via the Crimea and 
the revenue from the lease is used to develop the infrastructure 
of the Crimea, first and foremost that of Sevastopol. Why such 
a path precisely? At present the Black Sea Fleet is paying six 
types of taxes. As the city administration attests, 50 percent 
of those taxes, amounting to around 1 trillion karbovantsi a 
year, goes to Kiev. Then -- Kiev says -- it gives a subsidy to 
Sevastopol. As far as the public can tell, it does seem that 
Kiev is maintaining Sevastopol. But essentially what Kiev is 
doing is returning to Sevastopol a part of the many taxes that 
it has received from the fleet. For example, in the form of 
wages to servicemen, workers, and employees and in the form of 
taxes, the Black Sea Fleet has paid out 1 trillion karbovantsi 
in the first five months of this year alone, the same figure as 
the Sevastopol budget, even though in the classical sense the 
city's budget ought not be subsidized. 
  The situation is also being aggravated by the fact that the 
bureaucratic apparatus in the city has grown beyond all measure 
and costs a vast amount to maintain. 
  A large administration has also been created in the city's 
rayons which is structurally and quantitatively larger than in 
the days of the Soviet Union. 
  The Internal Affairs Administration, for example, has 
increased in size 4.8-fold in the space of a year. And what 
about the mushrooming formations of the National Guard, subunits 
of the Ukrainian Security Council, the Ukrainian Navy, the 
Berkut and Sokol special-purpose subunits, and the psychological 
services? Now the National Guard has demanded 60 apartments. 
And they have been allocated at the expense of other Sevastopol 
people, who have been waiting decades for housing. 
  Nevertheless, with a sensible taxation policy the city could 
be self-sufficient even in present-day conditions. Admittedly, 
if there were a lease it would then be necessary to 
constructively change the existing structures and appoint a 
viable apparatus in place of the elected one. Or, to use the 
British method, we could appoint a governor general or governor 
admiral with structures along the lines of Gibraltar. Then 
Sevastopol will have military and commercial areas -- a base and 
a port. In addition, the appointed administrative organs will 
be able to establish municipal property and thus have its own 
budget. These measures will not in any way be an impediment to 
the further development of the private sector. The existence of 
municipal and private property (the municipal segment must 
constitute at least 60-70 percent) will make it possible to 
support the city's own budget capable of satisfying a 
considerable proportion of the population's needs. None of the 
city's existing administrations can fulfill those tasks at 
present. The commercial structures are producing virtually 
nothing. All they do is buy and sell. The city budget's income 
from them is minimal. 
  However, this is a topic for a separate discussion. To 
return to the main theme, I want to stress that the state, in 
leasing the base, develops [obustroit] only the base, according 
to world practice. And to divide Sevastopol into base and city 
is surely simply impossible, so firmly interlinked are they. In 
addition, there must not be "foreign" military formations on the 
leased territory. That is precluded. 
  [Pasyakin] How do you react to the idea that the Ukrainian 
Navy headquarters be based in Balaklava -- an administrative 
unit of Sevastopol? 
  [Baltin] This is not a serious suggestion. Well, suppose 
they station the Ukrainian Navy in Balaklava. The operational 
regime in the zone will be maintained by the fleet's forces, of 
course. Then what will happen is that the Ukrainian Navy is 
again using the Black Sea Fleet's infrastructure without being 
accountable for anything. And that infrastructure includes the 
navigation and hydrographic support facilities, the observation 
and communications systems, and lines of supply and 
communication.... 
  [Pasyakin] In the mass media, incidentally, there has been a 
report that the Ukrainian Navy Command has stopped passing on 
technical information to the Black Sea Fleet's navigational 
services. What can you tell us about that? 
  [Baltin] The Black Sea Fleet Command has never used 
technical information supplied by the Ukrainian Navy. The Navy 
simply does not have any information because the navigational 
and hydrographic infrastructure is in the hands of the Black Sea 
Fleet. With the exception of the Odessa and Nikolayev 
hydrographic regions seized by the Ukrainian Navy, which have 
virtually ceased operations. And the whole responsibility for 
the safety of shipping in this region rests on the Ukrainian 
Navy. I cannot predict how they will cope with this task. It 
is easier to seize regions than to ensure the safety of shipping 
in them. After all, the Ukrainian Navy has no full-fledged 
navigation and hydrographic service. They even buy conventional 
navigation charts from the Russian Federation GUNIO [expansion 
unknown]. 
  [Pasyakin] So just how can the Black Sea Fleet problem be 
resolved? 
  [Baltin] Only by resolving the problem of Crimea. A 
civilized and nonviolent solution by means of talks, taking into 
account the opinion and will of the people of Crimea and 
Sevastopol and the general foreign policy interests of Russia 
and Ukraine -- for the purpose of the national security of all 
the Slav peoples. 

