BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of appeal by visual and audio media to Aden District </F>
people "warning that the gang of crime and treason has 
distributed booby-trapped pens, toys, and watches to blow them 
up"] 
  In the name of God, the merciful, the compassionate. The 
one who betrays his country cannot appreciate others because he 
lacks all feelings of citizenship in both heart and mind. 
Likewise, the one who plots to fragment his country will not 
hesitate to send all the sons of the country to the crematorium 
of death and annihilation. Every criminal who commits such 
crimes will not hesitate to perpetrate the ugliest of crimes 
toward others, be they men, women, youths, elderly, or children. 
Thus, the mania of crime and grudge led traitor agent 'Ali 
Salim al-Bid, the initiator of war and killer of children and 
women, to cherish the idea of killing children with trickery and 
cheap games in a bid to distort the citizens' feelings toward 
the future of the homeland. As for their present, unity has 
triumphed to the point of no return. The immortal existence of 
unity has been baptized for ever by the sacrifices of the brave 
heroes of the Armed and Security Forces. Otherwise, what is the 
meaning of criminal al-Bid's distribution of booby-trapped pens, 
toys, and watches in Aden streets and suburbs so that children 
can pick them up and get blown up under the claim that the one 
who distributed them and dropped them from planes are the forces 
of unity and legitimacy? They will then portray those 
victimized children to the world public as victims of the 
missiles which they falsely claim the forces of unity and 
protection of legitimacy are using to shell the city suburbs. 
It is easy to tell such lies and make such fabrications before 
us and the world. They are cheap lies about an ugly crime of 
killing children in such a vile and cowardly manner. 
  While revealing this bitter fact about the latest innovation 
of the criminal secessionists, we appeal to fathers and mothers 
and all citizens in the suburbs of the city of Aden--in 
(Kiraytar), al-Mu'alla, al-Tawwahi, (Hawr Makthar), al-Shaykh 
'Uthman, al-Qallu'ah, al-Burayqah, al-Mansurah, al-Sha'b city, 
and other suburbs--to prevent children from picking up any pens, 
watches, toys, or housewares from the streets in front of their 
houses so that their lives will be saved and no distortions be 
sustained. 
  As for the criminal secessionist butchers, they will sooner 
or later receive their punishment. Our people will never be 
deceived by all their criminal methods and vile, treacherous 
actions. Tomorrow is close at hand for all to see. 

