Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The political trend in the region as well as the 
rest of the world now favors our national development and 
construction. It has resulted in good cooperation in 
implementing the market-oriented economy mechanism. Noteworthy 
is the present trend in economic relations, which continues to 
brighten. In light of this atmosphere, a PASASON newspaper 
correspondent had the honor of interviewing Himmakon Manotham, 
deputy minister of communications, transport, posts, and 
construction. In the interview, Himmakon talked about the 
construction of roads to link northern Laos with foreign 
countries, a subject of great interest to the masses. 
  Asked about progress in developing this system of 
communications lines and postal service, Himmakon said: 
Following the second meeting of Laos, Thailand, Vietnam, 
Cambodia, Myanmar [Burma], and China on economic development in 
the subregion, which was held in Manila, capital of the 
Philippines, in 1993, the Lao People's Democratic Republic 
[LPDR] Government has sought funds for development projects. It 
has also held bilateral consultative meetings with friendly, 
neighboring countries to find ways and means to improve 
communication lines, border transit transportation, and 
intercommunication service in order to enable the countries in 
this region to cooperate in building infrastructure with a view 
to creating favorable conditions for economic and trade 
development, and the development of human resources. 
  Lately, we have participated in a meeting including 
Thailand, 
Myanmar, and China in Bangkok and a high-level technical meeting 
of the four countries in Kunming to discuss the possibility of 
building regional communications lines (both overland and 
waterborne) to link the four countries. 
  For its part, the LPDR Government has authorized the (Vicno) 
Company of Thailand to invest in exploiting coal in Viang 
Phoukha, Bokeo Province, and building a road linking Houai Sai 
and Viang Phoukha. In addition, it has granted an authorization 
for the (Usafamily) Company of Thailand to conduct surveys and 
plan a design for the construction of a road linking Houai Sai 
and Luang Namtha Province and to find funds for the construction 
of a road linking Viang Phoukha and Namtha. Regarding this, the 
LPDR Government has received cooperation from the World Bank 
which has granted loans to the LPDR for implementation of 
comprehensive development projects in Luang Namtha Province. 
The projects include repairing two roads to provide 
conveniences for vehicles to travel during the dry season -- one 
is the road linking Viang Phoukha and Namtha and another is the 
road linking Sing District and Siangkok which is an area 
bordering Myanmar. 
  With regard to the development of waterborne communication 
lines, in 1993 our government granted authorization to a 
technical team from Yunnan Province in the PRC to make surveys 
and collect technical data along the Mekong River, from the 
Chinese border to Luang Prabang. The survey work is complete 
and various courses of action are under consideration. 
  The deputy minister added in conclusion: Regarding the 
development of Routes 1, 2, 3 and 4 which involve various 
countries in this region, the LPDR Government invested in 
repairing them regularly. The loans used for these repairs have 
been obtained from the Asia Development Bank. All these are to 
create favorable conditions for the expansion of economic 
relations and the exchanges of visits between the peoples of 
Laos, Thailand, Myanmar, and the PRC in the future. 
  Regarding the use of the Mekong River as the primary 
waterborne communication route among these countries, 
appropriate methods and principles are being studied for 
implementation. As the Mekong does not belong to any particular 
country in the region, to make use of this significant river it 
is necessary for the countries to discuss details on utilization 
of the river. The International Mekong Organization may take an 
important role in making this river significant in the economic 
development of the region. 

