 
<!-- PJG STAG 4702 -->

<!-- PJG ITAG l=11 g=1 f=1 -->
Section 1.51 would include a new subparagraph (a)(2) identifying the required parts of a complete provisional application.
The complete provisional application would include a cover sheet, a specification as prescribed in 35 U.S.C. 112,
first paragraph, any necessary drawings and the provisional application filing fee. A suggested cover sheet format
for a provisional application will be available from the Office free of charge to the public. The cover sheet as set
forth by proposed subparagraph (a)(2)(i) would identify (1) the application as a provisional application, (2) the
name or names of the inventor or inventors, (3) the title of the invention, (4) the name and registration number of the
attorney or agent (if applicable), (5) the docket number used by the person filing the application to identify the
application (if applicable), and (6) the correspondence address, all of which is information required in order to
properly prepare the provisional application filing receipt.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The Office currently receives thousands of papers and fees every work day. Most papers filed in the Office are received
in the Correspondence and Mail Division which must identify and route each paper to the appropriate area for consideration.
Among the papers which may currently be filed in the Office are disclosure documents, which may comprise a written
description and drawings, and applications for patent, some of which may be incomplete because claims are omitted.
Further, applications for patent are frequently received in the Office without the filing fee or the oath/declaration
required by &sect;1.63. With the inception of provisional application practice, the Office will begin receiving
another type of document resembling either a disclosure document or an incomplete application for patent and which
may comprise nothing more than a written description and drawings. The potential for Office error, e.g., misinterpreting
a paper intended as a provisional application as some other type of document, will obviously increase. Further, with
the inception of a twenty-year patent term, it will be highly desirable for the Office to process applications, as
well as all other papers which the Office receives, quickly and correctly.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
While the name or names of the inventors are required in order to accord a provisional application a filing date, a provisional
application is not required to be signed by the inventor or the assignee. No oath or declaration is required. Presumably,
most provisional applications will be filed by a registered practitioner without a power of attorney being filed.
If an essential part, e.g., the drawings, of the provisional application is omitted or if the filing fee did not accompany
the application, the Office will need a correspondence address to notify the applicant of the omission.
<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->

<!-- PJG 0012 frnewline -->
The cover sheet required in &sect;1.51 would provide the Correspondence and Mail Division with a paper specifically
identifying the document as a provisional application and would provide the Application Processing Division with
most of the information it will need to promptly and properly process the provisional application and to prepare the
official filing receipt. The cover sheet would also provide applicants and practitioners with a checklist prior
to the filing of the provisional application.
<!-- PJG /ITAG -->

<!-- PJG /STAG -->
