LAWSON (HM INSPECTOR OF TAXES) v JOHNSON MATTHEY PLC
Court of Appeal
(Lord Justice Fox, Lord Justice McCowan and Lord Justice Beldam):
March 27 1991
A LUMP sum injected into an insolvent subsidiary by its parent company prior
to and as a term of the sale of the subsidiary to the Bank of England in a
rescue operation to which the only alternative would be disaster for the
parent, is a capital payment, though made for the sole purpose of preserving
the parent's trade, and is therefore not tax deductible as a trading expense
from the parent's profits.
The Court of Appeal so held when dismissing an appeal by the defendant
parent company, Johnson Matthey plc, from Mr Justice Vinelott's decision
that a Pounds 50m payment made to a subsidiary just before the subsidiary's
shares were sold to the Bank of England, was not an allowable expense in
computing the profits of the parent company.
LORD JUSTICE FOX said that the parent company carried on business in
refining and selling precious metals, particularly platinum. One of its
wholly-owned UK subsidiaries, Johnson Matthey Bankers plc, carried on a
banking business, including the merchanting of bullion.
In August 1984 the subsidiary got into difficulties on its commercial loan
business. Large advances had been made on what turned out to be inadequate
security.
A board meeting of the parent company was held at the Bank of England on the
night of September 30/October 1 1984, to deal with the resulting crisis.
At about 12.30am on October 1 the board concluded that the subsidiary was
insolvent and could not open its doors for business without further
financing, which the parent could not afford to supply. Cessation of the
subsidiary's business and resulting damage to confidence in the parent was
likely to lead to repayment demands by lending institutions which the parent
would be unable to meet. The parent would therefore have to cease trading.
There was no alternative but to wind up the subsidiary and appoint a
liquidator. A receiver should be appointed to protect the interests of the
parent's shareholders and employees, and to facilitate the orderly disposal
of assets.
The Bank was told of the decisions at once. It made a non-negotiable offer
to the board that the Bank would acquire the issued share capital of the
subsidiary for Pounds 1, on condition that, prior to the sale, the parent
injected Pounds 50m into the subsidiary.
The board accepted the proposals. They were implemented by the opening of
business later that day.
In its accounts to March 31 1985 the parent deducted the Pounds 50m as an
expense of its platinum trade.
The Revenue disputed that deduction on the grounds (1) that it was a capital
expense; (2) that it was not paid out exclusively for the purposes of the
trade.
The Commissioners found that the sole purpose for which the parent made the
Pounds 50m payment was to enable it to open the doors of its platinum trade
on the Monday morning. They found on the evidence that the payment was made
to preserve the parent's trade from collapse and that, as a payment to
preserve an existing business, it was of a revenue nature. They found that
its association with the disposal of shares did not convert it into payment
of a capital nature.
Thus they decided both points in favour of the taxpayer. The Revenue
appealed to the High Court.
On the appeal it did not dispute that the monies were laid out wholly and
exclusively for the trade. It did, however, contest the decision that the
payment was a revenue expense.
Mr Justice Vinelott accepted the Revenue's contention. He said the board's
purpose in agreeing to make the payment was no doubt to preserve the
parent's business, but the means by which that was achieved was to transfer
the subsidiary's shares to the Bank as part of a single arrangement to pay
Pounds 50m to the subsidiary and to release the subsidiary from any
obligation to repay it.
He said 'these two elements cannot be severed, the one being treated as a
disposal for a nominal consideration of a worthless but not an onerous
asset, and the other as a payment made to preserve the business'. He
concluded that the Pounds 50m was a capital payment. The parent now
appealed.
There were numerous decided cases on whether a payment was to be treated as
capital or revenue. They varied widely in their facts. The facts in the
present case were unusual and derived from very special circumstances.
Authorities were accordingly of very limited value.
In Strick v Regent Oil (1966) AC 295,315 Lord Reid said 'the determination
of what is capital and what is income must depend rather on common sense
than on the strict application of any single legal principle'.
That was accepted. It seemed to be an approach of some importance in the
present case.
Mr Park for the parent company submitted:
(1) the Commissioners found that the Pounds 50m was laid out to preserve the
parent's platinum trade from collapse;
(2) there was no ground for saying it was laid out to secure the disposal of
a capital asset, because (i) the shares were not an onerous asset (see
Mallett v Staveley 13 TC 772) but were a worthless asset; and (ii) the
parent did not need to pay Pounds 50m to get rid of the shares - it could
have disposed of them to a shelf company or could have liquidated the
subsidiary;
(3) prior to receiving the Bank's offer the parent had in fact decided to
put the subsidiary into liquidation;
(4) accordingly, it did not represent the reality of the matter to say
either that the Pounds 50m was paid to dispose of the shares or that it
achieved a disposition of the shares;
(5) it was not a case of negative consideration or reverse premium being
paid for the shares. The essence of the transaction was that the parent paid
Pounds 50m to preserve its own trade. The Commissioners, it was emphasised,
found that the monies were wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose
of the parent's trade. At the end of it all the parent lost its shares which
were worthless and would be lost anyway, but saved its platinum trade.
On the night of September 30 the subsidiary was a wreck. It would not be
able to continue trading on the Monday morning. The state of affairs
produced a perilous situation for the parent because the resulting loss of
confidence in the parent was likely to produce repayment demands which it
could not meet.
The sale of the shares was for a nominal consideration of Pounds 1 only. But
the Bank was not prepared to take them unless prior to the sale the parent
injected Pounds 50m.
Mr Park said this was a rescue operation by the Bank. That was right. But
the real question was, what was the nature of the rescue operation?
Mr Park said in effect that the Pounds 50m was not for and did not have the
effect of securing the sale of the shares.
That was not accepted. There was a single agreement. The Bank was ready to
acquire the shares only on terms that prior to the sale the parent paid the
subsidiary Pounds 50m. There was no other way in which the parent could rid
itself of the subsidiary without disaster.
It could have got rid of the shares by transferring them to a shelf company
or by putting the subsidiary into liquidation but that would not have solved
its problem.
The solution offered by the Bank was the only way out. The subsidiary had to
be rescued, not liquidated or ignored.
It was true that the parent's purpose was to preserve its own trade. But
that was not determinitive of the capital/income issue.
The position was in reality the same as if the Bank had said: 'We will take
over the subsidiary if you pay us Pounds 50m.'
Whichever way it was done, it was a payment by the parent to enable it to
get rid of a capital asset. The asset was not onerous, but its continuous
retention was harmful to the parent.
The common sense of the matter was that the Pounds 50m was capital
expenditure.
The appeal was dismissed.
Their Lordships gave concurring judgments.
For Johnson Matthey: Andrew Park QC and Thomas Ivory (Taylor Joynston
Garrett).
For the Crown: Jonathan Parker QC (Inland Revenue solicitor).
