SCHNEIDER, the French electrical equipment group, has won a battle lasting
almost three months to take over its US competitor, Square D, following a
12.5 per cent improvement to Dollars 2.23bn (Pounds 1.29bn) in the value of
its bid.
The French company said yesterday that it had reached agreement with Square
D on an offer of Dollars 88 a share. This compares with Schneider's initial
offer of Dollars 78 a share, and represents an increase of Dollars 250m in
the overall value of the deal.
Square D's management has fought bitterly against the Schneider bid since it
was launched in February, but it was forced to negotiate after the US
Department of Justice announced last Friday that it had no anti-trust
objections to the deal.
The government's decision was believed to be an indication that Square D
would lose its legal battle against the merger. It was pressing an
anti-trust lawsuit in a US District Court in New York, which has now been
withdrawn.
Mr Didier Pineau-Valencienne, Schneider's chairman, immediately flew to New
York with his bankers, Lazard Freres, to meet Mr Jerre Stead, chairman of
Square D, and his advisers, Goldman Sachs.
Square D will now drop its lawsuits against Schneider, which will withdraw
the list of candidates it had put up against the current board.
Mr Pineau-Valencienne said yesterday that the deal would create one of the
world's leading groups in the production of low- and medium-tension
electrical distribution equipment, and would also considerably strengthen
his group's position in the field of industrial robots.
He said that the additional Dollars 10 a share was justified by the
successful conclusion of a friendly agreement, as well as by the improvement
in economic conditions in the US.
'At Dollars 88, the price works out at 19.2 times 1990 earnings per share,
where the market values the sector at an average of 18.9 times. On book
value, we are paying 2.8 times book, compared with a sector average of 2.6.
In other words, we are buying the company in dollars at the market price,
without a control premium,' he said.
The cost of the takeover will be funded half from money provided by
Schneider and by its subsidiaries Merlin Gerin and Telemecanique, and half
by a bank loan provided by Societe Generale and Paribas.
