BLOWOUT teams fighting to cap Kuwait's blazing oil wells said yesterday they
were making 'tremendous progress' despite still lacking vital equipment and
responded angrily to criticism from the Kuwaiti government that they were
not working fast enough.
The four US and Canadian teams working in Kuwait's southern al-Ahmedi and
Burgan oilfields have capped 45 wells to date, including at least 14 of the
more than 500 which were ignited by the Iraqis, and say they are capping at
a rate of between three and five wells a day.
Mr Joe Bowden, president of Wild Wells Control, which has capped 27 wells,
said: 'You'll see tremendous progress now. The pace will pick up
tremendously in the next few weeks.'
The two other Texan-based blowout specialists, Boots and Coots and Red Adair
Company, have capped 12 and six wells respectively, while Safety Boss, the
Calgary-based Canadian group, yesterday began work on its first two wells.
Mr Larry Flak of OGS, the group co-ordinating the capping operation, said
yesterday the teams were working as fast as they could given that they still
lacked much of the heavy machinery necessary to tackle the largest fires.
'We're risking men's lives to put out these wells, and we couldn't work
faster if we wanted to,' he said.
Although more equipment arrives daily on board US air force Galaxy C5
transporters, Mr Flak said the blowout teams were short of 'damn near
everything' and criticised the Kuwait authorities for having been slow to
sign contracts to import equipment to meet the companies' needs.
He said all four teams required more heavy earth movers, cranes, hydraulic
excavators, jet cutters and jackhammers - mostly to deal with badly damaged
wells which have accumulated large deposits of burning coke around the head
which must be cleared before the well fire can be attacked.
Some of the teams have resorted to cannibalising some of the innumerable
trucks and other vehicles wrecked by the Iraqis and which litter the oil
centre of al-Ahmedi. 'Money could have saved a lot of this,' said Mr Flak.
'The Kuwaitis are the problem,' he said. 'Not the ones here, but the
Kuwaitis in London and elsewhere who control the purse strings. It's the
guys sitting in their little air-conditioned palaces outside that are
causing the headaches.'
All four blowout teams were stung by remarks last weekend by Dr Rasheed
al-Almeeri, the Kuwait oil minister, that they could not cope with the oil
well crisis alone and that he was therefore tendering for help from European
and other oil and construction companies.
'We really resent the oil minister's comments,' said Mr Flak. 'We think
we're making excellent progress with little support.'
The four teams are also handicapped by lack of water at the fire sites. A
giant lagoon built in the oil field is being fed by water tankers and work
is proceeding to pump water back to the wells through the oil gathering pipe
network running to the oil terminals. However, the blowout teams say there
is enough water so far only to deal with the smaller fires.
