The packaging industry believes it is grievously misunderstood. At a
Financial Times conference on the subject last week several speakers claimed
that many desirable facets of packaging are frequently overlooked amid the
debate about its impact on the environment.
Packaging acts as an efficient means of transporting and preserving goods,
as a way of ensuring food safety and hygiene and as a method of advertising
a product, they say.
Good packaging saves more than it wastes. The squandering of resources in
many third world countries and the former Soviet Union suggests there should
be more packaging in the world, not less.
'Waste is much more than just a landfill, or a bin in a household,' argues
Hans Rausing, chairman and chief executive of Tetra Pak Alfa-Laval Group. If
a child's brain is wasted through lack of milk, is this not also waste, he
asks.
The industry has a point.
In the grand scheme of things, packaging waste represents only a small
environmental problem but assumes a disproportionate amount of attention
because of its connotations with a throw-away society.
And in framing European legislation on packaging waste, national legislators
have adopted narrow definitions of waste which concentrate on recyclability
to the exclusion of other environmental factors such as the energy used to
recycle them.
But complaining about all this is rather like a football team moaning about
losing one-nil after extra time while worse teams have escaped with draws.
It is the result that counts. If consumers and politicians believe that
packaging represents a big problem then it does. 'Perception is reality,' as
one speaker noted.
With some commendable exceptions, packaging companies have generally reacted
to the environmental challenge with the vision of proverbial ostriches
burying their heads in the sand.
Those companies which have responded tend to view the process as a marketing
exercise rather than as a means of changing the way they operate. Sweeping
environmental claims have been made and subsequently regretted.
Different factions of the packaging industry have also indulged in an
unhealthy internal debate pitting one sector against another. Plastics,
glass, metals and paper packaging associations have all extolled the virtues
of their own products while rubbishing those of others. There has been
little attempt to co-ordinate an industry-wide approach.
Equally, environmental pressure groups are in danger of losing faith with
consumers by pressing governments to adopt policies that are of obvious
political appeal but of dubious environmental benefit.
In particular, the German recycling scheme, the Duales System Deutschland,
which encourages industry to recover and recycle its packages, has aroused
the ire of many in the European packaging industry. One speaker condemned it
as 'absolute lunacy'. Another criticised it as a 'pilot scheme involving 79m
people'.
There is justification in many of their criticisms. Although the DSD may
help solve the landfill problem there are grave concerns about its total
environmental effect.
As Jonathan Sims of packaging consultants RMA said: 'More resources are
being spent transporting waste packaging around Germany, sorting it,
recycling it, warehousing it and dumping it on other markets, than are being
saved. Repeat this on a European scale and in the name of environmental
benefit we will be committing environmental vandalism.'
It is perhaps now time for both the packaging industry and the environmental
campaigners to drop their antagonisms and work closely together to create
more sensible technical solutions to the problems.
At present, both sides are in danger of losing their credibility. And in the
environmental debate credibility is all.
