THE DECLINE in the dollar over the past week and a half has brought to the
fore a tussle between the US currency and a motley collection of economic
statistics over the direction of the nation's credit markets.
The plunge in the currency which began on August 21 sharply reversed a
two-month rally in the bond market which had been prompted by Wall Street
starting to conquer its fears of inflation, the bond market's biggest
bug-bear.
However, by the end of last week the yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury
issue had risen to 7.42 per cent, against 7.35 per cent a week before and
7.31 per cent two weeks earlier.
Trading on US bond markets was quiet yesterday as investors and dealers
stayed on the sidelines ahead of this week's important employment report for
August. In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  7/32
at 98 1/8 , yielding 7.401 per cent. The two-year note was slightly firmer,
up  1/32 at 100 3/16 , to yield 4.118 per cent.
There are probably three inter-linked reasons for this unusually powerful
currency impact on the credit markets. The first, and most important, is
that Wall Street thinks the dollar's plight reduces the freedom of the
Federal Reserve to cut interest rates again. For this would increase the
large interest rate differential between the US and Germany and place the
dollar under greater pressure.
Second, the market fears a weakening currency could encourage foreign
investors to sell their investments in dollar-denominated assets, or at
least not buy new ones, thus reducing demand for both equities and fixed
income securities.
Third, a low dollar makes imports more expensive, and this could help give
an upward bias to inflation. However, given the vast size of the domestic
market, relative to imports, this concern is of minor consequence.
Behind the dollar's decline lies a direct policy conflict between the US
government, which has slashed interest rates to promote growth, and the
German government, which is keeping interest rates high to choke off
inflation.
This clash is not going to be resolved quickly, so the dollar is likely to
remain weak for some time - at least until the German economy shows more
concrete signs of cooling, which will reduce the pressures for yet tighter
German monetary policy.
Those short rallies the US credit markets have enjoyed over the past week
have been due to further evidence that the domestic recovery from recession
is proceeding at the pace of a snail.
Money supply numbers released last Thursday saw an unexpected decline in M2,
while Wednesday produced a surprisingly sharp decline in orders for durable
goods. On Tuesday, the Conference Board reported that consumer confidence
had fallen to its lowest level since March.
This week the market will be focusing on Friday's employment report - the
most important early snapshot of how the economy performed in August.
Many analysts are forecasting a drop in unemployment, from July's 7.7 per
cent to between 7.6 per cent and 7.5 per cent. Payroll employment is
expected to rise between 145,000 and 250,000 people.
These raw figures are misleading, because most of these jobs will be due to
the temporary employment of deprived youths under a Federal summer work
creation programme.
The figures will doubtless be seized by both the Democrats and Republicans
to support their cases in the presidential election campaign, which is
likely to cast an increasingly heavy shadow over the bond market in the
weeks ahead.
Many on fiercely Republican Wall Street have yet to take on board just how
far President Bush remains behind in the polls and the increasing
possibility of a Democratic victory.
