P&amp;O, the shipping group, has ordered a Pounds 200m custom-built liner from a
German shipyard to operate cruises from the UK.
Lord Sterling, P&amp;O chairman, said he would like the 67,000-ton ship to have
been built in the UK, but no British company had felt able to tender.
P&amp;O hopes that the liner, due for delivery in April 1995, will enable it to
take advantage of the rapid growth in the UK cruise market, which has seen
passenger numbers double over the past five years to nearly 190,000 last
year.
The ship, which will carry up to 1,975 passengers and will have an outdoor
deck area of 2 1/2 -acres, will be built by Meyer Werft, a family-owned yard
based in Papenburg.
Lord Sterling said that 20 per cent of the purchase price would be paid in
four instalments between now and 1995. The remaining 80 per cent is to be
financed by an 8 per cent loan from German banks which will be paid off over
8 1/2 years beginning in 1995.
The ship, the name of which has not been announced, is expected to increase
the proportion of cruise passengers taking trips from the UK. According to
Mr Robert Duffett, chief executive of the Passenger Shipping Association,
the number of people beginning journeys in the UK has remained static at
about 50,000 a year over the past four years in spite of a big increase in
cruises by UK residents.
About 60,000 of the UK residents who take cruises annually begin their
journeys in the Caribbean, usually after flying to Florida. Some 45,000
start their cruises in the Mediterranean.
The UK cruise market is small compared to that in the US, where an estimated
3.5m people took cruises last year. The UK is the biggest European cruise
market, followed by Germany with an estimated 150,000 passengers a year and
Italy with about 100,000. P&amp;O is the leading UK cruise operator followed by
CTC Lines, which is owned by the Black Sea Shipping Company of Odessa.
The industry is trying to dispel the notion that cruising is not for the
young. The P&amp;O ship will be the first to be custom-built for the UK cruise
market. Mr Duffett said the tendency in the past had been to convert
passenger liners, but there are now fewer available.
Passenger liners also used to have segregated facilities for different
classes of passengers, whereas cruise ships have only one class, making
conversion of liners difficult.
