MORE than Pounds 2bn of investment in the North Sea and thousands of related
jobs might be jeopardised if the government tries to cancel contracts for
gas-fired power stations or force generators to use more coal, a report
warns today.
The latest North Sea Report from County NatWest WoodMac's oil services
consultancy, which includes a detailed analysis of the 'dash for gas',
emphasises that the government has limited room for manoeuvre in its
forthcoming energy review. It warns that the review has come 'three years
too late'.
Several new gas developments rely on power-generating contracts and might
have to be cancelled if the contracts are not fulfilled, the report says.
That has important implications for gas producers, for thousands of jobs in
the offshore construction and services industry, and for producers'
confidence in the North Sea as an investment area.
The consultancy says that 16 gas-fired stations have secured contracts for
gas supplies and obtained government consent. With a total generating
capacity of 9,800 megawatts, they are likely to play a significant part in
basic electricity generation in the UK by 1995.
A further three power stations, with a total capacity of 4,200MW, have
secured gas supplies but not government consent. They may not now be given
consent after the opposition to the government's plans to close coal mines.
One of them is the plant at Connah's Quay, Clwyd, owned by PowerGen, the
privatised electricity generator. It is due to receive gas from the Hamilton
and Hamilton North fields in the Irish Sea. The cancellation of the Pounds
400m-Pounds 500m plant would also throw into question the Pounds 500m
development of the Hamilton fields.
North Sea fields whose economics depend largely on gas-fired generating
projects are Caister, Everest/ Lomond, Lancelot/Guinevere/ Excalibur, Orwell
and Pickerill.
The government may force generators to use more coal. Professor Stephen
Littlechild, the electricity industry regulator, is also carrying out an
investigation into gas generation contracts to ensure that regional
electricity companies are buying the cheapest power.
If those moves affect the amount of gas that can be taken by gas-fired power
stations, the report warns, that might either make the fields uneconomic to
develop or force producers to put gas prices up to a level that would make
gas-fired power uncompetitive. Generators might then have to default on
their contracts.
North Sea Report 234. County NatWest WoodMac, Kintore House, 74-77 Queen St,
Edinburgh EH2 4NS.
