COMPAQ, the US computer manufacturer which last month unveiled a new range
of cut-price personal computers, yesterday reported a 43 per cent jump in
second quarter net income and such strong demand for its products that it
was suffering from a parts shortage.
The figures - at the top end of Wall Street expectations - provided the
strongest evidence yet that the company's new strategy of competing against
clone manufacturers on price, rather than features, was bearing fruit.
The strategy was put in place last autumn after Mr Rod Canion, president and
chief executive of the company, was ousted in a boardroom coup.
Compaq has slashed prices since then and last month introduced a new line of
desktop and notebook PCs with US prices starting as low as Dollars 899
(Pounds 471).
Second quarter net income totalled Dollars 29m, or 35 cents a share,
compared with Dollars 20m, or 23 cents a share, in the same period of last
year. Sales rose 15 per cent from Dollars 718m to Dollars 827m.
Wall Street's mean earnings per share forecast was 29 cents and the shares
rose on the New York Stock Exchange to close Dollars 3 1/8 higher at Dollars
27 3/4 .
The company said unit shipments were up 51 per cent over the second quarter
of last year and 24 per cent ahead of the first quarter. Strong demand had
caused a considerable product backlog because of a shortage of parts. It
expected to have cleared this by the end of the current quarter.
Mr Eckhard Pfeiffer, chief executive, said the company was running three
shifts in its Houston and Singapore factories and two in its Scottish plant
and was 'moving aggressively to secure additional materials'.
Analysts, however, said Compaq's failure to forecast demand correctly had
angered dealers and prompted some customers to switch to rivals.
Price-cutting policy hit its gross margin, in spite of cost-cutting.
The margin dipped from 34.5 per cent in the second quarter of last year to
33.5 in the first quarter of this year and dropped to 30.2 in the latest
period.
For the six months the company reported net income of Dollars 74m, or 88
cents a share, compared with Dollars 135m, or Dollars 1.49 a share, in 1991
on sales which dipped from Dollars 1.7bn to Dollars 1.6bn.
