IF a cure for cancer is found in the bark of a tree grown only in the
northern Amazon, is that tree a Brazilian asset? If so, how should it be
valued? Should countries with the technology to turn it into a
pharmaceutical product be given access to it and if so should they pay
royalties to Brazil? Can a tree be patented?
These are questions being raised in negotiations on biological diversity -
one of the main issues at the Earth Summit and very complex.
Biodiversity refers to all the species of animals, plants, genetic material
and ecosystems in the world. These are essential for the world's food and
fibre needs, and for many medicines, but knowledge of the subject is far
from complete.
To date, 1.4m species have been identified but biologists believe at least
10m - maybe as many as 100m - exist.
Many species are being wiped out at the rate of as many as 75 per day, along
with the acre of tropical forest that vanishes every second because of human
activities such as mining, logging, agriculture and polluting industries.
The belief that species as yet unknown are being lost, and which are
potentially valuable for economic and scientific development, has made
biodiversity an increasingly important issue.
A biodiversity convention was agreed last weekend in Nairobi, at the final
preparatory meeting for the summit, with the aim of maximising and spreading
benefits of biodiversity and improving its conservation.
There is a clear north-south split on this issue, as most of the planet's
biodiversity is to be found in developing countries while the technology to
exploit it lies with the industrialised ones. Countries such as the US want
better access to genetic resources of the third world, while countries such
as Brazil and Malaysia want to ensure a share in its utilisation, thus
running into thorny areas such as intellectual property rights and transfer
of technology and resources.
'To call it a convention on biodiversity is misleading,' says Mr Marcos
Azambuja, Brazil's chief negotiator. 'The real problem is with
biotechnology'. Brazil, and other developing countries, complain that
multinational pharmaceutical groups use substances such as snake venoms and
tree barks found in Brazil without having to pay royalties. The companies
can then sell the drugs on the Brazilian market.
Differences over who should bear the cost of protecting the world's
resources, and how profits for exploitation should be shared, led to an
impasse in the Nairobi negotiations.
The final document was watered down in the view of non-governmental
organisations, and lacked specific commitments on both sides.
While developing countries believe that the issue of biotechnology transfer
has not been clarified as much as they would hope, some countries - such as
US, France and Japan - are threatening not to sign the convention because
they would like tighter commitments on conservation from developing
countries and more protection for their own pharmaceutical companies.
Included in the convention is the need for countries to make inventories of
their ecosystems and for the interim use of the Global Environment Facility,
administered by the World Bank, to fund the programme. In the convention's
current form, the door is left open for the patenting of genetic material by
developing countries.
