THE PORT, once a byword for appalling industrial relations and inefficiency
is now one of Merseyside's success stories.
Mr Trevor Furlong, managing director of the Mersey Docks and Harbour
Company, says: 'Let me give you a just a few figures. In 1980 we made Pounds
800,000 profits and employed 6,000 people, 3,000 of them dockers. Last year
we made record profits of Pounds 13.2m and employed 1,500 people, 400 of
them dockers.'
Going further back, the contrast in the company's fortunes is even more
dramatic. In the early 1970s, the Dock Board - then a sheltered company -
had to be rescued from the brink of bankruptcy by the government after it
defaulted on bonds.
The implication of what Mr Furlong says is that the company has been able to
make great gains in productivity because of the better industrial relations
climate of the 1980s. Although staff numbers were reduced throughout most of
that decade, the turning-point came with the government's abolition of the
National Dock Labour Scheme in 1989. This scheme had allowed only voluntary
staffing reductions.
Mr Furlong says: 'It was not just being able to reduce the head count,
although that was important. It was also the improvement in working
practices with flexible manning levels.'
The government has also helped by writing off most of the company's
remaining debts of around Pounds 100m, allowing it to start paying dividends
again.
The company has made efforts to increase the volume of business. The port
claims it is the most comprehensive in Britain. Unlike other ports which
have a specialisation, say, in containers, Liverpool conducts almost the
whole range of business. It has ro-ro facilities and is constantly expanding
its container facilities. It trades in oil, bulk liquids and grain. It
competes with Rotterdam as the largest trader in scrap metal in western
Europe. It is the largest UK port for trade with the eastern seaboard of the
US. It is also the largest UK port trading with Ireland.
Additionally, it is the home of Britain's only successful freeport so far.
The freeport takes up 640 acres of the company's 2,000 acres of land on both
sides of the Mersey. It is currently being expanded to include a further 120
acres of Birkenhead docks. Since the free zone was set up in 1984, it has
handled goods worth some Pounds 700m from 80 different countries.
More than 100 companies use the freeport. The idea is that companies can
ship goods free of import duties and VAT so long as they remain in the zone.
Most of the companies using the freeport are involved in warehousing and
storage, but a few have started manufacturing. The freeport is a profit
centre in its own right.
Merseyside has also developed as a hub port for a number of Mediterranean
ports. It takes on cargoes from the US and Africa and tranships them with
frequent services to the Mediterranean. This counters the idea that
geography is against Liverpool now that the thrust of British trade is with
Europe and thus goes mainly through the east coast ports.
In a difficult climate, overall turnover rose by 27 per cent in 1991 to
Pounds 69.5m, against Pounds 54.8m in 1990. However, the increase in
business is perhaps best seen in volume terms. Cargo volumes through the
port of Liverpool rose in 1991 by more than 1.5m tonnes to 24.7m tonnes.
Most trades increased over the previous year. In 1987 the port handled 10m
tonnes of cargo.
Mr Furlong mentions two specific growth points for the future. PowerGen is
spending Pounds 40m on an environmentally sensitive bulk terminal at
Gladstone Dock. This will handle 5m tonnes of coal a year.
The other is the dedicated freightliner terminal at the Royal Seaforth
Container Terminal. This means that Liverpool will be set to become the
landbridge port for Irish trade with Europe, and for containers from North
Atlantic deep sea shipping services. It is anticipated that this trade will
initially be 60,000 container units once the Channel Tunnel opens.
There are also plans to expand Irish trade to Europe by using the Humberside
ports.
Although the core business of the Mersey Docks group of companies is
operating the Port of Liverpool and the Liverpool freeport, the group's
seven other companies include a port management consultancy, a security
service, a travel agency and property development partnerships.
Around 10 per cent or 200 acres of the port's land is non-operational and
available for property development. The company has successfully built and
mostly sold residential units at Waterloo Dock in conjunction with Barratts
Homes.
Recently, the company received planning permission from the Merseyside
Development Corporation to develop 1.5m sq ft of offices with P&amp;O at
Prince's Dock, a prime site next to Pier Head.
All this should keep profits on a rising curve. This would be welcome.
Although pre-tax profits were a record, the need to make provision for tax
for the first time meant that earnings per share showed a decline of 5 per
cent from 17.9p to 17p.
Relieved of its debts, however, the company's shares have become worth
trading again. The government still has a 20 per cent shareholding from the
days of the rescue, but is a passive investor. It has said it will sell its
shares when the time is right, raising the question of whether the company
might even become an attractive takeover target.
