MR TERRY Smith, the suspended head of UK research at UBS Phillips &amp; Drew,
likens company accounting in the 1980s to a jungle with its own rules and
many species of animal.
Little did he know that he would be one of the first forest prowlers to be
devoured as a tropical storm erupted over his forthcoming book, called
Accounting for Growth.
In a draft obtained by the Financial Times, Mr Smith describes his aim as
trying to explain how a company which is reporting profits can still go
bust. He says he intends not so much to help readers make money from
investments as to prevent them from losing it.
He cites three large recent corporate collapses - Polly Peck, British &amp;
Commonwealth and Coloroll - and argues they were in part the result of
techniques of creative accounting or financial engineering.
He then systematically addresses 12 techniques used in companies' accounts
which he says can massage their figures to produce growth in earnings per
share and make the balance sheet appear less geared than it actually is.
The 'accounting health check list' items - in order of greatest frequency -
are:
 - extraordinary and exceptional items;
 - disposals profits on sales of assets taken above the line or by
deconsolidation of subsidiaries in anticipation of sale
 - pre-acquisition write-downs: making provisions to adjust purchases to
their 'fair value';
 - capitalisation of costs such as interest and research and development;
 - pension fund surplus used to reduce the regular annual charge or to
create a pre-payment asset;
 - contingent liabilities;
 - issues of convertibles with premium put options or variable rate
preferred stocks;
 - deferred consideration: earn-out commitments on acquisitions;
 - changes in the method or time over which assets are depreciated;
 - capitalising brands in the balance sheet;
 - off-balance sheet finance, using quasi-subsidiaries, or the sale and
re-purchase of assets and joint ventures
 - mismatches between the currency of borrowing and deposit.
A section towards the end of the book highlights the incidence of these
techniques among more than 200 of the largest quoted UK companies, by market
capitalisation, at the beginning of the year. A series of tables shows which
of the techniques each employs.
If the uses are added together for each company, Grand Metropolitan - which
complained to UBS after reports of the book appeared - scores highest, with
nine of the 12 techniques. Ladbroke and Trafalgar House use eight, and 41
companies use at least five.
Mr Smith stresses that use of the techniques does not mean a company uses
creative accounting, nor that it is doing anything detrimental. Use of an
extraordinary item could represent the most conservative approach, for
example.
All the accounts listed follow UK Generally Accepted Accounting Principles,
meaning that they present a 'true and fair' view as defined by the law. But
the key word, he argues, is 'view', since the accounts simply show someone's
opinion.
He stresses that he has made no attempt to show how significant the use of a
particular technique is to a company's accounts, and he makes no attempt to
rank the techniques in any order of importance.
But he points out that the scores awarded in a previous version of the guide
 -the original 1991 brokers' circular on which the book is based  - proved
an accurate pointer to companies for investors to avoid, judging by their
share price performance.
The final section of the book provides suggestions for readers of accounts
on how to avoid the pitfalls of creative accounting, which he calls
'survival techniques in the accounting jungle':
read the accounts backwards: place less emphasis on the glowing statements
from the chairman and more on the resolutions for the annual meeting; the
notes such as contingent liabilities, pension funding, and interest payments
and receivables;
read the accounting policies and compare: see them in the light of the
effect they will have on profits, looking at issues such as depreciation -
whether the treatment has changed and how it compares with competitors'
practices;
screen the accounts using various filters: comparing net interest
income/expense with average net cash/debt; the tax rate charged with the
statutory rate for companies; the change over a series of years in the
proportion of net assets which are depreciated;
watch for transfers between balance sheet and profit and loss account:
examples include converting development properties to investment properties
before writing them down; and making provisions in the balance sheet against
the value of acquisitions and for their reorganisation which are not then
passed through the profit and loss account. This can be checked by comparing
the net asset value with movements in profit, and by the new statement of
recognised gains and losses proposed by the Accounting Standards Board;
cash is king: profits can be manufactured by creative accounting, but
creating cash is impossible. Cash is more important than profits because it
pays dividends and explains why businesses fail. The new cash flow statement
considerably improves on the figures presented up till now;
if in doubt, don't invest: none of the accounting techniques analysed are in
breach of UK accounting standards; the auditors will not draw attention to
them; and most analysts focus on earnings per share. That means small
investors must perform their own analysis, posing questions directly to the
company.
Accounting for growth - stripping the camouflage from company accounts, by
Terry Smith, is due to be published by Century Business on September 15.
Price Pounds 25.
