It is one thing for the government to re-draw the lines of economic policy;
quite another to restrain the inexorable rise in the immediate costs of the
recession. This week it emerged that the rate of business failures in
Britain had accelerated sharply in the third quarter, with a jump of more
than 50 per cent over the comparable period last year. The pain has been
particularly acute in the small business sector, where a new generation of
entrepreneurs that prospered in the boom of the 1980s is being
systematically wiped out. It is a tragedy not only for them, but for the
wider economy.
A striking feature of the labour markets of the developed world over the
past decade is the disproportionate contribution that small business has
made to the growth in employment. Britain and the US serve to illustrate the
point. Between 1985 and 1989, according to a study by Professor Colin
Gallagher of Newcastle University, more than 1m additional jobs were created
in the British economy by companies employing fewer than 20 people - twice
as many as those created by larger companies.
In the US the Bureau of Labour Statistics estimates that new companies
generated 12m jobs in the 1980s out of a total of 18.5m. The weakness of the
US economic recovery is largely explained by the collapse in the job
creating capability of small business: between 1990 and 1991 the additional
jobs created by new companies dropped from 1.5m to 144,000.
It is not difficult to see why small business should have been such a
conspicuous victim of the recession in the English-speaking economies. The
potent combination of loose monetary policy and financial deregulation in
the 1980s ensured a supply of plentiful, but increasingly expensive, credit.
In Britain rising house prices provided ballooning collateral for small
business loans.
Today in Britain house prices are down in nominal terms and real rates of
interest are still at their highest level since the 1930s. Unlike the early
1980s when an overvalued exchange rate was chiefly responsible for rising
unemployment, interest rates are now the key. Since a high proportion of
small businesses are in the non-tradeable sector of the economy, they
enjoyed a degree of protection in the earlier recession. Today they have
nowhere to hide.
Credit, whether cheap, as in the US, or expensive, as in Britain, is now
scarce. Small companies are not only vulnerable because of their greater
indebtedness; they are, as David Hale of Kemper Financial Services points
out, more dependent on a shell-shocked banking system than large companies
because they lack access to stock and bond markets and to commercial paper
markets. As banks seek to rebuild their capital and profits, small business
suffers disproportionately from the banks' urge to widen margins.
In the US the credit crunch has been exacerbated by bank failures and
conservative lending policies arising from new federal regulations that
severely penalise bank directors who adopt risky lending policies. Small
businesses there have also been hit by a sharp rise in health insurance
costs. And the heavy weighting towards the non-tradeable sector means that
they are less well placed to take advantage of a weak dollar than large
companies - a point that now applies with equal force to post-ERM Britain.
If the balance of advantage has shifted somewhat towards the larger
companies in economies that have seen significant devaluations, does this
mean that corporations will generate jobs in the 1990s on a scale to rival
the performance of small business in the 1980s? The answer may well hinge on
structural changes at work in the global labour market, the impact of which
can best be seen in the US.
Between 1979 and 1991 the level of employment in the Fortune 500 companies -
a reasonable proxy for big business - fell from 16.2m to just under 12m. As
a share of total (non-farm) employment that represents a spectacular fall
from 18 per cent to less than 11 per cent.
The most important factor behind the decline is the emergence in the 1970s
and 1980s of a global labour market. Business decisions about where to
produce mainstream industrial products came to be made increasingly on the
basis of global cost comparisons. In effect, the newly industrialising
countries were embarking on a process of wage equalization with the
developed world similar to the one that Europe embarked on with the US after
1945. Until the process of convergence in wages is complete, a tight cost
discipline is imposed on companies in the developed world. Labour markets
tend to polarise between skilled workers, who maintain or increase living
standards, and less skilled workers who see a decline in real wages.
This cost discipline has been reinforced by other micro-economic trends such
as the liberalisation of markets, technological innovation and the
development of Japanese-style 'lean' production methods. The results of this
explosive cocktail are reflected in the accompanying chart, extracted from
Prosperity or Decline, a thoughtful piece of futurology by Giles Keating and
Jonathan Wilmot of Credit Suisse First Boston (CSFB). The chart shows an
attempt by the rating agency Moody's to construct a long-run set of figures
to show the pattern of business defaults back to 1900.
The striking feature of the chart is the discontinuity in the decades that
followed the second world war. The end of the Bretton Woods era of fixed
exchange rates appears to have marked a shift to a less stable world in
which corporations felt unable to offer the same degree of job security. The
growth in self-employment and small business employment is, up to a point,
the obverse side of that coin.
In a world where corporations sub-contract more activity to turn as many
fixed costs as possible into variable costs, both the sub-contractors and
the corporations can be better off thanks to efficiency gains. But as CSFB's
Jonathan Wilmot points out, employment is less secure and the labour market
is subject to 19th century-style booms and busts.
If this thesis is correct the recent rise in the household savings ratio in
Britain is more than a temporary hangover after the 1980s debt party. It is
a longer-term structural change, reflecting the growing propensity of
nominal incomes to go down as well as up. And the trend will be
strengthened, as the fall of communism and the spread of liberal economics
propels more than 3bn people back into the global market for goods and
capital.
Against that background, falling interest rates will not do much to
stimulate new jobs. Fiscal policy will have to play a bigger part. Yet it
cannot do so in countries such as Britain and the US, which face the 1990s
from a position of budgetary weakness. The stimulus will have to come from
Japan and continental Europe; to some extent it is already doing so. The
structural, as well as short-term, factors thus suggest that the focus of
job creation may be in the tradeable goods sector in Britain and the US -
good for big business, but not such a favourable environment for job
creation.
 ----------------------------------------------------
        JOB GENERATION BY COMPANY SIZE
 ----------------------------------------------------
                                        As %
                     Net job         of 1987
Size                creation      employment
 ----------------------------------------------------
1-4                    357           29.4
5-9                    166           10.7
10-19                   92            4.7
20-49                   76            5.8
50-99                   85            7.4
100-499                123            6.2
500-999                 55            9.8
1000-4999               36            3.4
5000-9999               14            2.8
10000+                 125            3.7
TOTAL                1,127            7.7
 ----------------------------------------------------
Source: Job Creation 1987-89, Employment Gazette
 ----------------------------------------------------
