WHEN John Speed, the Tudor cartographer, published his atlas of the British
Isles in 1611, the rationale for Cheshire's existence was plain. Natural
features, rather than human diktat, defined the county, which was rich and
fertile.
Chester, an ancient Roman fortress linked to London by Watling Street, was a
thriving port with a virtual monopoly in trade with Ireland and troop
movements to garrisons there. The county was bounded by the Dee in the west,
the Mersey to the north, the Derbyshire peaks in the east and tributaries of
the Dee or Weaver to the south.
Grain, meat, butter and cheese were exported down the Dee to Ireland and
Scotland, or went by road to London - or were traded for wool from Yorkshire
to supply Cheshire's weavers in towns such as Macclesfield. Brine springs at
Northwich, Nantwich and Middlewich were the foundation of the county's
mineral industry, salt-making.
But the Dee started to silt up and new wharves had to be built downstream at
Neston in the Wyre Hall Hundred, now known as the Wirral peninsula.
The result was that the main thrust of the industrial revolution passed by
much of Cheshire as entrepreneurs and capital moved north. The wide,
fast-flowing Mersey was tamed by locks and docks in Liverpool. Birkenhead,
which does not appear on Speed's map even as a village, sprang up opposite
on the Wirral shore.
Inland, Manchester - in Speed's time a village in Lancashire's Salford
Hundred - started to grow and coalesce with similarly growing villages
around it.
Economically and geographically, Warrington became a more important
crossroads than Chester for both road and rail. Even Chester's role as the
regional economic capital of north Wales was usurped by Liverpool.
Cheshire's industry grew in such places as Wirral, in the north-east of the
county below Manchester, and in the south around the junction of the railway
lines from Scotland, Manchester and Holyhead (via Chester) at a former
village called Crewe.
The Manchester Ship Canal, built a century ago, made the ancient northern
boundary meaningless as it became the Mersey basin's main drainage channel
and turned much of the original river into little more than a stream.
Economic and political reality finally caught up with olde Cheshire with the
local government reorganisation of 1974.
Most of the Wirral was lopped off, turned into a metropolitan district to
absorb the county boroughs of Birkenhead and Wallasey, and put into the new
county of Merseyside.
On the eastern side, the new county of Greater Manchester swallowed
Altrincham, Sale, Stockport and Hyde, all of which had already coalesced
into the 2.5m-population conurbation. Cheshire managed to keep Wilmslow.
To compensate and keep Cheshire in fiscal and administrative balance, its
boundary was redrawn north of the Mersey divide to take in Warrington and
Widnes, the latter a town that had sprung up in the 1870s to move
Lancashire's chemicals industry nearer Cheshire's salt.
One of Warrington's advantages was its new town development status
corporation which in 1981 took over the neighbouring new town of Runcorn.
The other advantage was the motorway system - the latest generation of
infrastructure to use Warrington as a crossroads.
The M62 transpennine motorway crosses the M6, Britain's main north-south
link west of the Pennines, just north of Warrington. To the south of the
town, across the Manchester Ship Canal and what remains of the upper reaches
of the Mersey, the M56 links Manchester with Chester and North Wales. The
latter links to the M62 in Greater Manchester via the M63, which orbits the
western half of the conurbation. Other roads connect the M56 and M62 via a
bridge at Runcorn-Widnes.
The net result is that most of Britain can be reached from Cheshire within
four hours. And any part of Cheshire can be reached from anywhere else in
the county in less than hour - and far less if the motorways can be
exploited fully. Crucially for industrial development, Manchester Airport,
right on the county's boundary, is 20 minutes from Warrington, 30 minutes
from Chester or Ellesmere Port and 40 minutes from Crewe.
The M56, in particular, may yet have a greater influence on Chester's
development than Watling Street did in the Middle Ages: it is starting to
close an east-west divide in the county that has created social and
political tension.
The divide has been caused by the differing recent economic performances of
Greater Manchester and Merseyside.
The former's has turned the east Cheshire districts of Macclesfield and
Congleton into the north's equivalent of the Surrey stockbroker belt.
Prestbury, near Macclesfield, boasts property values comparable to some of
the best in south-east England before the recession. The market is slow now,
but it has not fallen much.
By contrast, Merseyside's professional and managerial class is getting
smaller and has had a lesser influence on the Dee coast of the Wirral and in
the countryside of west and mid-Cheshire.
However, the motorway network has now put the Wirral, Chester and much of
North Wales within 40 or 50 minutes of Manchester city centre, taking
pressure off east Cheshire.
Meanwhile, the forced growth of Warrington as a 'new' town saw its
population shoot up by nearly 11 per cent in the 1980s. Congleton, in the
south-east of the county and bordering Staffordshire, managed 8 per cent,
albeit from a smaller base.
Four of the six other Cheshire districts also grew - Vale Royal, in the
middle of the county, by 1.7 per cent, Crewe and Nantwich by 1.5 per cent,
Halton, helped by Runcorn's new town status, by 1.3 per cent, and
Macclesfield by 1.2 per cent.
These are places where people want to live. They contributed to a 2.8 per
cent population growth in Cheshire as a whole, despite Chester's population
being squeezed down by 1.8 per cent and that of Ellesmere Port and Neston by
3.9 per cent.
By the end of the 1980s, therefore, Cheshire's population had risen to
958,600 and it is expected to pass the 1m mark before the year 2000. The
county has few areas with social stress and only Halton, which is comprised
of the predominantly working-class towns of Widnes and Runcorn, has urban
programme status.
The question hanging over Cheshire, however, is whether the new Local
Government Commission will allow any of its districts to break away. In
spite of differential growth, Cheshire has largely succeeded in balancing
its development because each of its districts has fewer than 200,000 people
and none dominates.
This lack of a large focal town or city distinguishes the county greatly
from others - such as Humberside, Leicestershire or Nottinghamshire - where
those outside the local capital often see themselves as disadvantaged and
those in it feel held back and prevented from full self-determination.
The biggest case to break away and form a unitary authority on its own may
come from Warrington, which has about 190,000 people and is growing at up to
2,000 a year. But such a move would probably only make sense if Widnes were
to break off from Halton and go in with Warrington, adding another 60,000
people.
Since the government has already said it will not alter the boundaries of
the metropolitan counties - so Cheshire cannot take back places such as the
Wirral, Stockport or Altrincham - such a breakaway would reduce Cheshire's
population to the level of 30 years ago, but this would still be a viable
size with more than 750,000 people and plenty more wanting to live there,
guaranteeing taxpaying growth.
John Speed, who was born in Cheshire, and knew full well that anywhere north
of the Mersey was really in olde Lancashire, would have certainly seen a
logic in it all.
