JAPAN'S professed faith in the multilateral trading system is undermined by
its readiness to accept bilateral 'managed trade' solutions to appease
trading partners, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) says in
a report published yesterday.
The country's grudging approach to trade liberalisation, undertaken largely
in response to pressure from trading partners, and the measures adopted to
reduce trade frictions, come in for strong criticism from the Gatt
secretariat.
The report calls on Japan, as the world's third biggest trader after the US
and the EC, to help promote the health of the multilateral trading system by
'more active reliance' on Gatt regulations, making more use of Gatt disputes
procedures and lowering trade barriers in protected sectors, notably
agriculture.
In its second review of Japan's trade policies and practices, Gatt says that
since 1990 Japan has continued to improve foreign access to its market,
especially for industrial products, in an effort to help reduce its
'persistent and growing' merchandise trade surplus. This topped Dollars
100bn last year, as recession dampened import demand.
However, many of the market-opening measures announced last August -
designed to boost imports by an extra Dollars 5bn over the next 18 months -
stemmed from commitments announced before 1990, the report says.
Increased financial and tax incentives aimed at promoting imports 'may even
help to increase Japan's trade surplus to the extent that access to
lower-cost imports contributes to stimulating exports'.
Gatt calls on Japan to implement a resource-efficient strategy that expands
foreign competition through removing existing impediments to imports.
Greater trade liberalisation, it says, 'should be pursued by Japan for its
own benefit, including long-run economic competitiveness, rather than seen
as a fix for bilateral imbalances'.
Nowhere is this more true than in the farming sector, one of the most
heavily subsidised in the industrialised world. Though Japan remains overall
the world's largest food importer, it continues to pursue a policy of
self-sufficiency in rice, including an import ban it has been battling to
preserve in talks on farm trade reform within the Uruguay Round of global
trade negotiations.
Assistance to farmers imposes an implicit tax on food consumption of around
11 per cent and costs the Japanese economy more than 1 per cent of gross
national product, according to OECD estimates.
Domestic food prices are, on average, double world levels, ranging up to
four to five times world prices for rice and milk products, and well over
three times for sugar.
A 'hard core of protection' also exists in certain industrial sectors such
as leather and leather footwear, textiles and clothing. Gatt argues that
liberalisation in these areas would promote structural adjustment at home
and benefit developing country exporters. In general, however, industrial
tariffs are low at 5.2 per cent on average and most import restrictions have
long since been scrapped.
Gatt also believes the protectionist effect of informal barriers -
government procurement practices, technical standards, anti-monopoly
legislation, the distribution system, keiretsu (industrial groupings) and
other business practices - 'may be less important than often claimed'.
Despite the emphasis put on these barriers by the US in particular, a recent
survey by the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan ranked them well behind
other factors such as high fixed costs and staffing problems, the report
notes.
Though exports remain highly concentrated, with motor vehicles, machinery,
office equipment and telecommunications apparatus accounting for half total
export value, import patterns have been changing rapidly.
Manufactures accounted for more than half Japan's total imports last year,
compared with less than a third in 1985.
The regional pattern of trade has also changed. South-east Asia overtook the
US last year as Japan's biggest overseas market, partly because of trade
with Japanese subsidiaries in the region, taking 31 per cent of Japanese
exports compared with 29 per cent for the US and 19 per cent for the EC.
However, Tokyo remains wary of entering into any regional trading
arrangements that might provoke a retreat into rival trading blocs by the US
and EC and undermine the multilateral trading system.
Japan's stated support for the Gatt system contrasts with its readiness to
enter bilateral trading agreements instigated by its main trading partners,
the report argues. It concedes that most such deals - such as the 1991
semiconductor accord with the US - carefully avoid discrimination.
But, it says, the agreement on car parts earlier this year between Tokyo and
Washington appears to endorse specific objectives for purchases of US parts
by Japanese car manufacturers. Other US/Japan deals have also been attacked
as discriminatory by third governments. Similarly, Japan has shown continued
willingness to manage sensitive exports through 'voluntary' export
restraints and export monitoring arrangements on products where it is highly
competitive.
Japan thus 'gives the impression of a country which, while seeking to reduce
frictions with all trading partners, favours growth of grey-area measures
and managed trade in certain sensitive areas'. This, Gatt warns, contributes
to erosion of confidence in the multilateral trading system and of the
system itself.
