SALES of diesel-engined cars in the UK rose by 9 per cent during 1991 at a
time when the rest of the new car market was falling by more than 20 per
cent. And they increased their share of that market from 6.4 per cent in
1990 to 8.8 per cent last year.
New diesel car sales in 1991 totalled 139,810, more than 11,600 up on the
1990 figure of 128,167, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders (SMMT). That growth compared with a 21.74 per cent fall in 1991
total car sales to 1.59m.
Now, say automotive industry sources, the growth in diesel vehicle sales
could further accelerate over the next few years if the UK government bows
to growing environmental and industry pressures for a reduction in diesel
fuel tax to widen the price differential with petrol. 'In Britain, diesel
fuel is barely cheaper than petrol but the price differentials in other
major European markets are considerably wider,' claims the SMMT.
Taking 1991 prices, the SMMT says that in France, for instance, a gallon of
diesel fuel after tax was about 70p cheaper than a gallon of petrol. In
Holland and Italy it was 83p cheaper and in Germany, 30p cheaper.
As a result of those price differentials, claims the SMMT, diesel car sales
in Continental Europe are proportionately much higher than in Britain.
Figures for 1990 showed the diesel share of new car sales in France was 31
per cent, in Germany 11 per cent and in Italy nearly 7.5 per cent.
Diesel car sales for fleets of more than 25 vehicles accounted for 38,419 in
the first 11 months of 1991, an increase of nearly 13 per cent on 1990 at a
time when vehicle fleet numbers as a whole fell by 12.5 per cent.
Further evidence of the increasing popularity of diesel-engined cars comes
from vehicle manufacturer Peugeot Talbot which claims to have three models -
the 405, 205 and 309 - in the half dozen top selling diesel cars in Britain.
'Our sales of diesel-engined cars for the first 11 months of 1991 rose by
just over 37 per cent on the same months of 1990 to 42,286. That represented
38 per cent of our total 111,585 British car sales in that period,' says
Heather Yaxley, Peugeot Talbot UK public relations officer.
Peugeot Talbot also saw diesels account for 4,262 (77 per cent) of its total
5,549 UK light commercial vehicle sales in the 1991 period. In the overall
UK British light commercial vehicle market, diesels accounted for 99,772 (67
per cent) of the total 149,155 sales in the first 11 months of 1991.
There are now reckoned to be around 1.25m diesel-engined cars and light vans
in the UK and by the mid-1990s that figure is expected to top 2m.
The main selling point for diesel cars in the UK has been their lower fuel
costs. They have also held their value as used cars. Those advantages still
hold good, says Geoff Cobley, managing director of Fleet Management
Services. But he remains cautious about the wider attractions of
diesel-engined cars for fleet operators. 'At the moment, we are only
recommending diesel-engined cars for very high mileage users - those doing
25,000-30,000 miles a year,' he says.
Mr Cobley admits, though, that any change of policy by the UK government to
make diesel much cheaper than petrol could result in diesel-engined cars
becoming a more attractive proposition for a wider range of fleet operators.
Mr Ron Elder, managing director of Avis Lease and Fleet Management, believes
the government should also look at 'redressing the slightly unfair tax
banding situation' in respect of diesel car engine capacities. 'You
generally need a larger capacity diesel engine to deliver the same power as
a petrol-driven unit. There should be some adjustment of the tax bands for
diesels to reflect that,' he says.
Further support for that argument comes from the British Vehicle Rental and
Leasing Association which claims in its recently-published 1992 Budget
submission that in the context of vehicle taxation 'the arbitrary use of
engine capacity produces serious anomalies and discriminates unfairly
against the diesel-engined car'.
The main argument in favour of lowering diesel taxes is an environmental
one. The SMMT claims the reduced levels of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and
oxides of nitrogen resulting from the use of three-way catalytic converters
on petrol engines is achieved more naturally by diesel. And, it adds, diesel
does not contain lead.
Many car drivers, though, apparently remain unconvinced about the
environmental merits of diesels. A survey commissioned by BRS Car Lease
showed that only 33 per cent of more than 600 company car drivers questioned
believed that diesel cars were more environmentally-friendly than
leaded-petrol-engined cars, with that figure falling to 28 per cent in
respect of cars using unleaded petrol.
Only 36 per cent of drivers said they would consider choosing a diesel car.
Forty-eight per cent said they thought diesels were 'too polluting or
smelly,' with a further 31 per cent citing noise as a reason for not
choosing one. Surprisingly, adds BRS Car Lease, only one in five drivers
were concerned about performance.
'With only one in five drivers stating performance as a reason for not
choosing a diesel, it is clear that manufacturers' advertising campaigns
have worked well. However, these campaigns have been targeted at showing the
improvements in performance of diesels and not promoting their environmental
advantages,' says Paul Bates, general manager of BRS Car Lease.
Particularly significant in terms of the performance improvements cited by
Mr Bates has been the introduction of turbo-charging for passenger car
applications. Such features add power increases of 25 per cent or more,
helping to overcome the 'sluggish' image of earlier car diesel engines.
Turbo-charging has also been accompanied by improvements to fuel injectors
and the combustion system to produce greater engine efficiency and lower
emissions.
At the same time, diesel car manufacturers have upgraded vehicle trims and
other features to make them more attractive to comfort and image-conscious
users.
Further enhancements to diesel cars are likely to include the fitting of
catalytic converters.
