AIX-EN-PROVENCE
July 13 - 31
Ancien Palais de l'Archeveche, 13100 Aix-en-Provence, France. Tel (16) 4217
3434
Only three full opera productions this year: new stagings of Don Giovanni
(with Andreas Schmidt) and The Rake's Progress (with Jerry Hadley and Dawn
Upshaw), and a revival of last year's smash-hit Britten Midsummer Night's
Dream. But opera is by no means everything at Aix. The pleasures of this
festival have quite as much to do with the well-devised concert series (with
its short 'Une heure avec' recitals by rising singers, longer ones by more
famous ones, and big choral events in the cathedral) - and with the place
itself, of course, a beau ideal among festival locations.
ALDEBURGH
June 11 - 28
High Street, Aldeburgh, Suffolk IP15 5AX; 0728 453543
Aldeburgh remains the quintessential English festival, suffocatingly so to
some tastes. The joint artistic directors Steuart Bedford and Oliver Knussen
have reinvigorated it of late, managing to do what seemed impossible a
decade ago, given Aldeburgh an existence and character that fulfil its
duties to the memory of its founding genius Benjamin Britten, yet strike out
on fresh paths. This year's highlights include a promised recital by
Sviatoslav Richter, while the Borodin Quartet and the Dutch
conductor/composer Reinbert de Leeuw are in residence; there is the premiere
of John Tavener's opera Mary of Egypt, new works by Knussen and Alexander
Goehr, and a staging of The Beggar's Opera given, naturally enough, in
Britten's own realisation.
AVIGNON
July 10 - August 3
Le Festival d'Avignon, Bureau du Festival BP 492, 84073 Avignon
Avignon is one of the many festivals gripped by Spanish fever this year.
Highlights should be Lluis Pasqual's two productions Le Chevalier d'Olmedo
by Lope de Vega and Los caminos de Federico, a composition of Lorca texts.
Alain Maratrat's musical Zarzuela] Historia de un Patio comes here after its
visit to the Vienna Festival; the French-Spanish text is by
champion-translator Jean-Claude Carriere, who did La Tempete for Peter
Brook. There is also a French version of Cervantes' Le Siege de Numance and
Pier Paolo Pasolini's play Calderon.
BATH
May 22 - June 7
Linley House, Pierrepoint Place, Bath BA1 1JY. Tel: 0225 463362/466411
The 1992 Bath programme could be categorised, unfairly, as enjoyable rather
than essential. No special infusion of festival-planning imagination seems
to have gone into the mixture of chamber-music programmes (with the Takacs,
Endellion and Lindsay among the quartets, Donohoe, Ousset and Lupu, among
the pianists, Dmitry Sitkovetsky and song recitals by Brigitte Fassbaender
and Stephen Varcoe) and orchestral concerts (including a Wells Cathedral
Gerontius conducted by Charles Groves). The once-proud Bath tradition of
contemporary music events has dried up: Capricorn (May 25) and the Nash
Ensemble (May 31) providethe trickle.
BAYREUTH
July 25 - August 28
Kartenburo, Bayreuther Festspiele, Postfach 100262, D-8580 Bayreuth,
Germany. Tel 921-20221
Placido Domingo's Bayreuth debut - in the title role of Parsifal for just
two performances - is a publicity coup for the festival in a year with no
new productions. Another debutant is Scottish conductor Donald Runnicles, in
charge of a revival of Wolfgang Wagner's innocuous 1985 production of
Tannhauser. Sinopoli returns to conduct Dieter Dorn's cool, intellectual
1990 staging of Der fliegende Hollander, and the Barenboim-Kupfer Ring has
its fifth and final year - with Anne Evans and Deborah Polaski sharing
honours as Brunnhilde. As far as Parsifal is concerned, many will happily
forego Domingo for the chance to hear the exciting Danish tenor Poul Elming
in the first three performances.
BERLIN
May 15-31
Berliner Theatertreffen, Budapester Strasse 50, 1000 Berlin, Tel (30) 254
890.
Hundreds of productions compete to be among the dozen invited to this annual
theatre showcase, so the quality at Berlin is always inspired. The exciting
prospect this year is the early modern revivals which hark back to Berlin's
heyday: opera director Ruth Berghaus' production of Brecht's Jungle of
Cities, Georg Trakl's Bluebeard, Barlach's Blue Boll, plus plays by Isaac
Babel and Sean O'Casey. Also marked in the choices this year is the
introspective shift in German culture: in 1991 there were only four German
authors; here there are nine. They include Botho Strauss with Schlusschor
(Final Chorus), a flamboyant play about German unity directed by Luc Bondy,
and Buchner, whose Woyzeck is reworked as a parable about 1990s adaptation
and aggression at the Volksbuhne in east Berlin.
BERLIN
September 2 - 27
Berliner Festspiele, Budapester Strasse 50, D-1000 Berlin 30, Germany. Tel
30-254890 Fax 30-254 89111
Czechoslovakia and middle European culture are the dominant themes of this
year's festival, which opened with the world premiere of Aribert Reimann's
new opera Das Schloss, based on Max Brod's dramatisation of Kafka's novel.
The concert line-up includes Czech repertoire conducted by Abbado, Rattle,
Muti and Haitink, all with the Berlin Philharmonic. Libor Pesek will conduct
the Chamber Orchestra of Europe, and Jiri Belohlavek is bringing the Czech
Philharmonic Orchestra. There will be a special focus on contemporary Czech
composers. Other unusual events include Sian Edwards conducting Frank Zappa,
and a Berlin SO concert featuring four members of the Sanderling family as
conductors and soloists.
BREGENZ
July 21 - August 23
Bregenzer Festspiele, A-6901 Bregenz, Postfach 311. Tel: (5574) 4920 228
The opera festival at the Austrian end of Lake Constance has won itself an
enviable reputation for the artistic seriousness and imaginative boldness of
its response to the requirements of both place and tourist audiences. The
big popular shows - this year, Carmen - take place on the stage floating in
the lake, with spectator seats tiered on dry land; in the nearby indoor
theatre there are modern stagings of rarer fare - this year, Berlioz's
Damnation of Faust in Harry Kupfer's production. At its best, a Bregenz
visit proves unforgettable. Also on the schedule: dance, theatre, and
concerts by the Vienna Symphony. BRNO
October 1 - 11
Brno Festival, Radnicka 10, 602 00 Brno, Czechoslovakia. Tel 5-27151 Fax
5-23671
There are still a few east European festivals which have not yet succumbed
to western commercialism, and which provide ample reward to those willing to
veer off the beaten track. Brno is one of them. This rugged Moravian city is
closely associated with Janacek, and this year's festival includes a new
production of The Adventures of Mr Broucek. But the main focus is on early
and baroque music. Brno's excellent local choirs will perform sacred music
by Zelenka, and there will be a staging of La rappresentatione di Anima et
di Corpo, a dramatic allegory by the late 16th century Italian composer
Emilio de' Cavalieri. The festival also pays centenary tributes to Honegger
and Milhaud, and includes a strong dose of contemporary Czech and Slovak
music.
BUXTON
July 15 - August 2
Buxton Opera House, Buxton SK17 6XN
The recent record of this once-promising opera festival has been dismal:
skimpy stagings, only middlingly cast and conducted, of operas requiring
much higher levels of expertise. The lovely spa town and its jewel of a
theatre deserve better. This year, Handel's Agrippina (directed from the
harpsichord by Roger Vignoles) and Rossini's Italiana in Algeri (conducted
by Jane Glover, the new festival artistic director, with Jean Rigby in the
title role) look more promising, on paper at least. Other events include
Schubert recitals by Ian Partridge, Benjamin Luxon and Sarah Walker.
CHELTENHAM
July 4-19
Festival Box Office, Town Hall, Cheltenham GL50 1QA; 0242 523690
Had it taken its courage in both hands in the 1970s, Cheltenham could have
established itself as the leading British festival for contemporary music.
But it didn't, and has subsequently spent too long trying to be all things
to all publics without really getting to grips with any of them. There has
been more shape and sense of purpose in the last five years - stronger
themes, higher profile events. Switzerland is the link this year, with good
helpings of music by Honegger, as well as works by Goetz, Holliger and
Martin, and performances of many of the piece commissioned by Paul Sacher
for his Basle Chamber Orchestra. But other birthdays are being celebrated
too - Hugh Wood's and Alexander Goehr's 60ths, Richard Arnell's 75th, and
the centenary of Howells.
DRESDEN
May 23 - June 8
Dresdner Musikfestspiele, Postfach 6, O-8016 Dresden, Germany. Tel 51-459
4040 Fax 51-459 3738
This is the first year that Dresden has merited a place on Europe's festival
map. The city's musical past is celebrated in operas by two Dresden
composers - a new staging of Weber's Der Freischutz and a production from
Stockholm of Johann Gottlieb Naumann's Gustaf Wasa. Other rarities include
Una Cosa rara by Mozart's Spanish contemporary Vicente Martin y Soler, and a
Polish production of Britten's Curlew River. The attraction of the concert
programme is a series of recitals in the newly-restored court palaces and
country houses in the region surrounding Dresden. For those able to find
accommodation (hotels still being in short supply), the city itself provides
such a fascinating study of historical reconstruction, botched Communist
town planning and delayed modernisation - with quaint gas lamps still lining
some residential streets - that no festival-goer will be disappointed.
DROTTNINGHOLM
May 22 - September 24
Drottningholms Teatermuseum 'Forestallnigar', Box 27050, S-102 51 Stockholm.
Tel: 08 660 82 25
After a period of retrenchment, the festival at the tiny 18th-century
Swedish court theatre has this year increased the number of performances - a
boon for all those who up to now have despaired of encountering the
Drottningholm miracle at first hand. This year's repertory includes stagings
of Salieri's Falstaff and Gluck's Orfeo (in the rare Parma edition, with a
soprano Orpheus) plus a new pastiche-style ballet on Beaumarchais's Figaro,
a visit from the Bavarian Chamber Opera with Hasse's Artigiano gentiluomo,
and concert performances of both Haydn's and Gluck's Armida operas.
EDINBURGH
August 16 - September 5
21, Market Street, Edinburgh, Tel 031-225-5756). Fringe: 031 226 5257
The Edinburgh Festival has a new director, Brian McMaster, formerly in
charge of the Welsh National Opera. He inherited an empty cupboard and a
deficit, and his first Festival necessarily looks threadbare at the edges.
There are no major overseas opera and drama companies visiting Edinburgh,
but the programme could be popular with the public. And there is always the
Fringe to offer excitement and variety in spades, plus the Film and TV
Festivals which overlap with the main festivities. Edinburgh at Festival
time remains the most artistically vibrating place in the world.
Music: There are four main themes to this year's Festival and two are
musical - the music of Tchaikovsky and a retrospective of Scottish music
stretching back to the 8th century Celtic chants. in honour of St Columba.
There will be at least 30 performances devoted to Tchaikovsky, including all
his symphonies and piano concertos. There will also be lesser known works
like the Cantata Moscow, and a concert performance of the opera The
Oprichnik. There will be three performances of the double bill commissioned
by the Imperial Theatre of St Petersburg from Tchaikovsky - the ballet The
Nutcracker, choreographed for the innovative Adventures in Motion Pictures,
and the opera Yolanta sung in English by Opera North.
The season of Scottish music culminates on September 5 with the Scottish
premiere of James MacMillan's Percussion concerto performed by Evelyn
Glennie. Other musical highlights include a double bill of opera written for
solo voices - Elisabeth Soderstrom singing Poulenc's La Voix Humaine and
Claudio Desderi Cimarosa's Il Maestro di Capella, and an opening night
concert performance of Schoenberg's Moses and Aaron, with Willard White and
William Cochran.
Theatre: The two dramatic themes of the festival are the works of the
Glasgow born playwright CP Taylor, best known for Good and And a Nightingale
Sang, and of the great Edwardian playwright Harley Granville Barker.
including his masterpieces, The Voysey Inheritance and The Madras House.
Among the visiting companies are the National Theatre of Bucharest, with
Andrei Serban's trilogy of Ancient Greek plays, and Els Joglars from
Barcelona.
Dance: This year the festival is rather more enterprising - and modern  -
than heretofore in its offerings. The Spanish flamenco star Cristina Hoyos
will be seen with her troupe at The Playhouse, August 17-20. At the King's
Theatre, Pina Bausch and her Wuppertal Dance Theatre will show Cafe Muller
between Sept 3 and 5. Mark Morris will appear at the King's Theatre with his
Dance Group in two programmes that give a comprehensive view of this
fascinating creator: between August 18 and 20, his acclaimed version of
Purcell's Dido and Aeneas will show him as both Dido and the Sorceress, with
these roles sung by Della Jones; on Aug 22, 23,24, the Morris company will
present a triple bill of dance works: A Lake, Ten Suggestions, and Gloria.
On August 26, 28 and 29, a new version of Tchaikovsky's The Nutcracker will
be seen in a double bill with his opera, Yolanta. The Nutcracker will be in
a new version by Matthew Bourne, choreographer and artistic director of the
post-modern troupe 'Adventures in Motion Pictures', which will be augmented
to provide the dance cast.
Art: The visual arts have been the poor relation of the Festival in recent
years but for 1992 the Scottish National Portrait Gallery is presenting a
major retrospective of the work of the 18th century portrait painter Allan
Ramsey; at the National Gallery, an exhibition of Dutch art, including works
by Rembrandt, Vermeer and Hals; and Joan Miro sculptures at the Royal
Scottish Academy.
GLYNDEBOURNE
May 2 - July 23
Glyndebourne, Lewes, East Sussex BN8 5UU. Tel: 0273 541 111
This is the last season in the old theatre, before the massive re-building
programme gets immediately under way: for that reason it starts and finishes
a fortnight earlier than usual. Andrew Davis, the Glyndebourne musical
director, conducts two eagerly awaited shows: Trevor Nunn's new production
of Peter Grimes and and Graham Vick's of Queen of Spades. Cos fan tutte,
Jenufa (with the magnificent Anja Silja back as the Kostelnicka) and Death
in Venice (with Robert Tear) are the revivals.
HELSINKI
August 18 - September 6
Helsinki Festival, Unioninkatu 28, 00100 Helsinki, Finland. Tel 0-659688 Fax
0-656715
This year's theme is the Baltic Sea, with special focus on composers from
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and a 'Baltic marathon' concert by three
orchestras. Esa-Pekka Salonen conducts the 75th anniversary concert of the
Finnish Musicians Union, and other well-known Finnish artists taking part
are Leif Segerstam and Matti Salminen. The programme also includes a concert
performance of Die Frau ohne Schatten, Paul McCartney's Liverpool Oratorio
and recitals by Natalia Gutman, Kathleen Battle and the Emerson Quartet.
HOLLAND
June 1-30
Holland Festival, Kleine-Gartmanplantsoen 21, NL1017 RP Amsterdam; 31 020
627 6566
Visitors to Amsterdam have difficulties with the Holland Festival. Its
events are scattered through June, and unless your time and resources are
limitless, it is hard to sample more than a fraction of the events on offer.
Much of the interest is operatic, and contemporary opera this year at that,
with the second-ever production of Nono's Prometeo and the Dutch premiere of
the latest instalment of Stockhausen's Licht cycle, Dienstag. There's also a
concert performance of Schreker's Der Schatzgraber and a visit to the
Concertgebouw by the Montreal Symphony under Charles Dutoit.
The Festival will also celebrate the 35 years of Hans van Manen's
choreographic career in programmes by Nederlands Dans Theater
(Muziektheater, Amsterdam, June 2,3,5,7; Dans Theater, The Hague, June
6.9.10.11.12); by Nederlands Dans Theater 2 at the Stadsschouwberg,
Amsterdam on June 12,13,14; and by the Dutch National Ballet at the
Muziektheater, Amsterdam on June 18 and 20.
HOHENEMS
June 12 - 28
Schubertiade Hohenems, Schweizer Strasse 1, Postfach 100, A-6845 Hohenems,
Austria. Tel 5576-2091 Fax 5576-5450
This small Austrian festival is known chiefly for the quality of its
recitalists, as well as for its huge contingent of British Schubert-loonies.
Andras Schiff will give a cycle of Schubert piano sonatas, Brigitte
Fassbaender will sing Winterreise and Andreas Schmidt tackles Die schone
Mullerin. Other recitalists include Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, Alfred
Brendel, Margaret Price and Olaf Bar. Visiting quartets include the
Cherubini and the Emerson. Nikolaus Harnoncourt will conduct the Royal
Concertgebouw Orchestra in a Schubert symphonic cycle.
LONDON, THE PROMS
July 17 - September 12
Promenade Concerts Ticket Shop, Royal Albert Hall, London SW7 2AP; 071 823
9998 (telephone bookings from June 8)
Though Russian music seems specially favoured and Haydn is healthily
represented, there are no special themes for this year's Proms, just what
seems on paper an unusually rich selection of orchestral goodies. As usual
the BBC's own symphony orchestra takes on the main burden of the concert
giving, but the roster of foreign orchestras boasts the Vienna and St
Petersburg Philharmonics, the Cleveland and the Concertgebouw; visiting
conductors include Boulez and Abbado, Rostropovich and Rattle. Opera
performances bring Boris Godunov from Opera North and The Queen of Spades
from Glyndebourne, while Rossini's bicentenary is celebrated by, of all
things, an evening of jazz arrangements. The new works look particularly
promising - commissions from Holt, Casken, Dillon and Sawer as well as
premieres of Goehr, MacMillan, Tavener and Takemitsu.
LUCERNE
August 15 - September 9
Lucerne International Music Festival, Postfach, CH-6002 Lucerne,
Switzerland. Tel 41-235272 Fax 41-237784
Of all European festivals, Lucerne has the most impressive line-up of major
orchestras - the Vienna and Berlin Philharmonics, the Royal Concertgebouw,
the St Petersburg and London Philharmonics, the Dresden Staatskapelle and
the Orchestre National de France. Giulini and the ECYO open the festival
with Beethoven's Ninth, Anne-Sophie Mutter will play a new violin concerto
by Wolfgang Rihm and there will be a series devoted to Les Six, including a
staging of Poulenc's Les mamelles de Tiresias and a performance of
Honegger's Christoph Colomb. Among the novelties introduced by incoming
festival director Matthias Bamert are a street music competition and an
improvisation concert. The lake paddle steamers, mountain railways, Alpine
views and Lucerne's clean efficiency are a permanent attraction.
LUDWIGSBURG
May 16 - October 4
Kartenburo der Ludwigsburger Schloss-Festspiele, Postfach 1022, D-7140
Ludwigsburg, Germany. Tel 7141-949610
Ludwigsburg, near Stuttgart, has a castle, theatre and church providing an
undisturbed atmosphere for music. This year's programme features Rattle and
the CBSO, Masur and the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra, and a host of
prominent soloists, including Murray Perahia, Marilyn Horne, Nigel Kennedy
and Andreas Schmidt. There will be concert performances of Cos fan tutte
(conducted by John Eliot Gardiner) and Verdi's I masnadieri, a radical
staging of Die Zauberflote, and performances by ballet companies from
Stuttgart and Dusseldorf.
MONTPELLIER
July 13 - August 1
Le Corun BP 9214, 34043 Montpellier Cedex 01 Tel: 6702-0201
Montpellier, the Radio France festival, devotes itself to revivals of
off-the-beaten-track operas, interestingly chosen and cast, and interspersed
with a broad mixture of symphonic programmes. The 1992 offerings include the
original version of Aida (ie shorn of dance music added for Paris) and, in
concert form, Sacchini's Oedipe a Colonne, Puccini's early Edgar,
Franchetti's Cristofor Colombo and the premiere of Philippe Hersant's
Chateau de Carpathes.
