When George Bush signed a Dollars 151bn (Pounds 85bn) highways bill in
December last year, America's top road construction companies received the
news with champagne toasts. But they were unprepared for the backlash
against new highways by environmentalists in the US.
Despite America's love affair with the car, many states, including New
Jersey, Colorado, Maine and Florida, are rejecting highway expansion
programmes in favour of mass transportation and other
environmentally-friendly projects.
In Boston a Dollars 5.6bn highways investment, 90 per cent of which will be
funded by Washington, was nearly overturned by environmentalists convinced
that fewer traffic jams would encourage more car usage, and with it more
pollution.
The Conservation Law Foundation, a Boston ecological group, for months
fiercely opposed adding more highway space to the city. But the foundation
convinced city planners to modify the plan. 'I am very happy with this
project,' said Stephen Burrington, lawyer for the Conservation Law
Foundation. 'I hope it serves as a model to other cities facing similar
problems.'
The Boston project, awarded to construction giants Bechtel and Parsons
Brinckerhoff, will sink the city's central artery underground, widen it and
improve road access in other parts of the city.
For more than a generation, Bostonians have reluctantly tolerated the
highway, which cuts through the heart of the city. 'People here look at the
artery as a hulking green mass which carves their city to bits,' said Peter
Zuk, the project's head.
When the offending highway is buried beneath the ground, the city plans to
put parks, city avenues and a few high-priced real estate developments in
its place. Most important, as far as the Conservation Law Foundation is
concerned, is the city government's agreement to throw Dollars 4bn into
public transportation over the next few years and place strict limits on
parking in the downtown area. The foundation settled its lawsuit against the
project after the administration made those concessions last month.
Despite widespread support for the project, reaching a consensus has been
painstaking. Dozens of special interest groups approached the city with
legitimate concerns. Archeologists insisted on a project delay to give them
a chance to excavate the site.
Neighbourhood activists worried that the digging would send thousands of
rats scurrying around Boston. They forced the city government to allocate
Dollars 60m to a pest control scheme.
Fishermen have been latest to complain. The project includes an underwater
tunnel through Boston's harbour, and they were concerned that blasting would
disturb the fish population. As a result, the city declared a moratorium on
blasting during spawning season.
Delays caused by vying interests have caused city planners to move back the
estimated completion date from 1998 to 2000. And further complications would
make more delays likely.
The project, which represents the largest urban highway project ever
undertaken, is still far from problem-free. No one knows, for instance, what
the city will do if it comes across hazardous waste during digging. And
restaurant and shop owners in the city's Italian district, which borders the
artery, are nervous that customers will be put off by construction.
No one doubts the benefits to the city after the project is completed,
however. Studies point to the variously estimated fortunes Bostonians will
save by spending less time in traffic.
The new highway should improve truck shipments to and from the city. If
everything goes according to plan, Bostonians believe the scheme will be a
perfect marriage between economic and ecological development.
