JAPAN'S economy declined in the last three months of 1991, indicating that
the country may soon slip into recession.
However, economists believe that any decline in output would be modest in
comparison with Britain or the US.
Output fell compared with the previous quarter, resulting in the first
quarterly fall in economic activity in more than two years. The decline
reflects weak consumption and will increase the pressure on the Bank of
Japan to cut interest rates, possibly next week.
The stock market, buoyed by the speculation of a cut in the official
discount rate, rebounded sharply. It sent the Nikkei index back above the
20,000 level. Investors also took heart from speculation that the government
was planning to boost the economy by concentrating public works spending in
the first part of the new financial year. The index closed 420 higher on the
day at 20,185.09.
The economy contracted by 0.2 per cent on an annualised basis in the last
quarter of 1991 compared with the previous quarter, according to the
government's Economic Planning Agency. A sharp decline in domestic demand of
2.1 per cent was partly offset by an increase in external demand, composed
of a decline in imports and a rise in exports.
The agency admitted that the government's target of 3.7 per cent economic
growth in the year to the end of March looked unattainable. The outturn is
likely to be closer to 3.3 per cent - well down on the 5.5 per cent recorded
for 1990-91 but still well ahead of most other industrialised countries.
A decline in the Japanese economy in the first quarter of this year, making
two successive quarters, would by most yardsticks mean Japan was in
recession. Japan last suffered a recession in 1974-75.
EPA officials said the economy was much stronger now than in 1974, pointing
out that the 0.2 per cent quarter-on-quarter decline was modest.
However, bankers and industrialists, who have been calling for further
interest rate cuts, will seize on yesterday's figures. Mr Yoh Kurosawa,
president of the Industrial Bank of Japan, said that although businessmen's
gloom was exaggerated, Japan needed a rate cut to boost confidence and
revive the stock market.
According to the EPA, consumption was weak, held back by lower year-end
bonuses and a decline in confidence. It grew just 0.4 per cent. Private
investment (excluding housing) declined but only by 2.5 per cent - less than
expected and a sign of continuing resilience in the economy.
On a year-on-year basis, the economy grew 3.2 per cent. For 1991 as a whole,
the economy grew by a robust 4.5 per cent, due to strong growth early in the
year.
Car exports cut, Page 3
Editorial Comment, Page 16
World stock markets, Page 37
