THE peoples of the European Community emptied 50m tonnes of rubbish into
their dustbins last year. Although this represents a mere fraction of the
waste created by industry, the public is far more aware of it because it is
on the doorstep.
Over the past few years politicians have responded to the clamours of the
increasingly vocal environmental lobby by introducing laws to limit the
amount of waste produced, or at least encourage its re-use and recycling.
But the problem all legislators face is a simple one: what gets thrown away
is not worth very much. If it were otherwise it would be unlikely to be
thrown away in the first place.
In order to reduce the amount of domestic waste governments are therefore
faced with a choice. Either they mandate industrial companies and local
authorities to collect and re-use the material; or they rely on tweaking
market mechanisms to increase the inherent value of waste and thereby
stimulate its re-use. This could be done, for example, by raising the cost
of landfill sites to encourage more recycling or imposing duties or levies
on packages.
The problems created by these two approaches are common to all debates about
the virtues of economic regulation versus free-market liberalism.
The first approach - most aggressively pursued in Germany through the
introduction of its Duales System Deutschland (DSD) - has led to industry
collecting a vast mountain of waste without having the capacity to reprocess
it. This has created an environmental perversity whereby large quantities of
waste have been expensively collected and exported - either being dumped in
other countries' landfill sites or seeping on to foreign markets at zero
cost destroying the fragile economics of indigenous recycling schemes.
The supporters of the DSD argue that such distortions are only likely to be
a temporary phenomenon. If a steady source of supply is created demand will
inevitably follow, they argue. In some areas the effects of this argument
are bearing fruit: four giant paper mills are already under construction in
Germany to soak up the glut of waste paper.
But the DSD's critics argue that such approaches are only likely to lead to
a 'second Common Agricultural Policy'. Production will be stimulated while
demand is ignored at enormous economic - and environmental - cost to
Europe's consumers.
Yet the obstacles created when waste management is left entirely to the free
market can prove insurmountable and can be illustrated by the difficulties
faced by the polystyrene food packaging recycling plant officially opened in
July by Linpac, the UK plastics group.
Mr David Eggleston, Linpac's environmental manager, says such plants are
vital if the UK is to increase its rate of recycling but their existence is
crucially dependent on the government introducing market-based incentives.
The plant, which has the capacity to recycle 2,000 to 2,500 tonnes of waste
a year, is testing the technical and commercial viability of recycling
plastic containers but in the existing market conditions it is uneconomic.
The government 'must encourage the consumption of recycled materials of all
kinds at prices which make recycling economically viable,' he says.
The UK government has hesitated in introducing sweeping environmental
initiatives, waiting for the European Commission to finalise the details of
its directive on the avoidance of packaging waste.
This summer, the EC published its far-reaching proposals aimed at
harmonising environmental laws across the Continent. However, it is likely
that it will take another two years before its modified principles become
enshrined in national laws.
Its hierarchy of preferred solutions is: minimisation of the packaging used
in particular products, followed by recovery and recycling, with final
disposal in landfill sites remaining as a last resort.
The directive sets a stiff target that within 10 years of implementation 90
per cent of all packaging waste by weight should be removed before it
reaches the waste stream with 60 per cent of each packaging material being
recycled.
It expects that within five years of implementation the member states will
have set up appropriate systems to collect packaging waste from the
consumer, enabling them to ensure that it is effectively re-used or
'recovered'.
Perhaps inevitably, the directive has come under fire both from industry,
which argues that some of its provisions are too onerous, and
environmentalists, who argue that they are too lax.
Suggestions for limiting the average amount of waste produced by each person
in the EC which appeared in early drafts of the directive were dropped by
the time the final version was published - much to the chagrin of groups
such as Greenpeace.
The environmental group argues that the prevention priorities have
effectively been 'lobbied away' by industry with disposal becoming the main
focus of legislative activity. 'The net result today is that the waste
management hierarchy has been turned upside down,' it says.
But at the heart of the debate on packaging waste is a fundamental and
irreconcilable difference between the industry and environmental
campaigners. Companies want to sell more packaging; environmentalists want
them to sell less.
In a free market economy, packaging companies cannot be expected voluntarily
to contribute to a lessening of demand for the products on which their
prosperity depends. Conversely, however, they clearly appreciate both the
economic and environmental sense of reducing the amount of material they use
to the minimum.
The clearest instance of this conflict is apparent in discussions concerning
refillable containers. For many years, environmental campaigning groups,
such as Friends of the Earth, have campaigned to promote the use of packages
which can be re-used and re-filled.
But although many of these schemes make clear sense in an ideal world,
industry argues that they often do not conform to contradictory consumer
desires in the real one. So, for example, although many shoppers profess to
care about the environment, they are unlikely to appreciate queuing in a
busy supermarket to refill milk bottles from a 'steel cow' dispenser - even
assuming high standards of hygiene could be guaranteed.
Ultimately it will be the shopper who will decide environmental priorities
by assessing the relative attractions and costs of particular forms of
packaging when buying a product.
