DISCIPLINARY action is being considered against 28 of the 39 water companies
in England and Wales over breaches in drinking-water standards, the Drinking
Water Inspectorate said yesterday.
At least three companies may face prosecution for instances 'where it is
very probable that water was supplied that was unfit for human consumption',
said Mr Mike Healey, chief inspector, presenting the inspectorate's annual
report.
However, drinking water 'is of a very high quality', he said. 'We are
talking about fractions away from perfection.'
Even where water had failed to pass the inspectorate's standards - which
incorporate both UK and European Community directives - the inspectorate's
medical advisers had concluded that there was no risk to public health, he
added.
The inspectorate's comments are likely to fuel the debate about whether the
UK's water standards are unecessarily and expensively high.
Mr Michael Carney, secretary of the Water Services Association, which
represents the 10 privatised water and sewerage companies, said: 'We have
been screaming for the past few years that customers are paying billions in
higher water bills for measures not necessary for their health. Many of the
quality standards we are meeting are purely aesthetic - smell, colour,
taste.'
Water companies have pledged to spend Pounds 28bn during the 1990s to meet
EC standards. Of that, Pounds 1.8bn will be spent by 1995 to meet
drinking-water standards.
The inspectorate's annual report - the second since it was created in 1990 -
showed an apparent deterioration in water quality because of an increase in
pesticide levels. A total of 98.7 per cent of tests passed the national
legal standards, compared with 99 per cent the year before.
However, the 'statistically significant' drop might be due to increased
testing for pesticides, the inspectorate said.
Excluding pesticides, the 'pass rate' had risen from 99.2 per cent to 99.3
per cent.
The 28 companies that may face disciplinary action include the 10 water
services companies. The action would be to force them to sign undertakings
to make rapid improvements.
Nine companies on the inspectorate's target list have breached the standards
for permissible levels of bacteria in waterworks and five for levels of
faecal bacteria. The others are on the list for bacteria in reservoirs or
for supplying inadequate data to the DWI.
EC legislation requiring increased sewage treatment to improve water quality
in rivers and seas may cost Northumbrian Water more than Pounds 500m,
forcing a steep rise in customers' bills, the company's finance director, Mr
Alan Jones warned yesterday.
Northumbrian Water, which serves north-east England, believes that of
Britain's 10 privatised water and sewage companies it may be the worst hit
by the new EC urban waste water treatment directive, due to take effect from
1998.
The directive will impose absolute standards, with still more stringent
requirements for waters designated 'sensitive'.
Northumbrian Water is currently investing Pounds 100m a year, mainly on
environmental improvements. But Mr Jones said the directive might mean
another Pounds 100m a year, and if a large proportion of the region's waters
were designated 'sensitive' the cost might be even more.
