OFFER, the electricity indus-try regulator, has indicated to regional
companies in the sector that it plans a less rigid price controls system
than some in had feared.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, director-general of Offer, has also signalled
that, as part of a shake-up of supply price controls, it will allow recs
more flexibility in their dealings with large companies.
Offer's latest thinking is outlined in a memorandum to the regional
electricity companies as a review of electricity supply controls gets under
way in readiness for change in April next year.
It will be welcomed by most regional companies, which will argue that
Offer's approach will enable them to tailor contracts more to customers'
requirements - for example, by providing long-term contracts at higher
prices to the benefit of some buyers.
Large customers, some of which have faced steep price rises since
privatisation of the electricity industry three years ago, will be concerned
it could lead to further increases.
In the memorandum to regional companies, Offer says it attaches great
importance to putting pressure for efficient purchasing on them. It believes
'this can best be achieved by restricting the scope of price control to the
franchise market'. The franchise market, where regional companies have a
monopoly in the areas they distribute electricity, is restricted to
customers who use less than 1MW of electricity in any half-hour period. From
April 1994 the threshold will fall to 100kw. Offer says regional companies
would be exposed to the 'full pressure of competition in the non-franchise
market without the inevitable complications which price control brings'.
For the franchise market, Offer proposes a yardstick approach under which a
measure would be made of average costs of units supplied in England and
Wales, excluding those covered by coal contracts signed in current
negotiations.
The franchise market yardstick would 'both provide a published source of
information and act as a trigger for further inquiry on economic purchasing
should an individual rec's (regional company) costs exceed the yardstick by
a certain amount'.
This suggests that contracts for gas between regional companies and the
independent power projects, in which many have equity stakes, will be
scrutinised further in spite of the regulator's recent endorsement of the
'dash for gas'.
Nevertheless, the yardstick approach outlined by Offer is considerably less
formal than other possibilities though to be under consideration. Under
present rules, the price of electricity supplied to all customers can rise
only by the level of inflation.
