PROFESSOR Stephen Littlechild, the electricity regulator, will today rebut
criticism of his support for a 'dash for gas' policy in a further setback to
the coal lobby.
His second and final report on the controversial issue will be seen as in
effect quashing the argument that the growth of cheap gas-fired power
stations should be reined back to help boost demand for coal and save a
substantial number of the 31 pits threatened with closure.
Prof Littlechild's counterblast follows sustained criticism from the
electricity generators and British Coal that his initial report on the
subject, issued last December, was deeply flawed.
Although the government was already sceptical that it could stem the dash
for gas, Prof Littlechild's conclusions make it even less likely that it
will use legislation to prevent more gas-fired power stations being built.
The growth in gas-fired power is largely responsible for a sharp fall in the
demand for coal.
Prof Littlechild's review comes as the government struggles to complete a
politically sensitive review into the future of coal prompted by uproar over
the decision on October 13 to close 31 pits. A white paper, originally
promised this month, is unlikely before the second week in March.
Some electricity market analysts believe that unless the government tackles
either gas or nuclear power, it may not be able to save enough pits to
satisfy Tory backbenchers.
Prof Littlechild's report concentrates on whether 11 of the 12 regional
electricity companies (Recs), which distribute power in England and Wales,
made the best decision on behalf of consumers when they signed long-term
contracts to buy gas from stations in which they have a stake.
Prof Littlechild serves notice on National Power and PowerGen, the two
largest electricity generators in England and Wales, that he wants to study
their coal contracts. This follows allegations, denied by the companies,
that they are failing to pass coal price cuts fully on to customers.
Prof Littlechild says he wants to address concern that electricity provided
by coal-fired plants may be overpriced.
He asks for further details about the generators' costs and says: 'I shall
be examining the costs and margins of their licensed business generally . .
. I shall monitor the situation particularly carefully.'
However Prof Littlechild says in his report that the Recs have used stakes
in the stations to 'provide protection against the market power of the
generators, rather than to profit from higher prices in contracts'.
He says his information suggests that, in signing the gas contracts, none of
the Recs violated licence requirements to pur-chase electricity
economically.
Prof Littlechild also clears the companies to sign five-year contracts with
the generators to buy coal. He says he will not apply yardstick controls -
affecting the ability of the Recs to pass through costs to the consumer - to
the coal contracts.
In response to allegations that he was using unrealistically high coal
prices in his December analysis, Prof Littlechild says: 'I have re-run the
main scenario using lower prices implied by British Coal. Changing the coal
price assumption does not affect the conclusions.'
