GENERAL Motors Europe has transferred all production of its Opel/Vauxhall
cars in Finland to Germany, triggering a complex legal battle with its
Finnish partner Valmet, the majority state-owned paper machinery and
engineering group.
GM has moved production of its Opel/Vauxhall Calibra coupe from Valmet's
plant at Uusikaupunki to one of its main German plants at Russelsheim, near
Frankfurt.
The US carmaker, which is in second place in the west European new car
market, has been forced to introduce short-time working at the Russelsheim
plant during the first three months of this year in the face of weakening
new car sales in west Europe.
It has moved the Finnish assembly to Germany to improve capacity utilisation
at the German plant and to avoid the added cost penalties of production in
Finland.
Mr Louis Hughes, president of GM Europe, said the company incurred a cost
penalty of around FM5,000 (Pounds 600) per car for Calibras produced in
Finland compared with assembly of the same car in Germany.
GM had shipped many of the components to Finland from its plants in Germany,
incurring substantial transport costs.
In a separate move to cut production costs in Europe, GM is also planning to
reduce output at its Bochum plant in Germany, by moving from three-shift to
two-shift working. The company has already introduced short-time working at
its Antwerp, Belgium and Luton, UK assembly plants.
The GM action in Finland is a significant blow to the loss-making Valmet
group, which produced 34,556 Opel/Vauxhall cars in 1992 and 21,532 in 1991,
but which now faces the complete loss of the Opel business in 1993.
Valmet is left only with the assembly of the Saab 900 convertible of which
it will produce 7,000-8,000 this year compared with 10,800 in 1992. Saab
Automobile is owned equally by GM and Saab-Scania of Sweden.
Valmet is seeking to resolve the dispute with GM under Finnish arbitration
rules, but GM is challenging the legality of this move.
It is expected to move soon to invoke arbitration under the rules of the UN
Commission for International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), as stipulated in the 1990
Calibra assembly agreement.
Adam Opel, GM's German subsidiary, signed an agreement with Saab-Valmet, now
a 100 per cent owned subsidiary of Valmet, in June 1990 for the assembly of
the Calibra in Finland at a time when GM needed extra capacity in west
Europe with new car demand at a record level.
The assembly agreement with Valmet is not due to expire until the end of
1996. Under the terms of the deal, GM believes that it is free to decide the
volume of cars to be assembled in Finland each year.
This volume can be set at zero, as there are no volume guarantees, but only
a contractually agreed price per unit.
