THE FABER BOOK OF MOVIE VERSE edited by Philip French and Ken Wlaschin Faber
Pounds 20, 450 pages
Can this really be 'the first collection of its kind' as the flyleaf boasts?
The words 'poetic' and 'cinema' have been going steady now for almost a
hundred years. But then as the book's co-editor, The Observer film critic
Philip French, points out in his preface, verse about the movies probably
constitutes the slimmest of the half-dozen categories in which the two big
concepts - Poem and Film - interact.
There are 'poetic' movies (John Ford, Dovzhenko, David Lean). There are
movies by poets (Cocteau, Pasolini) and about poets (Fredric March as
Browning, Richard Chamberlain - heaven help us - as Byron). There are movies
quoting poetry or titled after it (Gone With The Wind). There are even
movies based on verse plays (Key Largo, Winterset), though Hollywood ensured
that not much of the verse remained by the time Humphrey Bogart or Burgess
Meredith moseyed into view.
Yet amid all this crossbreeding there seem to be few instances of poets  -
or well-known ones - serenading the screen. This book is a pleasure and a
provocation: not just for its revelation that many bards over many decades
have hewn serious thoughts about cinema. But the range and wit of the
entries surprises too. In a Cinemascopic arc of mood from satire to sober
philosophising, from terse haikus to logorrheic lampoons, we find a poetic
language not vulgarised but enriched by movie terms and argot. Witness
'Hollywood Jabberwocky' in which screenwriter IAL Diamond, Billy Wilder's
longtime collaborator, brings the spirit of Lewis Carroll to Lotusland:
'Twas ciros, and the cinelords Were lollyparsing with their babes: All
goldwyns were acadawards But demille rules the nabes. 'Beware the
Jarthurank, my lad]'. . .
And so on, niftily, neologistically. (Keep the footnotes handy to discover
that 'lollyparsing' refers to gossip columnist Louella Parsons and 'ciros'
to a Tinseltown nightclub.)
Wordplay is one response to cinema and its challenges for the poet. Other
practitioners prefer the monosyllables of gnomic irony. Daniel Hoffman
tartly addresses the Dream Factory's fleeting love affairs with Innocence -
'In the days of Rin-Tin-Tin/ There was no such thing as sin'. Irish
film-maker Neil Jordan wittily versifies his first encounter with Hollywood
back in 1985, when he pitched his ill-fated comedy project High Spirits -
'they ask why it's not like your last/ you tell them that emotion's past'.
And WH Auden in 'I Am Not A Camera' skins his language back to Savonarolan
spareness to conclude, at the end of three censorious stanzas, that 'The
camera may/ do justice to laughter, but must/ degrade sorrow.'
Auden's poem is enrolled in the most ambitious of the book's five sections,
'Movies As Metaphor.' Other headings include 'The Silent Cinema,'
'Hollywood,' 'Films And Genres' and 'TV And The Afterlife Of Movies'. Movie
as metaphor fills one with dread and this section is the most pompous and
unconvincing. 'Last night/ I played Kirk Douglas to/ Your Burt Lancaster'
starts one poem that does not tempt one to read further. Another, drawing
itself for a full fantasy/reality think-session: 'Can this, the world we see
today, be real?'
Attacks of solemnity are not absent from other parts of the book. We might
have guessed that a slew of 1960s poets would gather around Harpo Marx to
hymn his Christly, sad-clown, pre-Flower Power charisma. They are John Wain,
Jack Kerouac and Robert Lowell. And ASJ Tessimond makes short work of
Charlie Chaplin's idiomatic humanism by turning him into a cautionary
hieroglyph for all mankind: 'God kicks us in the pants and sets banana-skins
on stairs . . .'
In a good poem, as in a good movie, power comes from the particular. Nearly
all the best verse in this book grows from the casual passion of the viewing
experience itself. It can be Carol Ann Duffy finding that her memory of a
friend is enmeshed in the memory of their joint TV viewing of Now, Voyager.
Or it can be Michael Ondaatje's wonderful 'Late Movies With Skyler,' where a
midnight re-viewing of The Prisoner Of Zenda prompts some blithe, wry
philosophising on heroes and destinies. Watching Stewart Granger's hero
vanish from the zone of narrative certainty at the film's close, Ondaatje
suspects he is merely joining the rest of us in that great formless
playground we call Life:
In the movies of my childhood the heroes after skilled swordplay and moral
victories leave with absolutely nothing to do for the rest of their lives.
Ondaatje knows what makes popular movies so appealing. They provide our
lives with passing paroxysms of action and reaction, evildoing and
dering-do, purpose and message: after which we and the heroes head back into
the routine sunsets and sunrises of our lives - not disappointed, but
renewed in our relish for their subtler, quieter, more haphazard
eventfulness.
