Contraceptives have become a Cinderella subject for pharmaceutical research.
No fundamentally new techniques have been developed since the 'pill' 30
years ago, and even the long-term contraceptives recently introduced in the
US and some European countries - Depo-Provera injections and Norplant
implants - originated in the 1960s.
At last month's Population Summit, held in India by the world's scientific
academies, Kerstin Hagenfeldt of Stockholm's Karolinska Hospital estimated
that global funding of contraceptive R&amp;D amounts to just Dollars 57m (Pounds
41m) a year, of which governments and non-profit organisations provide 61
per cent and pharmaceutical companies 39 per cent. This is little more than
2 per cent of worldwide contraceptive sales (worth between Dollars 2.6bn and
Dollars 2.9bn a year).
'Many large pharmaceutical firms that in the 1960s and 1970s played an
active and essential role in developing contraceptive products have stopped
their activities in this area in the last decade,' Hagenfeldt said.
The world contraceptive market is currently dominated by four companies:
Johnson &amp; Johnson and American Home Products of the US, Schering of Germany
and Akzo of the Netherlands.
Reasons put forward for the industry's diminishing research activity include
more stringent regulatory requirements than for any other type of drug, a
risk of expensive product liability lawsuits of the sort that drove the
Dalkon Shield manufacturer A H Robins to bankruptcy in 1986, and opposition
to contraception by the Roman Catholic church and other religious groups.
'Contraceptive development is difficult in the sense that you're dealing
with products that may be used by perfectly healthy people over many years.
They therefore have to be extremely safe and effective,' says Hans Vemer,
international medical director of Organon, Akzo's pharmaceutical subsidiary.
The basic principle of hormonal contraception is to use synthetic sex
hormones (oestrogens and/or progestogens) to suppress ovulation. The
hormones also thicken the cervical mucus, making it more difficult for sperm
to enter the uterus, and thin the endometrium (lining of the womb) so that a
fertilised egg is unlikely to implant and grow.
Although today's contraceptive pills work in fundamentally the same way as
their forerunners 30 years ago, they contain a different balance of hormones
in lower doses. The standard 'combined pill' now has only 30 micrograms of
oestrogen, compared with 150 micrograms in the 1960s. There is also a range
of 'multi-phasic pills' in which the doses change during the month.
Long-term clinical studies sponsored by the World Health Organisation show
that the pill is safe, despite the health scares of the 1980s - so safe
indeed there are moves in the US to permit the dispensing of oral
contraceptives without a prescription. The pill may slightly increase the
risk of developing breast cancer and heart disease, but it has a protective
effect against some cancers of the reproductive system. Long-term use
reduces the chance of developing ovarian cancer by 40 per cent.
Oral contraceptives are highly effective at preventing pregnancy when taken
regularly but they are liable to fail through forgetfulness or gastric
upsets. Therefore, researchers have been working since the pill's
introduction on more reliable ways of administering contraceptive hormones.
The two injectable contraceptives in worldwide use today, Depo-Provera and
Noristerat, were invented in the 1960s. They are prescribed extensively in
some developing countries, but health concerns and political controversy
have kept them off the market in several industrialised countries. The US
finally approved Depo-Provera last year after its manufacturer, Upjohn, won
a 25-year battle to convince the Food and Drug Administration it was safe.
Depo-Provera contains tiny crystals of progestogen suspended in a
water-based solution which is injected every three months into the muscle of
the buttocks or arm. The hormone leaches slowly into the bloodstream from
the crystals. Its failure rate - about two pregnancies per 1,000 women per
year - is considerably lower than the pill.
More recently, WHO has sponsored the development of two monthly injectable
contraceptives, Mesigyna and Cyclofem, which contain a combined low dose of
oestrogen and progestogen. They avoid the main side-effect of Depo-Provera -
irregular menstruation. Both are being manufactured locally in several
developing countries.
Norplant, an implant to prevent pregnancy for up to five years, was designed
in the 1960s by the Population Council, a charity based in New York, and
developed during the 1970s by Leiras, a contraceptive manufacturer in
Finland. They are licensing it for sale by various international drug
companies. It was launched in the US two years ago by American Home Products
and in the UK last month by Roussel of France.
Norplant consists of six flexible rubber rods, each about the size of a
matchstick, which are inserted (under local anaesthetic) beneath the skin of
the upper arm. They release progestogen at a steady rate into the
bloodstream. If the woman wants to conceive, the capsules are removed.
According to Hemant Shah, a US pharmaceutical analyst, Norplant sales shot
up from Dollars 50m in 1991 to Dollars 140m in 1992, but are likely to fall
to about Dollars 110m in 1993. The decline is not a sign of disenchantment
but a result of Norplant's long-term action; the women most enthusiastic
about the implant had it fitted last year. However, some state authorities
have aroused controversy by allegedly putting unfair pressure on teenagers
from deprived and minority backgrounds to accept Norplant.
Several second-generation implants are in clinical trials and are expected
to reach the market before the end of the century. One is Norplant II, which
has two rods rather than six. Another is Implanon, a single rod system
developed by Organon, which provides two to three years of reliable
contraception; it is injected under the skin with a hypodermic syringe.
Vaginal rings are a third type of long-acting contraceptive undergoing
clinical trials. They release hormones slowly through the skin of the
vagina. Candidate rings have been developed by Organon, the Population
Council and WHO. Unlike implants and injections, they can be inserted or
removed by the user without professional help.
Another technique, pioneered by Leiras, is to combine hormonal contraception
with the intra-uterine device. Its Levonova IUD, recently approved for sale
in three Scandinavian countries, releases very low doses of progestogen
directly into the uterus for up to five years.
All today's contraceptive drugs - as opposed to barrier methods such as
condoms which are not covered in this article - are based on hormones. An
entirely different approach is to produce a birth control vaccine, by
inducing the immune system to immobilise either sperm or eggs or one of the
hormones that are essential for human reproduction.
Six contraceptive vaccines with various mechanisms of action are in the
early stages of clinical trials, although the safety and efficacy
requirements are so stringent that none will be available commercially until
the next century.
The immunological approach could produce a safe male contraceptive - and
satisfy complaints that all products so far, apart from the condom, have
been aimed at women.
'Since a man produces millions of spermatozoa at a time, it is far more
difficult to develop an adequate oral or hypodermic contraceptive for men,'
says Willem Bergink, director of Organon's fertility research programme.
'But we know some women are infertile because they produce antibodies
against sperm.' The solution may be to make men produce antibodies against
their own sperm.
The series continues next month with an article on obesity.
Articles over the last six months have looked at pharmaceutical advances in
the following areas:
Anaesthetics  15 October
Diabetes      17 September
Epilepsy      27 August
Arthritis     27 July
Menopause     25 June
Alzheimer's   24 May
