IN the mid-1980s, when the US was governed by a president who believed trees
were a source of pollution, north America's chemical industry realised
stricter environmental regulations were looming and started to modify its
behaviour.
The result was the Responsible Care programme, launched by the Chemical
Manufacturers Association in 1988 to improve the industry's image, reduce
its impact on the environment and circumvent the threat of harsher
regulations. Now that Mr Al Gore, an outspoken environmentalist, is
vice-president of the US, the industry's decision to implement environmental
guidelines may prove fortunate.
'Bhopal was the wake-up call,' says Mr Dave Buzzelli, Dow Chemical's vice
president for environment, health and safety. 'It brought home to everybody
that we could have the best performance in the world but if another company
had an accident, all of us would be hurt, so we started to work together.'
The initiative which led to Responsible Care in the US started in Canada in
1986, after a survey of public opinion found that the chemical industry was
widely distrusted. 'The industry is smaller in Canada, and there are fewer
large companies,' says Mr Buzzelli. 'It's easier to get things started with
a smaller group.'
The concepts were then brought south of the border by companies with
Canadian operations, and the CMA, which represents about 90 per cent of
basic industrial production capacity in the US, adopted its own principles
and codes of management in 1988. This was followed by the launch of a public
outreach campaign in 1991, which included an impressive advertising effort.
The industry has made significant strides since the programme was launched,
but Responsible Care is still in its infancy. According to the CMA, only
about 60 per cent of industry workers are 'somewhat aware' of Responsible
Care, and under 40 per cent are fully aware of the scheme.
Responsible Care is based on the premise that the industry can steadily
improve its performance in health, safety and the environment and that it
can regain public trust by improving its response to public concerns about
products and operations. The aim is continuous improvement: there is no
target end date.
Mr Buzzelli explains: 'Responsible Care isn't designed for the industry to
duck regulations. If it results in people feeling there is less of a need to
regulate, then it's a double win.'
Companies are not legally bound to comply with the tenets of Responsible
Care, but membership of the CMA is conditional on participating in the
programme.
While it was quickly accepted by the bigger chemical producers, many smaller
companies initially resisted the scheme because they feared they lacked the
resources to make the changes necessary to comply with the codes.
The most radical aspect of Responsible Care was the decision to open the
doors of an industry that has a long tradition of being secretive and wary
of public scrutiny. 'The biggest shift here is the willingness to share our
historic secrets,' says Mr Gerry Faigle, Dupont's corporate responsible care
co-ordinator. 'The communities want to know how our activities affect the
environment, and we're telling them that we release this much of that
material into the air, and inject this much of that material into the
ground. Without this dialogue we are going to get regulated out of
existence.'
Mr Faigle's views are shared by other industry leaders. 'The public
component of any job in the chemical industry is higher than it ever has
been. The need to listen is critical today,' says Mr Buzzelli.
Community advisory panels provide the main forum for dialogue between
companies and the public. There are now about 200 of these panels in the US
and more will be formed this year. Their advocates say they help companies
learn about local concerns which they can address by making changes or
providing enough information about operations to quell local fears.
While environmental groups applaud the industry's efforts to be more open
and communicative, the panels have not met with absolute approval. Critics
say the panels lack access to sufficient information and independent
experts. There are also concerns that local communities are economically
dependent on chemical companies and are thus less likely to be critical of
the industry.
'There is some concern that the advisory groups are really attempts to get
local citizens to serve as mouthpieces for the company rather than
consulting well-informed groups with some expertise to assess what companies
are doing,' says Mr Hillel Gray, toxics policy director at the National
Environmental Law Center.
Another area of concern is the lack of outside verification for the
environmental achievements that companies claim to have made under
Responsible Care. There is also no consistency in reporting formats, data
bases or even definitions, making it difficult accurately to measure or
compare results.
There is a consistency issue,' says Mr Ron Pingel, Dow's director of
environmental affairs and responsible care. 'How do we know that everybody
is evaluating in the same way? Ultimately, there will probably be a
component of third party involvement in terms of evaluation,' he adds.
'Responsible Care is the velvet glove around the iron fist of the chemical
industry,' says Mr Fred Millar, director of the toxics project at Friends of
the Earth. Mr Millar bases his charge on a CMA effort to defeat a 'Right to
Know More' bill which would have added chemicals and sectors to the
government's toxics inventory list. 'The CMA rounded up about 50 trade
associations and sent a letter to every member of congress saying the
proposal was 'radical' and would harm the economy.'
Most Americans seem to think that the chemical industry is neither
responsible nor caring. A CMA survey in 1992 found fewer than 30 per cent of
the public look favourably on the sector. Only the tobacco industry was less
popular; even nuclear power was more favourably viewed.
The CMA hopes to placate some of its critics by acting on the
recommendations of its responsible care committee.
One of the recommendations looks at verification of the processes that
companies are using for responsible care. 'This would involve some form of
third party or public involvement,' says Mr Richard Doyle, CMA's director of
Responsible Care. 'It is important to note that we're not at this juncture
ready to recommend any one type of verification process.'
Mr Gray of the National Environmental Law Center has not been won over.
'There's a lot more that all the chemical companies could be doing,' he
says. 'If they spent less time fighting Right to Know and issuing public
pronouncements and more time trying to provide meaningful information, it
would turn round public opinion which is very low in spite of what has been
put into Responsible Care advertising.'
