BANKERS in Italy have this decade grown accustomed to an annual crisis.
First came the collapse of the Federconsorzi farm services group in 1991,
then the liquidation of Efim last year. This year has brought new troubles
with the rescue of Ferruzzi, Italy's second-biggest private company.
The involvement of the same big banks at the top of the creditors' list
means the need to find fast, transparent solutions has become crucial to
prevent embarrassing loan write-offs and lower profits.
Efim has proved easily the most complicated and, so far, frustrating of the
three crises for bankers. Even by Italian standards, progress has been
painfully slow, information uncommonly inadequate and the number of
conflicting interests unusually complicated.
'I'm just about to write the fifth, sixth or seventh letter to the prime
minister calling for urgent action,' says Mr Guido Rosa, chairman of the
Foreign Banks' Association in Italy and head of the local unit of France's
Societe Generale.
Mr Rosa, a veteran of Federconsorzi and now tied up in the Ferruzzi saga,
has lost count of the letters he has sent on behalf of foreign bankers.
Foreign banks account for about L3,500bn (Pounds 1.47bn) of Efim's L8,800bn
exposure to financial institutions.
'The problem is communication,' he says.
The bankers' first gripe is with Mr Alberto Predieri, one of Italy's most
experienced liquidation lawyers and the special administrator put in to run
Efim last year. Complaints range from allegedly excessive absences from the
office to disapproval of his methods; 'eccentric' is one of the more polite
words used.
The European Commission runs Mr Predieri a close second. Its decision to
block plans to repay creditor banks, on the grounds that the Italian
government's proposal represents unfair state aid, places Brussels high in
bankers' unpopularity stakes.
Bankers have also been enraged by a second strand in the Commission's
argument; that they should have first asked themselves whether Efim was the
recipient of illegal state aid before agreeing to lend it money. As some
point out, opining on the legality of state funding is something the
Commission should have done years ago, not the banks.
Italian Treasury officials are not free of criticism. Although relations
between bank creditors - particularly foreign banks - and the Treasury have
improved since confrontations last September, the climate remains unsettled.
A three-hour meeting this month of about 120 bank creditors in London
rekindled the idea of ostracising Italian borrowers in the international
financial markets if matters are not settled soon.
It takes little provocation for bankers to recall the extraordinary
confusion - virtually unprecedented for an advanced industrial country  -
last August and September when the Treasury issued three decrees within
weeks, all of which left open more questions than they answered.
The first decree was the biggest bombshell: it implied creditors would only
receive 80 per cent of the face value of their loans. Once over the shock,
banks attacked the proposal as a 'unilateral rescheduling', unimaginable
from a member of the Group of Seven industrialised countries.
The Treasury could not have chosen a worse moment to antagonise the
financial community, given the storm that was about to break in the foreign
exchange markets. The decree provoked a stream of adverse publicity - some
papers compared Italy to a banana republic - just when the authorities most
needed the support and confidence of financial markets to keep the lira
stable.
Although the government eventually climbed down and agreed to honour all the
debts owed by Efim and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, differences were only
partly resolved.
The next decree antagonised bankers further by setting the interest rates on
the special bonds to cover Efim's borrowings at about half corresponding
market rates.
The decision renewed threats to blackball Italian borrowers. It also
signalled a tense period in which bankers considered using a legal
technicality to put into default loans by some Italian state-owned groups
being transformed into joint stock companies.
Relations between the government and the banks have thawed since, partly
because of a greater willingness by Treasury officials to meet the banks.
However, many foreign bankers are bitter over what they view as
unprofessional conduct by the authorities. The severest criticism is
levelled against the lack of detail about Treasury plans to repay lenders
and delays in supplying information.
One foreign banker says some, who 'knew Italy and understood the mentality',
tried to explain it was unreasonable to expect anything better. 'We
recommended patience, as these things tend to sort themselves out in Italy
in the end. But try explaining that to a Japanese or US bank which has no
first-hand knowledge of Italian business.'
The ill will explains why, even today, some bankers believe Rome is using
the European Commission's opposition to repayment as an excuse to avoid
compensating creditors. Mr Rosa thinks such a view is far-fetched, as the
Treasury has already allocated funds for repayment and the total bill is
mounting as accrued interest builds up. But some bankers are sceptical.
'The Treasury promised that repayments would start by the end of April. Then
the Commission stepped in and everything came to a standstill. Now Treasury
officials say matters are outside their control, while the situation in
Brussels is confusing at best,' says the head of one European bank in Milan.
Once the Commission's block is lifted, bank creditors will still have a
string of grumbles. Foremost is that repayment should be extended to Efim
subsidiaries which are less than 100 per cent owned by the parent company.
The list includes important operations such as the Breda Costruzioni
Ferroviarie railway equipment unit.
Bankers are also confused about how they will be repaid. Originally, the
Treasury announced plans to issue special bonds, denominated in either lire
or Ecus. This year, however, the Treasury's borrowing arm was cleared to
embark on an international borrowing programme to raise funds to pay back
creditors - implying that repayment would come in cash.
'It's totally unclear. No one understands anything about this,' says Mr
Rosa.
Mr Predieri also has a bone to pick with some of Efim's bankers. Some have
decided unilaterally to terminate swap deals - which are complicated
financial transactions based on arbitraging interest rates or currencies -
for Efim and its subsidiaries.
The swaps, linked to foreign currency loans by the group, were terminated
before their official maturity on the grounds of Efim's financial crisis.
However, aborting the deals has raised the group's debts yet further in lira
terms because of the currency's devaluation since the swaps were signed.
The banks are likely to be repaid eventually and some lessons are likely to
be learnt along the way. But many bankers may by then be worrying about the
next Italian crisis.
