The government's deregulation bill due to be published in mid-January will
not include the wholesale revision of health and safety legislation which
was hinted at by ministers and feared by trade unions.
The bill is expected to say very little about existing health and safety
legislation apart from referring to a separate review of legislation by the
Health and Safety Commission which began last May and is expected to report
in March.
That review is not expected to recommend significant change and, according
to Ms Angela Orr-Ewing of the HSC, the consultation period, which ends next
month, 'has not attracted a large response'.
The sweeping away of bureaucratic safety legislation was supposed to be one
of the central pieces of the deregulation bill. But aside from the weeding
out of some obsolete legislation, a constant process since the 1974 Health
and Safety at Work Act came into effect, there is little scope or demand for
wholesale change, Whitehall officials say.
'People are always saying that business is hampered by safety laws but when
they try and find specific examples they rarely come up with anything.
Health and safety laws are usually there for a good reason and they are
applied in a pretty flexible way,' one official said.
Backing away from radical changes to health and safety laws may ensure the
deregulation bill an easier passage through the House of Lords.
The government is planning to get rid of hundreds of regulations without
seeking primary legislation, in order to bypass debate in the Commons. But
in view of reservations about this method ministers are considering some
form of parliamentary scrutiny. The deregulation initiative was first
announced last July when task forces to abolish red tape were established in
seven sectors: construction; food, drink and agriculture; chemicals and
pharmaceuticals; communications and transport; engineering; financial
services; and other services.
Mr David Hunt, the employment secertary, reported that the separate HSC
review of safety legislation had identified 30 regulations to be abolished.
In almost all cases this was because they had been superseded.
A Department of Trade and Industry working party subsequently identified
several areas where health regulations could be abolished which led to
speculation about fundamental reform.
