WESTDEUTSCHE Landesbank, the largest and most aggressive of Germany's public
sector banks, reported yesterday that first-half group operating profits
increased by nearly 24 per cent to DM280.6m (Dollars 163.1m).
The increase was achieved despite a substantial increase in provisions
against bad and doubtful debts. Mr Friedel Neuber, the bank's chief
executive, predicted full-year figures would exceed last year's result
despite the prolonged German recession and continuing difficulties in the
world economy.
The bank, the 'house' bank to the state of North-Rhine Westphalia, is,
according to some measures, the third-largest in Germany, in all areas of
business a strong rival to Germany's 'big three' commercial banks. The rate
of increase in first-half profits at WestLB was higher than at Deutsche
Bank, Dresdner Bank and Commerzbank. In recent weeks they reported increases
in profits of 13, 14 and 16 per cent respectively.
German banks as a whole have profited from rising German bond and equity
markets as well as currency market turmoil and hectic derivatives trading.
As in the private commercial banking sector, WestLB's profits growth
reflects performance in own-account trading together with fee-income
generated from securities business. The bank also had a strong increase in
profits from interest income generated from the mainstream lending business
 -for the private sector institutions growth rates were more anaemic.
WestLB's profits from own-account trading more than doubled to DM190.7m  -
up by DM101m over the comparable period in the previous year.
WestLB, like other German banks, makes its calculations with reference to
half the profit made in the whole of the previous year - not the actual
profits for the first six months of last year. Fee income rose by 12.6 per
cent to DM230.4m and interest income climbed by nearly 16 per cent to
DM1.33bn.
Like other German banks, WestLB disclosed for the first time the scale of
its bad and doubtful debt provisions. These were DM468.8m in the first half,
43 per cent up on last year's comparable DM326.3m. This reflects the sharp
deterioration in the credit environment in Germany's worst economic downturn
since the second world war.
