IF GREECE'S opposition Panhellenic Socialist Movement wins the general
election on Sunday, several hundred new jobs will be created in Lavrion, a
port south of Athens where some 70 per cent of the workforce have been made
redundant in the past three years.
If the ruling New Democracy party, lagging in the polls, manages to scrape
back in, the feud between a conservative government and socialist local
administration will continue, deterring new businesses from arriving.
The election campaign is being fiercely fought in Lavrion, a town that
exemplifies problems a new government must address: disinvestment,
increasing reliance on the black economy and intense political interference
that blocks administrative reform.
Issues that have dominated the campaign, such as the ballooning public debt,
Greece's ability to handle the EC presidency next year and, in recent days,
the outlook for talks with Macedonia, can arouse strong reactions.
However, in Lavrion argument is just as passionate over the town's efforts
to secure its share of the public investment budget. Competition is strong
for the spoils of Greece's patronage system, distributed for the most part
to the governing party's political allies.
'We've had a funding squeeze and public works projects moved very slowly.
Things will pick up a good deal here if Pasok comes back,' said Mr Panayotis
Bafilas, deputy mayor.
The conservatives claim they kept their 1990 election promises, improving
the road from Athens and building a workers' housing estate.
However, the town has lost almost 20 per cent of its residents since several
large companies, including two textile producers, a ceramics manufacturer
and a yacht-builder, shut down. A bigger blow to Lavrion would be the loss
of a Dollars 600m project to build a power station. If the conservatives win
the election, it will be built in central Greece instead.
'We get by, thanks to the black economy, with people working in the building
trade for illegal summer homes, or by commuting to jobs closer to Athens.
But there aren't many jobs for women so family incomes are down,' said Mr
Demosthenes Mourelatos, an electronics technician.
The effects of recession, blamed on the conservatives' stabilisation policy,
together with their commitment to privatising public utilities and shutting
loss-making industrial companies under state control, have undermined New
Democracy's chances of winning a second term.
Polls show Pasok holding a steady lead of between three and five percentage
points, which would translate into an overall majority of about 12 seats in
the 300-member parliament.
Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, the conservative prime minister, has managed to
make a dent in Pasok's support by energetically touring the countryside.
This was done to point up the contrast with Mr Andreas Papandreou, the
socialist leader, whose health is too frail to allow him more than a few
carefully stage-managed campaign appearances.
Given that the prime minister is expected to take personal responsibility
for a multitude of minor decisions, even socialist voters doubt whether Mr
Papandreou can withstand the stress of the job.
However, Mr Mitsotakis's personal approval rating has continued to decline
throughout the campaign. New Democracy candidates have tried to distance
themselves from a leader perceived as serving the interests of his extended
family and close business associates.
Yet if the conservatives are defeated Mr Mitsotakis can safely blame Mr
Antonis Samaras, the former foreign minister, who brought down the
government last month by persuading a handful of rebel conservative deputies
to defect to his newly founded party, Political Spring.
Political Spring is expected to win about 4 per cent of the vote, taking
support almost exclusively from New Democracy.
Mr Samaras, whose hardline nationalist proclamations sit uneasily with his
calls for modernising Greek institutions, is expected to get most of his
votes in large urban centres. In the countryside angry New Democrats have
pelted him with eggs, calling him a 'traitor'.
Two small left-wing parties, Left Alliance, which has been losing voters to
Pasok, and the Greek Communist Party, supported by unreconstructed
Stalinists, are also forecast to win around 4 per cent.
Mr Mitsotakis, 75, says he will resign the party leadership and retire if he
loses power. That would leave Mr Papandreou, his political rival for more
than 30 years, free to prepare for his own retirement and bring the
long-awaited transfer of power to younger politicians within reach.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MITSOTAKIS UNDER PRESSURE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Constantine Mitsotakis
Leader of New Democracy
Party has held power since April 1990. Conservative and pro-business,
its majority was wiped out last month when two deputies broke away to
support the new Political Spring party (qv). Internal divisions
undermined Prime Minister Mitsotakis's efforts for economic reform,
with supporters of the patronage system coming out in opposition to
privatisation of public utilities. Mitsotakis, 75, says he will step
down from leadership if the ND loses.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Andreas Papandreou
Leader of Panhellenic Socialist Movement
Party was in government from 1981-89. It claims to have outgrown its
radical past and is promoting a new, pro-EC image. Papandreou, who
founded the party, still keeps a tight grip on policy-making and
organisation despite weak health. He pledges to keep economic reform on
track but has a record of making unpredictable policy switches.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Maria Damanaki
Leader of Left Alliance
Party participated in a short-lived coalition government with the ND in
1989. It split away in 1991 during an ideological dispute with the
still-Stalinist Communist Party (qv). Factional infighting brought a
further decline in support. Mrs Damanaki, a former communist, is
fighting an uphill battle to keep Alliance voters from turning to Pasok.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Aleka Papariga
Leader of Communist Party
Party looks defiantly backwards to the Greek civil war of the 1940s,
when the  communists were defeated by nationalists. Most of its support
comes from elderly civil war veterans and their families and militant
trade unionists. It takes a moderate line on Macedonia, partly because
many Greek communists fled there in the civil war aftermath.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Antonis Samaras
Leader of Political Spring
Party was founded in June by Samaras, a former political protege of
Mitsotakis. He was fired as foreign minister in 1992 for taking a
hardline nationalist position in Greece's dispute with Macedonia over
the latter's choice of name. He brought down the government in
September after calling on rebel ND deputies to stop supporting
Mitsotakis. He attracts support from younger, dissatisfied conservative
voters but is short on specific policies.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
