Mr Yasushi Mieno, governor of the Bank of Japan, called yesterday for
further deregulation of Japan's financial markets, to help Japanese banks
write off their non-performing loans.
Pointing to the sluggish economy, Mr Mieno noted that further bad debt
write-offs by the banks were necessary before the economy could pick up. A
key to Japan's economic recovery was to create an environment for banks to
write off their bad loans, thereby improving their balance sheets, he said.
In particular, it was worth considering whether the financial markets could
play a role by providing a means for banks to securitise their
non-performing loans, the central bank governor said. 'The many functions of
the financial markets, particularly the transfer of risk, played a major
part in the recovery of US corporations. We must examine if there is room to
use those functions in Japan's financial system.'
But in order to do so, Mr Mieno said, Japan's financial system, including
regulations, tax, and settlement and accounting procedures, would need to be
revamped. Under present rules, the securitisation of bad loans is highly
restricted, with no secondary market in Japan to trade such securities.
'Financial institutions should make their own best judgments' about how to
write off their bad loans, but it was the responsibility of the authorities
to 'remove all obstacles in their way, creating an environment that will
allow them to do so,' Mr Mieno added. His call for greater market
deregulation contrasts with the stance of Japan's Finance Ministry, which
has been cautious about loosening its reins on the country's financial
institutions.
In addition to returning the financial institutions' balance sheets to
health, Japanese companies still had to complete the adjustment of stocks
and their balance sheets after the excesses of asset inflation in the
late-1980s. 'Unless the economy goes through these adjustments, it cannot
proceed to the next stage.
'Our stance is to carefully watch over the situation,' Mr Mieno said.
Concerning prospects of another cut in the official discount rate, he
believed interest rates were already low enough to support capital
investment by Japanese corporations once such activity picked up.
His remarks came amid growing unhappiness with the government's handling of
the economy.
A survey by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, Japan's economic daily, found nearly
49 per cent of the 3,000 people polled were critical of the economic policy
of Prime minister Morihiro Hosokawa, against 44 per cent who viewed the
government's measures positively. Over half wanted economic measures to take
precedence, compared with 38 per cent who thought political reform more
important.
