NO ONE expected that the New Year beacons lit to launch the EC's single
market would herald a completely smooth transition to a barrier-free Europe.
But yesterday's news from Brussels that enforcement of single market
legislation will for the moment be lenient indicates that the start-up could
be more problematic than many hoped.
The most vigorous response to the statement by Mr Raniero Vanni d'Archirafi,
internal market commissioner, came yesterday from British industry. In
Europe's biggest economy, by contrast, the Federation of German Industry
(BDI) reacted with equanimity. It called the announcement a rational
response to individual countries' delays in implementing legislation.
Germany had still to implement 20 per cent of single market legislation and
Italy more than 30 per cent, said Mr Reiner Franz, head of the BDI's
European policy division.
A special working party set up to monitor any difficulties encountered by
German business had received 'very few' complaints. These mostly concerned
complications over turnover tax, Mr Franz added.
Officials at the Germany's motor manufacturers' association said all was
running smoothly. 'It is not as though the single market fell suddenly from
the sky,' one said.
British industry was less sanguine. 'We take a very strong view about the
need for uniform enforcement so that all countries play squarely by the
rules,' said the Confederation of British Industry. The CBI is concerned
about what it calls a 'mess' in introducing a uniform EC-wide system for
collecting value added tax.
Ms Anne Robinson, head of the policy unit at Britain's free-market Institute
of Directors, said of the EC Commission: 'Their job is to make sure that
there is free access to goods and services in the single market. They
shouldn't be turning a blind eye.'
ICI, the British chemical company, adopted a less tough stance, saying of
single market infractions: 'There are bound to be companies outside the UK
which haven't got their act together.'
Small business could, on the other hand, suffer from lack of enforcement. Ms
Lindsay Wittenberg, a European business consultant based in Hove on the
Sussex coast, said yesterday's statement 'diminishes the seriousness of the
whole thing. What does it do for the image of the Commission if they say it
doesn't really matter what companies are doing?'
UK companies habitually point to Italy as failing to live up to single
market rules. However, Italian companies and government officials said
yesterday it was far too early to monitor effectively the workings of the
single market.
Companies say the main problems have arisen over confusion in government
departments, especially those dealing with customs and VAT. Officials admit
to confusion and say the difficulties have been caused by the large number
of ministerial orders which need to be sent round departments explaining
government decrees.
have either not yet been circulated or they have yet to be formulated. As a
result bureaucrats lower down have tended to operate by existing
regulations.
Dutch road hauliers, who carry more than 20 per cent of cross-border road
cargo traffic in the EC, have so far reported few problems at EC borders.
'We are cautiously optimistic that the internal market has got off to a good
start,' according to Mr Erik Runia, secretary for international affairs at
the Royal Dutch Road Haulage Association (KNV) in The Hague.
