THE TIME employees spend on off-the-job training has fallen dramatically in
the recession of the past three years, according to Department of Employment
figures to be released today.
The number of people undergoing training has dipped only slightly since
1990. But the figures reveal how little training they have done. The number
of hours of off-the-job training fell last year to just over 25m, from 40m
in 1990.
The figure, which is based on a survey of 4,000 employers, casts doubt on
the government's claims that training levels have held up through the
recession.
Officials point out that the sharp drop in training hours relates only to
off-the-job training and also excludes any training paid for by the
employee. One official said: 'It looks bad but it may just signify that
training courses are becoming more intensive.'
However, off-the-job training is the largest component of corporate
training, according to the survey. Department of Employment statistics
published last week showed that 14.5 per cent of the UK's 20.8m employees
had gone through some kind of training in the four weeks before the survey
was conducted.
Of those, 4 per cent received on-the-job training, 8.6 per cent off-the-job
training and 1.9 per cent training on and off the job.
Women are now more likely to be receiving training than men, a reversal of
the position in the mid-1980, and training activity tends to be highest in
management and professional occupations.
About two-thirds of all medium to large establishments, have training plans
although less than half have formal written statements. The number with
plans has fallen over the last two years. The most common site for
off-the-job training is a college or further eduction establishment.
Training experts lend some support to the idea that courses are becoming
more intensive. Mr Peter Ashby of Full Employment UK said: 'A lot of
colleges and private providers are doing now in one or two day courses which
used to take a whole week.'
Mr Tony Cann, chairman of East Lancashire Training and Enterprise Council,
said that if training had been cut more than previously realised during the
recession it was not because of the 'poaching' of newly skilled workers.
In the latest issue of Personnel Management he writes that the poaching
claim 'is just an excuse hiding the real causes of insufficient training. A
company that does not train its employees will find that the better ones
leave even more quickly'.
