The row about Europe's mountains of waste packaging is shaping up to be one
of next year's biggest environmental controversies.
The dispute has pitted European countries against each other - and set
environmentalists against the packaging industry. It also offers one of the
best examples of how 'green' enthusiasm can lead to bad and expensive
regulation.
Pressure on governments to tackle the question of waste packaging has been
growing steadily. Some of the most prominent environmental groups, such as
Friends of the Earth, have made recycling one of their highest profile
campaigns. They say they have found it easy to arouse public support -
people are reminded of the issue every time they look at their kitchen
dustbin. One UK government official says: 'recycling is the kind of thing
people like being told to do - they like thinking they can make a
difference'.
As a result of that pressure, the European Commission is trying to thrash
out minimum recycling levels for the 50m tonnes of packaging waste produced
each year in the European Union. Half of the total comes from households,
15m tonnes from services and 10m tonnes from industry.
Separately, the UK is considering whether to introduce a levy on landfills -
licensed rubbish dumps - to increase the rate of recycling and incineration
of waste. The political pressure for new regulation in Europe and in the UK
is tempered, however, by the cautionary spectacle of the crisis in the
German recycling industry.
German 'green' enthusiasm spawned tough laws which stipulated that almost
all packaging must be recycled. But the Duales System Deutschlands (DSD),
the national collecting and recycling scheme set up by industry, has been
forced into near-bankruptcy this year. Industry failed to develop recycling
technology in time, and markets for recycled paper and plastic were slow to
develop.
As a result, mounds of unwanted waste packaging, some in its raw, unrecycled
form, poured into other European countries. The House of Lords select
committee on the European Communities commented in October: 'What was at
first hailed as a pioneering approach to the environmentally responsible
management of packaging has become, within Germany and internationally, a
considerable embarrassment'.
The German overspill has undermined the UK's developing schemes for recycled
packaging. However, they already faced considerable problems: technical
difficulties, high costs, and lack of markets for recycled products.
According to Mr Steve Webb, policy director of the National Association of
Waste Disposal Contractors, recycling metal such as aluminium soft drinks
cans or steel food cans is cheaper than making new ones out of unused
aluminium.
But many kinds of plastics are technically difficult and extremely expensive
to recycle. A single plastic bottle, he points out, contains many different
types of plastic in its cap, its reinforced base and its sides, while
collection and sorting costs are high.
Glass recycling shares some of those problems and is 'struggling', in Mr
Webb's view, following a merger of the two main buyers of used glass and a
fall in the price they pay for collected material.
Even paper recycling, which is favoured by many local authorities, is
problematic, paper manufacturers argue. It can only be recycled usefully two
or three times before the fibres become so short that the paper is weakened.
'It is better to burn it to get the energy back', in Mr Webb's view.
Incpen, the Industry Council for Packaging and the Environment, which argues
that the proposed imposition of strict quotas takes no account of these
problems, is particularly sceptical of the recycling of household waste.
Commercial and industrial waste is at least homogeneous and easily collected
in bulk, Incpen argues. But it says that the cost of collecting and sorting
domestic waste - with the possible exception of metals, which can be
extracted with magnets - is likely always to make household recycling
uneconomic.
Doubt hangs over the economics of many kinds of recycling - some may be
environmentally harmful, some studies suggest (schemes may require high
volumes of polluting chemicals, or consume a lot of energy). Incpen
comments: 'It is pointless to conserve 'visible resources' - raw materials -
at the expense of using 'invisible resources' - fossil fuel energy. The
overall aim from an environmental perspective should be to make efficient
use of resources.'
This warning is recognised by the House of Lords select committee:
'Recycling is not a cost-free operation; it may be that the costs, in energy
or cash terms or both exceed the costs of the alternatives'.
While the committee urges governments to discourage 'excessive' packaging,
it also concludes that for some types of waste, incineration combined with
schemes to recover energy may be the best treatment. It argues, too, that
the UK is blessed with a large number of suitable landfill sites as a result
of the quarrying of building materials, and that landfill may often be a
cheaper and environmentally superior destination for waste.
The debate is far from over. However, it is clear that recycling is not
always the best choice for waste. The analysis of when it is appropriate is
complex, and in many cases has not yet been carried out.
Given those difficulties, it is hard not to have some sympathy with
industry's worries about the imposition of fixed recycling quotas. If those
concerns are ignored by politicians anxious to capitalise on one of the
strongest strands of green enthusiasm, the result could be an addition to
industrial costs without real environmental justification.
