THE PRUDENTIAL, the large US financial institution unrelated to the British
insurer with the same name, yesterday announced that its total capital
increased from Dollars 9.74bn to Dollars 9.82bn in 1992, despite the heavy
claims resulting from Hurricane Andrew.
The Prudential is a mutual insurer - owned by its policyholders rather than
by shareholders - and increases in capital are the closest equivalent to a
conventional profits total.
The company said the net loss from Hurricane Andrew, which devastated
southern Florida in late-August, topped Dollars 900m and that the overall
financial results 'fell well short of goals'. But it described the
performances of its Prudential Securities arm, its home mortgage, group
insurance and asset management businesses as 'vigorous'.
The group's results were also helped by 'substantial' gains in its bond
portfolio. The Prudential said total net capital gains on the investment
side were Dollars 461m last year - reflecting gains on the bond side, offset
by losses on commercial property investments. Consolidated net investment
income of the year overall was unchanged at Dollars 10.3bn. The Prudential's
return on invested assets, meanwhile, fell from 9.3 per cent to 8.8 per
cent, partly due to the declining interest rate environment.
Prudential Securities, the group's Wall Street broking house, reported a 42
per cent increase in pre-tax profits to Dollars 221m in the wake of strong
underwriting and retail brokerage businesses.
But after taxes of Dollars 71m, 1992 net income of Dollars 150m was well
down on 1991 when the firm made Dollars 201m after tax benefits of Dollars
45m.
Overall revenues at the securities unit rose 7 per cent to Dollars 2.7bn,
fuelled by an 11 per cent gain in retail broking commissions and what the
firm described as a 'significant increase' in underwriting activity.
Customer assets under management or administration at Prudential Securities
rose 10 per cent last year to Dollars 41.5bn.
The brokerage arm's management also said yesterday that 1993 had started
strongly. January was the firm's third best month ever, said chief executive
Mr Hardwick Simmons.
