MARCH is fast becoming the personal equity plan season. There is nothing
like a deadline to make investors open their wallets, and the approach of
the end of the financial year on April 5 turns their mind to tax-free
products.
Logically, it would have been better for investors to buy Peps in August,
when the FT-SE 100 index was at 2,280, than now, with the market trading in
the 2,800s. But with investors limited to one general Pep a year (see guide
below), there is a natural tendency to wait for the 'best product.' Also,
with base rates at 6 per cent, those savers who previously were content to
leave all their money in the building society may now be considering Peps
for the first time. A stream of these has been launched over the past few
weeks, with the specific aim of attracting investors who want income.
Perhaps the most ingenious is Hypo Foreign &amp; Colonial's Higher Income plan,
which offers a yield of 10 per cent after charges through use of the options
market. The product looks very attractive but is very complex and investors
should take financial advice before parting with their cash.
There is a danger that people will rush into Peps for the wrong reason. Any
equity-based investment involves risk; you should not buy a Pep if you are
likely to panic should your investment fall by 10 per cent six months from
now. These are investments for the long term, which means at least five
years.
You should also watch to see that the charges do not eat up the tax
benefits. This is a particular problem for a basic-rate taxpayer, who might
find it better to buy some unit or investment trusts directly, rather than
in Pep form. It is rarely suitable for a non-taxpayer to buy a Pep.
How does the investor sort through all the Peps on offer to find the one
that best suits his or her needs? One useful source of information is the
Chase de Vere Pepguide, which publishes details of around 700 plans and is
available for Pounds 9.95 from Chase de Vere Investments, 63 Lincoln's Inn
Fields, London WC2A 3JX.
BESt Pep (tel. 071-936 2037) produces a free background guide and makes
recommendations, for a charge of Pounds 25. Like Chase de Vere, it refunds
the charge if an investor then buys a Pep.
To guide readers through the maze, we asked financial advisers to give their
views on the Peps that would best suit three different types of investor.
Basic-rate taxpaying individuals in their 30s who want to save for the long
term.
John Cole, of Berry, Birch &amp; Noble, says a younger person probably will look
for a managed fund, as offered by a unit or investment trust. 'You don't
want to go for a yield as high as 6 or 7 per cent,' he says 'but it would be
wrong to go for a fund with no yield at all.' Cole says a unit trust such as
Perpetual's High Income, or an investment trust such as Murray Income, might
be suitable.
Richard Boyton, of Boyton Financial Services, recommends the Killik
self-select Pep where charges are 1.85 per cent for dealing and a levy of
Pounds 7.50 per dividend. He recommends that investors then select the
Scottish Value investment trust. Says Boyton: 'This fund has outperformed
the FT-SE 100 index by over 50 per cent since September 1991.'
David Harris of Chantrey Vellacott says that young people 'might well use a
Pep to back their mortgage. Peps represent the best long-term vehicle for
this.'
He adds that such people should opt for a cautious capital growth approach,
linked to either a unit or investment trust. 'Statistics show that
individuals in this age group tend not to invest the maximum Pounds 6,000
and to elect for regular monthly savings. I would choose fund managers with
a strong record who figure regularly in the top 25 per cent of performers.
My particular selections would be the Schroder Pep linked to its UK equity
fund, or Foreign &amp; Colonial's Pep investment trust.'
Mark Bolland of Chamberlain de Broe also favours Peps for mortgage
repayments. 'They are tax-efficient, and cheaper and far more versatile and
flexible than an endowment. The only thing they lack is an insurance
element, and that can be arranged more efficiently by other methods.
'Ideal vehicles are the investment trust savings schemes. These are
comparatively cheap and the returns can be outstanding. Someone kicking off
with a reasonably small amount could invest in the old favourites, Foreign &amp;
Colonial and Alliance. A couple could put up to Pounds 250 per month into
these trusts, which have very attractive long-term returns and are broadly
invested internationally.'
'Those in a position to save more, could look to other regular savings
schemes in the UK/EC trusts such as TR City of London, Guinness Flight's
Temple Bar trust, or Kleinwort Benson's Merchants Trust.'
Top-rate taxpayers in their 50s who are aiming to save for their retirement.
Harris favours a slightly more aggressive stance for people in this
category, who may want to consider a self-select Pep. 'My choice would rest
between the Charles Stanley gold Pep, for execution-only deals, and the
Alliance Trust Pep, although this requires the first Pounds 1,500 to be
invested in Alliance investment trusts and has a restricted list of direct
shares.
'For more conventional investors, I would choose the Perpetual self-select
Pep linked to their UK growth fund or, for international exposure, Barings'
Maxi-Continental plan linked to their European Growth trust.'
Cole says such investors might view their Pep as an extension of their
general equity portfolio and will probably opt for a self-select plan.
Bolland says: 'The nature of the investment needs to be considered
carefully, given that a tighter time scale is involved. If there is only
five years until retirement, too much risk is unwise.
'Suitable vehicles would be the Cazenove and Newton income Peps. The former
is a low-cost plan investing specifically in utilities and bonds, offering a
high yield. If anything, the drawback with this approach is limiting
exposure to a narrow range of equities. I like the Newton fund because of
its excellent long term record for growth and income.'
Boyton again opts for the Killik self-select Pep but linked to Morgan
Grenfell's Equity Income fund, yielding 5.4 per cent gross. This would give
a tax-free income of Pounds 324, which equates to a gross yield of 9 per
cent before tax.
Retired basic-rate taxpayers who need income.
A good yield is obviously the key factor, says Cole. He thinks the choice
falls between two plans: Cazenove's Bond and Utility fund; and the Fidelity
High Income, which yields 6 per cent and has slightly higher charges but
pays a monthly income. 'Many small investors are very keen on the monthly
option,' he adds.
Harris says: 'For the investor ready to take a moderate level of risk, I
would choose a unit trust-based income portfolio which yields between 15-25
per cent more than the All-Share. A good example is Newton Income.
'For those willing to take a slightly higher level of risk, investment trust
Peps using income shares will provide a higher yield. However, it should be
remembered that other classes of shares within the trust have first call on
any capital growth and there is a real chance of capital loss. My favourite
in this area is the Murray Johnstone Pep, linked to its split-capital trust
income shares. Alternatively, the new Cazenove Bond &amp; Utility fund is highly
attractive.'
Bolland says: 'Rather than going flat out for income, long-term capital and
dividend growth should be the targets. A self-select Pep investing in income
shares might be appropriate. Care is needed in choosing the income shares,
since some involve the possibility of a loss to redemption; the shares
selected should be ones which can participate in the capital growth of the
trust. A lower risk option might be the Cazenove plan.'
For those needing income, Boyton unashamedly recommends a product his own
firm has put together, with Killik as plan manager and Olliff &amp; Partners
making the share selection. The scheme is a combination of a split-level
income investment trust share and a zero dividend preference share.
The anticipated net yield in year one, after charges, is 9.46 per cent. This
will rise to 10.52 per cent in year five provided the income section grows
by 2.5 per cent per annum. A Pounds 10,000 investment is needed, of which
Pounds 6,000 is invested in a Pep and the balance in zeros. Charges are the
normal ones for Killik (see above), 1 per cent initial for Olliff, and
Pounds 150 payable to Boyton.
THE JARGON EXPLAINED
A PERSONAL equity plan allows an investor to buy stock market investments on
which all income and capital gains are tax-free. Individuals are limited to
a maximum of Pounds 6,000 a in most Peps during a tax year (although a
single-company plan of Pounds 3,000 can be bought on top).
The majority of the investment must be in shares (although a unit trust
which invests in both shares and gilts, can be eligible). Cash can be held
within the plan, but only if it is intended to move the money into shares
eventually. More than 50 per cent of the assets must be in the European
Community. There is no time limit on Pep investment but the nature of the
scheme makes it a long-term prospect. The capital gains tax exemption is of
value only to the wealthy - fewer than 100,000 people are likely to pay CGT
this year - and the income tax exemption is worth a very small amount in
early years. If a Pep has a yield of 5 per cent, the annual income on a
Pounds 6,000 plan will be Pounds 300; that represents a saving of Pounds 75
for basic-rate taxpayers and Pounds 120 for those on the top rate. Pep
charges can often obliterate these gains.
There are many types of Pep available. For those confused by the jargon,
they fall into these categories:
Corporate. This is a plan devoted to buying shares in a single company.
Confused easily with a single-company Pep (see below), a corporate Pep
allows for a full Pounds 6,000 investment. Many companies have set up
low-cost plans to benefit existing investors; but they must sell their
shares and buy them back within the Pep. The costs of this might outweigh
the benefits.
Investment trust. A plan which invests solely in the shares of one
investment trust, or a small group of them. Since trust charges normally are
quite low, most IT Peps will have additional charges. For some investors,
particularly basic-rate payers, these extra levies could outweigh the
benefits of holding the plan in Pep form.
Managed. A manager (normally a stockbroker, financial adviser or fund
management group) selects shares, or a combination of shares, unit and
investment trusts. Charges tend to be higher on these plans and performance
figures are difficult to come by.
Self-select. A plan where the investor chooses the stocks. A manager still
has to do the paperwork, however, and the investor must pay a charge;
indeed, the most crucial component in a self-select PEP is the charges. But
some brokers will offer advice on the stocks you select; it might be worth
paying a higher charge to benefit from this advice.
Single-company. An additional plan which can be added to other types of Pep.
Single-company plans are limited to Pounds 3,000 a year and, because of the
risk of 'putting all your eggs in one basket,' they are suited best to those
with large equity portfolios. But they can also be useful for those who have
bought shares through company option schemes. Such shares can be transferred
into a Pep without any liability for CGT if the transfer is within 90 days
of their purchase via the scheme.
Unit trust. A plan where the money is invested in a single unit trust. In
many cases, there are no additional charges; so if you are prepared to buy
into a unit trust in any case, you might as well do so via a Pep. But if
there are additional charges, you need to make a careful comparison to see
if these fees outweigh the tax benefits.
For further details on these plans, the 'phone numbers and addresses of most
fund management groups can be found in the managed funds pages at the back
of the FT's first section.
