IN THE BEGINNING by John Gribbin Viking Pounds 16.99, 274 pages
ANY SHORTLIST of the world's best popular science writers must include John
Gribbin. His gift lies not just in eloquent and lucid presentation of
complicated ideas, but in writing about them as if they were adventures.
From the first page of one of his tours of the universe the reader is
gripped. He does not disguise the sometimes bizarre character of scientific
theory; rather, he relishes it. And he passes on his enthusiasm to his
readers.
But Gribbin is not just an explainer, he is also an hypothesiser. More than
20 years ago, in an editorial in the science journal Nature, he made a
suggestion which then seemed wildly speculative but which has gained
plausibility. It is that our universe occupies what astrophysicists call a
'black hole.' Now he has elaborated this idea, suggesting that our universe
is a living entity, born from other universes and itself the progenitor of
more. His book gives the background science needed to explain and support
this idea.
According to present theory, the Big Bang happened about 15bn years ago.
Ever since then, the universe has been expanding. Everywhere one looks in
the sky, galaxies are flying away; the further off they are, the faster they
are receding.
Among the puzzles of the Big Bang is this: how, if the universe has expanded
smoothly from its initial fireball, did stars and galaxies form? Inspection
of the Big Bang's left-over traces of radiation in space suggested at first
that all matter in the universe should be spread out evenly. Yet, the
universe is 'lumpy'; visible matter has aggregated into stars and galaxies,
with what seem like vast tracts of space between. How did this happen?
The answer, devised within the past decade, is that visible matter (the
stars and galaxies) represents only 1 per cent of the true mass of the
universe; the rest consists of what physicists call 'dark matter.' This
mysterious stuff was not detected by experiment but is demanded by the
mathematics of cosmology.
One prediction by 'dark matter' theorists was that there should be
irregularities in the universe's faint background radiation left over by the
Big Bang. In April 1992, Cosmic Background Explorer, a satellite launched to
look for traces of the Big Bang, detected these ripples. They explain not
just the lumpiness of visible matter, but also its very existence.
To the COBE discoveries, Gribbin adds ideas from biology. Using the idea
that life is a complex process of self-replication, evolution, and
interaction, he suggests that just as Earth can be considered a single
living system (the 'Gaia' idea), so can a galaxy and even the universe
itself.
Gribbin suggests that our own universe might have been born from a black
hole in a different, earlier universe. Theories about what happened in the
first split seconds after the Big Bang allow that an entire universe can
appear from nothing; a 'quantum fluctuation' in the vacuum can be, as
physicists describe it, 'the ultimate free lunch.' Similarly, the
'singularity' of a black hole can generate a new 'baby universe,' possibly
different from its progenitor and thus evolving beyond it. Perhaps, Gribbin
speculates, a universe containing life, like our own, had to evolve from
many other more primitive forebears.
These speculations are exotic and sound fanciful; that, though, is
characteristic of the frontiers of science. I think Gribbin stretches the
concept of life in directions it does not go happily and makes too much of
some guesses in science. But, in the process of advancing his intriguing
speculations, he recounts a great deal of up-to-date science very readably
indeed.
