IF THERE was a reason why the US stock markets reacted so indifferently this
week to the news that Allied warplanes had bombed Iraq, it was that
investors were too busy kicking up a storm in the technology sector to
notice.
The huge gains earned by computer and related technology stocks this week
have energised Wall Street, fuelling talk that semiconductor and software
companies are rapidly becoming the new bellwethers of the market. A futures
trader in Chicago said on Thursday that Intel and Microsoft had replaced
General Motors and IBM as the best indicators of market performance.
Given that Intel and Microsoft have come from nowhere in the last decade to
challenge IBM's position as the company with the largest market
capitalisation in the US, and that both stocks are traded on Nasdaq's
electronic dealer-driven market and not on the New York Stock Exchange,
traditional home to the nation's blue-chips, the US equity markets appear to
be undergoing a quiet revolution.
The evidence is certainly there. The Nasdaq is now the world's second
largest stock market when measured in terms of the dollar value of trading.
Last year, Dollars 890.8bn of shares were traded on the market, almost
double Tokyo's total.
Although this was still some way short of the NYSE's Dollars 1,700bn, the
Nasdaq is catching up fast. Dollar volume grew by 28.4 per cent last year,
more than double the NYSE's growth rate.
In terms of the number of shares traded, Nasdaq is also coming up on the Big
Board's rails. More than 48bn shares were traded on Nasdaq last year,
compared with 51bn shares on the NYSE. It is even closer in terms of average
daily volume, which stands at 202m shares to 191m shares in the NYSE's
favour.
The story behind the figures is that more US investors are trading the stock
of smaller, fast-expanding companies which derive much of their growth from
technological innovation, and less are trading the big, established
industrial giants of the post-war era whose growth move ponderously in
synchronisation with the economic cycle.
Also, more investors are trading the new stocks via dealers who quote prices
on computer screens and trade over the telephone, as opposed to trading
through brokers who complete orders on pieces of paper with specialist
market-makers on the floor of the NYSE.
The shifting nature of equities trading can also be seen in the performance
of the various indices. Anyone glancing at the financial page this week
would have judged that the US markets were going nowhere in a hurry - the
Dow Jones Industrial Average rose about 16 points in the first four days of
trading and, at 3,267, is still 150 points below 1992's high. The Standard &amp;
Poor's 500 has fared only slightly better, and remains down on the year so
far.
Yet if someone was told that the Nasdaq's main index was as good a
representation of market performance as the Dow or the S&amp;P's 500, the
picture changes. The Nasdaq composite index has already risen three per cent
this year, to a new all-time high of 695.70 (Thursday's close). Daily volume
on Nasdaq so far this year has also been extremely high at 242m shares,
almost as much as the 249m shares recorded on the NYSE.
The message in all this seems to be that if you want to find out how
investors rate the performance of US companies, it is worth checking to see
how the Nasdaq composite is doing, as well as the Dow or S&amp;P's.
Yet this message should carry a warning. Many of the stocks that have lifted
the Nasdaq market to new highs are small, growth-oriented, technology-based
companies that are viewed by investors as excellent vehicles for
speculation. They like to buy them when the Nasdaq market booms, but they
are just as quick to get out at the first hint of a setback. As
beneficiaries of the market's 'hot money', Nasdaq prices are much more
volatile than their counterparts on the NYSE.
The recent rise in Nasdaq stocks already has the look of a speculative
rally, and a pattern is developing similar to last year. In the first
quarter of 1992, investors could not get enough of Nasdaq stocks, and the
composite index rose 6.3 per cent. The same stocks, however, suddenly fell
out of favour when the rally slowed and, in the second quarter, the
composite index dropped 7.5 per cent.
Do not be surprised if something similar happens this year. Analysts this
week were already warning that the Nasdaq market was looking a bit 'frothy'.
As one analyst put it: 'All of these stocks have come too far, too fast, and
will have a come-uppance at some point.'
Monday     3262.75 + 11.08
Tuesday    3264.64 +  1.89
Wednesday  3263.56 -  1.08
Thursday   3267.88 +  4.32
Friday     3271.12 +  3.24
