For innovators who have made their products attractive enough for the market
and want to expand, the search for funds can be frustrating. Enter the
'business angel', a successful entrepreneur who is probably over 35,
comfortably off rather than super-rich and dislikes publicity.
Angels are keen to use their money to help young enterprises which find it
hard to raise money elsewhere. With venture capital difficult to attract and
the UK government's Business Expansion Scheme diverted into such
non-productive areas as property, angels are eagerly sought out.
Business angels - the commercial equivalent of the Broadway angels in the
New York theatrical world - were first identified and defined in the US, but
clearly have a role to play wherever budding entrepreneurs look for capital.
The problem is they are hard to find. Thus matching the two sides is not
easy. Angels tend to invest near where they live or operate and often in
sectors they know something about. 'They know what they don't want to invest
in, but otherwise they are fairly open,' says Colin Mason, senior lecturer
in economic geography at Southampton University.
Together with Richard Harrison, management development professor at Ulster
Business School, Mason has studied the activities of business angels in
Britain. A recent paper by the two men suggested the informal capital pool
represented by angels could total between Pounds 2bn and Pounds 4bn,
compared with the Pounds 1bn or so a year invested by institutional venture
capital funds. Thus, they concluded: 'Business angels would appear to
represent a significant and under-utilised source of finance for small
business in the UK.' While they generally invest between Pounds 10,000 and
Pounds 30,000 in a business, a minority will put in more than Pounds 50,000.
British angels tend to invest alone, while many US angels work in syndicates
headed by an 'archangel'.
While angels may get a kick out of their investments, Mason stresses: 'They
are not philanthropists. They want a financial return.' Other factors do
play a secondary role, though. 'Sometimes, they may act partly out of social
obligation or altruism - this is more common in the US - but the fun factor
does come through.'
In the UK, around 15 per cent of angels' investments are directed towards
high-technology areas, far less than in advanced technology areas in the US
such as California.
Most angels are 'hands on' investors, says Mason. 'This means the business
is getting more than just money; it is getting the investor's skill, money,
knowledge and contacts.'
Those in search of angels' funds are more likely to find them if they are
based in the US, where their total is put at between Dollars 10bn (Pounds
7bn) and Dollars 20bn, rather than in the UK. Venture Capital Network was
set up in 1984 in the New England states of the US with business support. It
is now run as an affiliate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Clones of VCN have been set up in Canada and other parts of the US, though
not all have been successful. VCN operates as a computer-matching
information agency and not as a vetting or recommendation service. Mason
would like to see a similar operation in the UK, possibly funded by the
government which has already launched a pilot scheme.
Also keen for a more efficient way of introducing angels to technology
ventures is National Westminster Bank, which will undertake feasibility
studies aimed at doing this in Oxford and north-west England, regions of
heavy research and manufacturing activity. 'If this works,' says Peter Ives,
manager at NatWest's Technology Unit, 'we will do a national database.' The
EC is also looking at ways of putting European angels in touch with start-up
and early-stage companies seeking funds.
However, the relationship between entrepreneurial investors and young
companies is not always angelic. Sometimes business angels become
overbearing and disruptive. Then, they are called 'devils'.
