BEFORE 1993 gets too far under way, it is a good moment to reflect on the
disappointing state of financial reporting - and for those involved to
resolve to try harder this year.
After two years of corporate collapses against a backdrop of accounts that
provided their readers with all too few clues of what was to come, it would
be hard to deny improvements must be made.
The last few months have brought considerable change, notably through the
work of the Accounting Standards Board, the Financial Reporting Review
Panel, the Auditing Practices Board, the joint ethics committee of the
professional accountancy bodies, and the Cadbury committee on corporate
governance.
But more work needs to be done. Here are a few suggestions for those who
produce accounts - and for those who use them.
Finance directors and their boards. Both logic and the law - which do not
always correspond - suggest that directors are the individuals responsible
for preparing a company's accounts and ensuring that they show a 'true and
fair' view.
All too often, the question 'Where were the auditors?' is unfairly posed -
if only by those tempted to seek legal redress against professionals with
deep pockets - when blame should be more correctly focused on those within
the company.
Directors have the power, the access, the information and the responsibility
to act on behalf of shareholders as custodians of the assets of a business.
It is their actions which determine its direction and management.
Yet the level of financial literacy is often poor. A survey by KPMG Peat
Marwick last year suggested that one-third of managers did not understand
the meaning of the profit and loss account.
Auditors and accountants. The secretive world of the accountancy firms
becomes especially close-lipped at the mention of professional incompetence,
complacency or complicity. But accountants cannot be allowed to escape a
good share of the blame.
Legal obligations, professional guidelines and years of training should all
help them to ensure that accounts are accurately prepared and fairly
presented for the benefit of their real client: the shareholder.
Yet all too frequently auditors treat the directors of the company as the
client. It is the board which sacks, appoints and pays the auditors, meets
the audit partner, negotiates the wording of the audit report, receives the
management letter and hears details that never reach the ears of the
shareholder.
That places auditors under commercial and personal pressures that sit
uneasily with their impartial role, particularly at a time when accountancy
firms have become more business-oriented, marketing-driven and competitive
with one another.
Privately, auditors will talk about the fear of being sued or of losing the
client at least as much as about whether they agree with the treatment of
the accounts the directors request.
A tendency towards out-of-court settlements denies the public the details
surrounding auditors' judgments and actions. Even so, some embarrassing
evidence is now beginning to come to light.
It is more difficult for auditors to defend themselves when they have given
unqualified opinions on the growing number of accounts now being censured by
the Financial Reporting Review Panel.
The government. Accountancy is too important to be left to accountants. But
legislators seem to believe it is either too boring or too technical to
warrant their attention.
They have persistently turned their backs on the subject and left the
profession to draw up standards and to regulate itself. That may seem a more
efficient approach, but it risks pandering to self-interest.
There is little legislation covering financial reporting. What there is has
tended to be introduced only in response to compliance with EC directives.
It is inconsistent, incomplete and often inflexible.
There is also little case law to set precedents and give guidance. If
nothing else, clarification should be provided on what the Companies' acts
mean by 'a true and fair view'; and there should be a re-examination of the
Caparo judgment on the nature of auditors' responsibility. And too little
attention has been given to the question of whether it is desirable for the
profession to be the ultimate - and potentially unlimited - target of legal
action after every crash.
Analysts and institutional investors. Skilled readers of accounts cannot be
directly blamed for the figures that are presented to them. But they must
take responsibility for sloppy interpretation - particularly when they are
handling or advising on the use of other people's money.
There is little doubt that there are wide variations in analysts' ability to
read and understand accounts. Why else do company share prices so often seem
to drop after accounting changes - which are purely presentational - are
announced?
The attention analysts and investors pay to short-term returns and to the
bottom-line earnings figure has also played a strong part in encouraging a
superficial reading of accounts - and the manipulation of the figure by
companies.
Professional investors and analysts must also share blame for not lobbying
for reform more actively. Very few submissions for or against proposals
suggested by the Accounting Standards Board have come from City investment
institutions and brokers, for instance.
Standards-setters and watchdogs. Historically, standards have clearly
allowed far too much flexibility. All that is changing with the work of the
Accounting Standards Board, which has been widely welcomed. But the ASB's
honeymoon is coming to an end. This year will see how far it can face up to
opposition on controversial issues such as intangible assets, acquisition
provisions and valuations.
Critics have started to point out ambiguities with its new financial
reporting standards on cash flow and the profit and loss account. Companies
have begun to squeeze through loopholes in the recent rulings of the ASB's
urgent issues task force.
There are questions over the speed with which the ASB will be able to tackle
the vast number of topics demanding reform. It plans to introduce only two
new standards this year; its full agenda could well stretch through several
more economic cycles.
Financial journalists. Those who write and broadcast for a wide audience of
investors cannot escape from criticism. Time pressures and lack of
specialist training limit coverage of financial reports and accounting
issues.
The availability of comprehensive preliminary results has led to a tendency
to pay little attention to the final, audited annual accounts a few weeks
later. Often, vital clues to a company's subsequent problems can be found in
the notes to the accounts - yet these receive only cursory scrutiny.
Individual investors. Recent surveys of private shareholders have shown that
few have any faith in the quality of information published in accounts. Yet
an equally small proportion appears to understand the details that they
contain or to spend time studying the most important parts of the accounts,
such as the notes.
Large numbers of investors have elected to receive the grossly insufficient
information which is contained in the summary financial statements companies
are now allowed to circulate in place of full accounts. Does this really
provide a satisfactory basis for investing?
