THERE have been two unaccustomed reminders this week that Mr John Major's
government can now lay claim to the occasional political strength among its
all-too-manifest weaknesses. They came from Mr Kenneth Clarke and Mr Douglas
Hurd.
On Tuesday Mr Clarke offered few insights into how the substance - as
distinct from the rhetoric - of his chancellorship will differ from that of
his predecessor.
Even for a government so familiar with policy U-turns, the constraints
imposed by Britain's budget and trade deficits and by the gloomy world
outlook do not allow for radical policy shifts. Over time, Mr Clarke's
priorities may well turn out to be distinctly different from those of Mr
Norman Lamont. But in the short term the policy changes will be at the
margin.
His typically unconventional performance was important nonetheless. In
casting himself as a character in a DH Lawrence novel, Mr Clarke sent an
important message to the government's disgruntled supporters. After a long
excursion into theoretical debates about the relative worth of monetary or
exchange rate targets, economic policymaking is to re-enter the real world
of jobs and living standards.
Reassurance of a different kind came from Mr Hurd. The easy elegance of the
foreign secretary stands in stark contrast to the rough-edged populism of
the chancellor. But there is a common denominator - instinctive political
skill.
So, after the ravages of Maastricht, Mr Hurd yesterday had soothing words
for MPs on the European Community's agenda for next week's Copenhagen summit
and beyond.
His message was straightforward. Britain is not alone in suffering from
post-Maastricht depression. Anyone who has followed the pronouncements in
recent weeks of Chancellor Helmut Kohl or those of the new French
administration of Mr Edouard Balladur will understand that.
Belgium, which assumes the EC presidency next month, will continue to fight
the cause of federalism. It will do as much as it can to hold up the
enlargement of the Community to include Austria, Finland, Sweden and Norway.
So will some others. They might even manage the odd 'Britain isolated'
headline with a rhetorical ambush at the autumn summit planned to salute
Maastricht's ratification.
But the political realities in Germany - Chancellor Kohl has one or two
domestic problems on his mind - and the Gaullist instincts of the new French
government had undercut decisively the integrationist reflex of the 1980s.
The economic impact of recession meanwhile had reduced to wishful thinking
the timetable for monetary union.
Britain's agenda - enlargement, subsidiarity (now a respectable word in
continental Europe) and intergovernmental co-operation - was now making the
running.
It all sounded pretty convincing, even if Mr Hurd still shares the incurable
weakness of most at Westminster in underestimating the capacity of the
Franco-German axis to make trouble for Britain.
His skilful presentation to the foreign affairs committee also reinforced
the essential political point. For the last several years British domestic
politics has been dominated by two issues - the economy and Europe. They are
now being handled by the two most powerful members of the cabinet.
Mr Hurd and Mr Clarke also happen to share the same view of the world (the
latter ran the former's campaign for the party's leadership). Who better to
apply the patches necessary to hold together a bitterly divided party?
But like Mr Clarke, Mr Hurd is offering short-term respite rather than
medium-term strategies. By changing the rhetoric the chancellor has bought
himself time to consider options while economic recovery takes hold.
Similarly, the foreign secretary is cleverly exploiting post-Maastricht
exhaustion across Europe to sustain the impression that Britain can shape
its future.
For all the talk, though, of setting the agenda, there is a growing
realisation at Westminster that the government has opted for what used to be
called the European slow lane.
It has said the pound will stay outside the exchange rate mechanism at least
until 1996. In a few unscripted remarks in the Commons last week Mr Major
undercut the purpose of the Maastricht opt-out on EMU by indicating that,
whatever others decide, sterling will never be part of a single currency.
Britain is outside the Schengen group of France, Germany and the Benelux
countries. The government is defending stridently its social chapter
opt-out.
All this makes for relative tranquility on the Tory backbenches. But however
eloquent the exposition, Mr Hurd will find it hard to sell as a strategy
which keeps Britain at the 'heart' of Europe.
