IF YOU want to hang on to your Pounds 1m rather than simply spend it, where
should you invest it? The Weekend FT asked three private client stockbrokers
and an independent financial adviser for their views. The brief was to put
together a low to medium risk portfolio with the ability to draw a
reasonable income without jeopardising capital growth.
James Capel Investment Management
UK stocks are the clear favourite, with 62 per cent of the investment being
placed in the UK equity market. 'We believe there is scope for good returns
in the UK in the next year as earnings and profits come through,' says Simon
Corbett, head of UK private clients.
Risk is reduced through investment in large, good-quality companies such as
Bowater, BAA and Grand Metropolitan. Food and pharmaceuticals would also be
included. BTR and RTZ provide cyclical recovery potential, while Land
Securities and British Land are included to take advantage of recovery in
the property sector.
Of the utilities sector, British Gas, Severn Trent and East Midlands
Electricity should give growth and dividend increases. BT is regarded as
good value, with growth prospects in the telecoms sector. Prudential and
General Accident, the insurance companies, are selected for good yields and
HSBC for its growth prospects in the expanding Far East area.
Overseas holdings account for 21 per cent of the portfolio, with the US
having 7 per cent, Europe 4 per cent, Japan 2 per cent, the Pacific 6 per
cent, and emerging markets 2 per cent. The bond holding is in UK gilts (15
per cent) because of good yields and the lack of currency risk, and 2 per
cent of the portfolio is held in cash.
James Capel estimates the annual income from the portfolio at close to the
average market yield of 4.5 per cent, or Pounds 45,000 gross before charges.
For those wanting higher income, the exposure to gilts would be increased at
the expense of overseas markets.
Quilter Goodison
The UK market also underpins Quilter Goodison's portfolio, with 65 per cent
in UK equities, 20 per cent in overseas equities and 15 per cent in
fixed-interest securities to produce an average gross income of Pounds
40,000. 'In the short term, the UK market is concentrating on recovery
situations,' says Christopher Watkins, deputy chairman of the fund
management division.
'While they may have scope for further appreciation, in our view, this has
left many of the traditional growth stocks such as Glaxo and Unilever, and
others with high yields - for example, Bass, BATS, Argyll and Boots -
looking undervalued for the longer-term investor seeking good value.
'Utilities, banks and life assurance companies offer above-average yields
and good prospects for dividend increases.'
The overseas weighting is in managed funds. 'We are placing particular
emphasis on the Far East, Japan and emerging markets. In Europe, Italy and
Spain have their attractions following their devaluations but we would also
include France and Switzerland as having good long-term potential. In the
US, smaller companies are offering a satisfactory investment opportunity.'
Despite reservations about the size of the public sector borrowing
requirement, the fixed-interest element would be in gilts because of their
attractive real rate of return. 'Convertible stocks may be used to enhance
income if necessary, and overseas bonds where we perceive beneficial
currency changes,' says Watkins.
Cazenove Fund Management
There are two portfolios: one for the younger millionaire in his 30s, the
other for someone in his 50s. 'Our view is that equity returns in the
foreseeable future will, at least in the developed world, reflect the
prospects of low economic growth. Index-linked gilts offer an attractive
risk-free return as well as flexibility, and provide the sheet anchor of
both portfolios,' says Cazenove, which is aiming for preservation of capital
 -hence a relatively low annual income of Pounds 32,000 for the younger
millionaire and Pounds 35,000 for the older.
Both portfolios have a 40 per cent holding in UK equities but the younger
millionaire would have an additional 12.5 per cent invested in UK smaller
companies. He would hold 7.5 per cent in conventional investment trusts such
as Alliance, Scottish Eastern, Scottish Mortgage &amp; Trust, and Witan
Investment Company. One-quarter of the portfolio would be invested in
specialist overseas investment funds, with emphasis on the Far East and
emerging markets for growth. Index-linked gilts would account for 15 per
cent of the portfolio.
The older millionaire would hold 17.5 per cent of the portfolio in
index-linked gilts and 7.5 per cent in foreign bonds, for multi-currency
income and security at a time of low inflation. There would be no holding in
UK smaller companies. Conventional investment trusts would take 15 per cent
while 20 per cent would be in overseas investment funds, such as Cazenove's
own Pacific Portfolio fund.
Murray Noble
'Personal investors should move away from the traditional investment media
of UK, US, Japan and European blue chip shares because the risk reward ratio
no longer justifies their inclusion,' says this fee-based independent
financial adviser, which favours bonds over equities. It would also advise
switching out of sterling (because of its weakness) in favour of the franc
and mark.
Twenty per cent of the portfolio would be held in these currencies, offering
yields of over 7 per cent. Another 20 per cent would be put in index-linked
gilts and 40 per cent in European bonds. Murray Noble says German bonds are
particularly good value.
Only 10 per cent would be held in equities and this would be in emerging
markets (Latin American investment trust, Gartmore Emerging Pacific trust,
Turkey trust) because of the potential for growth. The final 10 per cent
would be placed in so-called 'angel funds' where private money is loaned to
established small businesses.
'There are a large number of businesses which have weathered the storm of
this UK recession and are in desperate need of funds,' says Murray Noble.
'Access to this capital is denied to them because of the shortcomings in the
UK financial system. In the US, angel funds plug this crucial gap, with
amazing results.'
An annual income of 4 per cent can be taken from the portfolio, but Murray
Noble says that drawing any more would jeopardise capital growth.
