INCINERATION is environmentally preferable to dumping waste in landfills,
the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution said yesterday.
The commission's report is likely to influence the environment department's
thinking about a levy on landfills - licensed rubbish dumps - to encourage
more recycling and incineration.
Sir John Houghton, commission chairman, said yesterday: 'Incineration under
carefully controlled conditions is likely to represent the best practicable
environmental option for such wastes'. He added, however, that some
incinerators had been unsatisfactory.
About 90 per cent of UK waste now goes to landfill, a small amount to
recycling, and less than 10 per cent to incineration. The cost of landfill
has remained low in the UK compared with continental Europe. That is partly
because the UK's excavation of aggregates has left many convenient holes
while local residents' objections have curtailed the spread of incinerators.
The commission argues that poisons leach out from landfill sites into the
water table, even with modern technology, and it regrets the department's
recent postponement of tighter rules for landfill operators.
Mr Don Reeve, a leading member of the commission, said it would back a
landfill levy to help shift the economic balance towards incineration. The
commission has found that landfill costs now range from Pounds 5 to Pounds
30 a tonne compared with incineration costs of Pounds 15 to Pounds 30 a
tonne. It predicts that landfill costs will rise by 2000 to between Pounds
10 and Pounds 45 a tonne because of a scarcity of suitable sites and tighter
regulation.
Incineration costs will rise in the same period to between Pounds 30 and
Pounds 35 a tonne, the commission predicts, excluding the non-fossil fuel
obligation, a government subsidy which is due to end in 1998. The commission
recommends extending some form of subsidy to encourage the development of
technologies to extract energy from waste.
It also argues that landfill, which emits methane gas from the decomposition
of organic material, could contribute at least three times as much to global
warming than incineration per 1,000 tonnes of waste.
Mr David Riddle, managing director of Cory Environmental, a leading
incinerator and landfill operator, said: 'I believe that the incineration
arguments are best for large volumes of waste, although in remote places
landfill may be best.'
Mr Malcolm Chilton, general manager of Mass Energy, a group specialising in
converting waste to energy through incineration, said that councils
anticipating rising landfill prices would be attracted by incineration
schemes.
Incineration of Waste. HMSO. Pounds 18.60.
