MR JOHN GUMMER, the environ-ment secretary, yesterday delayed planning
approval for an extension to the Sellafield nuclear fuel reprocessing plant
in Cumbria.
In his first big environmental initiative since taking office in May, Mr
Gummer directed Copeland Borough Council to withhold permission for the
project until the impact of the plant had been more fully considered.
The Pounds 300m plant would manufacture mixed oxide fuel (Mox) for nuclear
power stations using a number of ingredients including plutonium and
uranium. The plant would obtain plutonium from Sellafield's Thorp
reprocessing plant, the start-up of which has also been delayed because of
environmental concerns.
The government does not now expect to make a decision about the go-ahead for
Thorp until the autumn, and it is clearly not logical to embark on
construction of the Mox facility until Thorp's future is clear.
Copeland council, which wants the Mox plant, had received legal advice that
it would not have to prepare an environmental impact statement as long as it
consulted widely. But Mr Gummer told the council that he was considering
whether a statement should be made under local planning regulations.
Mr Robin Smith, the council's general manager, said last night that Copeland
supported the plant because it would bring more than 200 jobs to an area of
high unemployment. Some 1,700 jobs had already been lost because of delays
in approval for the start-up of Thorp. 'Council members are very concerned
at this outside interference in the area,' he said.
Mr Gummer's action is further evidence of the dilemma facing the government
over the whole Sellafield site. Environmental pressure groups have been
fighting any expansion of the operations there - yet it is the main industry
in a very depressed area, and a potential export earner.
British Nuclear Fuels, owner of Sellafield, said last night that it would be
'inappropriate' to comment on yesterday's developments. However, the
state-owned company has already said that delays over Thorp are costing it
large amounts of money. BNF has argued that Mox represents one way of using
up some of the plutonium that will be extracted by Thorp.
The Mox plant would manufacture 120 tonnes of fuel a year. The original
schedule was for a start-up in 1997. A demonstration plant has already been
built at Sellafield and is ready to start work on orders from Switzerland.
