SALES of existing US homes fell sharply in February for the second month
running, but most analysts expect a recovery in the spring following a
recent surge in mortgage applications.
Sales fell 6.1 per cent last month to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of
3.55m, according to figures from the National Association of Realtors. This
followed a 6.4 per cent decline between December and January.
The fall since Christmas has wiped out most of the market's recovery last
year, leaving sales only 2.6 per cent higher than in February 1992.
The figures are notoriously volatile and contrasted with analysts' forecasts
of a modest rebound in sales following a weaker-than-expected housing market
in January.
The weakness last month was broadly based, with all regions, including the
west and south, reporting falling sales. This suggests the decline is not
fully accounted for by adverse weather conditions mainly afflicting the east
coast.
Economists at Merrill Lynch, the New York broker, predicted a strong sales
recovery from next month, reflecting a sharp increase in mortgage
applications in recent weeks after the decline in long-term interest rates.
Mr William Chee, president of the National Association of Realtors, said:
'More people are becoming convinced the recovery is here to stay. There is
substantial pent-up demand to be filled, due to consumer reluctance to enter
the market during the recession.'
Separate figures published yesterday showed a slight decline in state claims
for unemployment insurance to 349,000 in the week ending March 20,
indicating labour market conditions are improving slowly.
Federal Reserve Board chairman Alan Greenspan said there was some reason for
optimism that bank lending would improve, although problems remained, Reuter
reports from Washington.
In prepared testimony before the House committee on small business, Mr
Greenspan said there was some 'firmness' in commercial real estate markets
and surveys by the Fed indicated banks were feeling less cautious about
loans and risk-taking. Nevertheless, the effect on banks of 'excess optimism
in real estate in the 1980s is not. . . as yet behind us.'
