PHILLIPS AND Drew Fund Management, a 10.8 per cent shareholder in holiday
company Owners Abroad, is understood to have decided not to accept the
Pounds 294m hostile bid from rival Airtours.
The decision follows the news last Friday that Mercury Asset Management
would cast its 15 per cent shareholding behind Airtours
PDFM's decision will revive confidence in the Owners camp ahead of the close
of the bid tomorrow. Its loyalty could turn out to be the deciding factor
that narrowly allows Owners to retain its independence.
Both holiday companies will be anxious to see whether Thomas Cook, the
travel agency, enters the market to buy Owners shares this morning.
The German-controlled group and its sister, LTU, the German tour company,
have proposed a commercial tie-up with Owners and last week made a
conditional offer for 12.5 per cent of Owners' shares at 150p if the
Airtours' bid fails. At Friday's close Airtours' paper offer was worth
149.3p.
Meanwhile, Airtours is today likely to switch the focus of its attack. The
company will argue that shareholders should examine the likely shape of the
Owners' share register and the number of large shareholdings that would
overhang the market should the bid fail.
MAM and Airtours, with seven per cent of Owners' shares at the moment, would
be likely sellers as would other shareholders who assented the offer,
Airtours will argue. Up to about 20 per cent of Owners would be held by
either directors or Thomas Cook.
Mr David Crossland, Airtours chairman, said yesterday that this would
severely restrict liquidity and the Thomas Cook stake would effectively give
the Germans a blocking interest and control.
'The downside of an independent Owners Abroad is a frightening scenario,' he
said. 'The Germans are still trying to get control of a public company, and
a fairly substantial one, in England.' He added: 'Owners Abroad will end up
a satellite of the German company which will view it as bid proof.'
The Airtours' chairman said that the tie-up had been 'cooked up to spoil our
bid.'
Owners' advisers rejected the argument about the potential overhang. They
said Thomas Cook's tender would soak up some of the shares and that there
were buyers of Owners if its price fell. There could also be yield support
about 130p.
'People's understanding of Thomas Cook deals is much better now,' an adviser
said. 'Institutions and markets may re-rate Owners Abroad.'
