The trade and industry select committee will today publish its report on
British energy policy and the market for coal. It will provide stark proof,
if any were needed, of the scale by which the government has botched the
privatisation of UK gas and electricity.
Far from opening the industry up to the forces of competition, we have seen
uneven bargaining in the marketplace. At the same time a conflict has
developed between short- and long-term factors, commercial interests and
strategic priorities for the nation.
Having served on the committees for the gas and electricity bills as well as
on the trade and industry committee I have seen the government plough on
with measures which distorted the market and led inevitably to the present
mess.
The nation was understandably outraged and confused at the sudden
announcement on October 19 that 31 pits were to close and 31,000 miners and
tens of thousands of other workers faced immediate dole.
Three questions arose. How had this come about? Was there a cheaper way of
spending taxpayers money than financing redundancy and unemployment? Why
were we abandoning, perhaps irretrievably, such a large amount of our
indigenous coal reserves?
To see how this arose it is necessary to look back into the government's
privatisation programme. British Gas fought successfully to be privatised as
a monopoly, despite strenuous argument that it should be broken up for a
genuine market to develop. The company was referred to the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission as soon as it was privatised because of its dominance in
the industrial market. Ever since, Sir James McKinnon, the director of
Ofgas, the industry regulator, has been battling to open up a genuine market
for gas.
The opportunity to achieve this has been offered by the advent in the
electricity industry of combined-cycle gas turbine generation.
Eighteen months after gas privatisation, Cecil Parkinson, then secretary for
energy, told parliament he would not repeat the mistakes of gas
privatisation and would break up the industry. Yet his approach at the
outset was timid, and once it emerged that high costs and uncertainties over
reprocessing and decommissioning made nuclear power unsaleable, he was left
with a generating duopoly - National Power and PowerGen.
The regional electricity distributors, faced with two generators which owned
all the coal-fired power stations, were desperate to move into generation to
give them something with which to bargain. The dash for gas was on.
The coal industry was squeezed out of the market, and the generators refused
to be locked into major long-term coal contracts. British Coal, faced with
its own privatisation pressures, had no choice but to shut down pits.
The main market for coal is electricity supply. It does not have the
flexibility of oil and gas. Faced with new gas technology, a subsidised and
capacity-protected nuclear industry, subsidised French electricity, rising
imports of cheaper coal and environmental constraints, sharp decline was
inevitable.
Yet the industry is responding with new technology and changing working
practices. Its own forecasts and the assessment of independent experts all
say they can achieve world market prices within three to five years.
However, if the abrupt market change is allowed to work through, Britain
will not have the pits to meet the potential capacity, much of which will be
taken up by imports. With opening or re-opening a pit costing about Pounds
400m, reserves abandoned now will be lost forever. Had the government
liberalised the gas and electricity markets before privatisation, much of
the present debacle could have been avoided.
A generation ago there was a dash for oil that has left a succession of
white elephants - under-utilised oil-fired power stations. The gas stations
are unlikely to suffer that fate. But we desperately need a regime that
promotes genuine competition against a background that will secure a
strategic balance of a sensible and flexible fuel mix, the best use of our
indigenous reserves of all fuels and minimal long-term dependence on
imports.
The committee has had to address a serious short-term crisis produced by
ill-thought-out measures. British coal faces a strong challenge, but I
believe we have created a breathing space to address all these issues
without destroying confidence in any sector.
The author is Liberal Democrat trade and industry spokesman and member of
the trade and industry select committee
