English National Opera's new Lohengrin is the company's first since 1971.
The work is hard to bring off: an amply proportioned Grand Opera fairy-tale
about the eternal battle between Good and Evil beneath whose surface Wagner
has melded several potent myths dealing with the role of the artist in
society, the relationship of the sexes and (viewed through Freudian eyes)
the development of the individual psyche.
I suspect that now it is harder to bring off than ever, in a
feminism-influenced age suspicious of notions of Elsa-like feminine
innocence and Lohengrin-like spotless chivalry, a television-dominated age
out of tune with musical spaciousness and steady-paced unfolding ' and
vocally a post-heroic age widely deprived of the type of Wagner voices
(broad-spanning, truly mettled, pure and shining of timbre) on which so much
of the opera's peculiar atmosphere depends.
So the notable success of this new production lies in its nice balance -
simplicity and many-sidedness in the dramatic handling, a precise musical
flow established by the conductor, Mark Elder, which enables the drama to
work up a powerful, impressive, long-lingering resonance. This achievement
is more than the sum of its parts, as probably an ENO Lohengrin is always
likely to be: the orchestral playing and choral singing solid and finely
prepared but lacking the last ounces of radiance; the casting more on
'house' than international considerations; the finish of design made perhaps
even plainer than intended by economic stringency - here and there one
senses that an extra Pounds 10,000 added to the budget would have come in
mighty useful.
And yet in the first two acts of Saturday's opening performance there was no
doubt that the experience was taking strong hold (I have not encountered the
Coliseum stalls in such quiet, concentrated form for a long while). Act 3
began with a functional glitch during which the movement of curtains - a key
feature of Hildegard Bechtler's set design - seemed briefly possessed by the
spirit of Disney's Fantasia; the mood was unsettled for a while afterwards,
on stage as well as in the audience, and no doubt later evenings will
proceed more serenely.
Even then, however, the spare intelligence of Tim Albery's production still
exerted itself in multifarious fascinating ways. In line with the best of
this remarkable director's work - the recent Opera North Don Carlos, say, or
ENO Budd and Grimes - the modernity of the vision is remarkably
unprescriptive. The setting, with its economical yet architecturally
forceful outlines evocative of stony, sculptured texture, bold restriction
of colour, sensitive gradation of light (by Jean Kalman, a master of his
craft), and controlled massed groupings, permits response on many levels -
ancient and modern, 'mythic' and analytic, narratively straightforward and
psychologically probing.
The simpler pleasures of the opera are not scorned: the slow build-up of
tableaux, episodic pictorialism, romantic alternations of light and dark.
(There's even a real dove.) Neither are the thought-provoking ambiguities:
the choreographic embodiment of the swan and final resurrection of Elsa's
young brother show as much. The treatment of the main characters is as
reverberant as the experience of the principals will allow: which means that
the Ortrud of Linda Finnie, the most significant Wagnerian performer on
stage, accrues a controlled stillness and depth unmatched elsewhere.
This is not Lohengrin as postmodernist lecture-demonstration, but its
qualities encourage the audience-member to come to grips with the work in
all its rich and problematic aspects. Without Mr Elder, who has matured into
a Wagner conductor of genuine and palpable authority, one suspects that the
grip would have to be comprehensively loosened. Nothing in the shaping or
pacing of the work drew attention to itself; equally, nothing dragged or
sagged. The transitional middle-point of the middle act, a perilous moment
of possible Lohengrin tedium, was sustained as firmly as the previous
Elsa-Ortrud encounter had been.
All that the evening lacked was real beauty, and follow-through, of singing.
The Lohengrin, Elsa and King - John Keyes, Linda McLeod, Michael Druiett -
are all young singers of considerable Wagnerian potential and no less
considerable patchiness of technique; one longs for a Reginald Goodall to
arrive swan-borne on the scene and coach them into a more complete state of
'finish'. Miss Finnie's powerful mezzo is exercised to its limits: the
effect is dangerous, but in the event thrilling.
Malcolm Donnelly's Telramund is sound workaday, Christopher Booth-Jones's
Herald admirable. The clear, sensible new translation by Amanda Holden adds
greatly to the vividness of the performance, although a handful of betises
'from whence', indeed]' remain to be sorted out.
ENO at the London Coliseum: in repertory until December 29; sponsored by
Friends of ENO
