Any attempt to gather the world's nations and forge in clear language,
acceptable to all cultures, religions and traditions a 20-year programme for
government policies bearing on human beings' most intimate behaviour was
always going to be ambitious. But the International Conference on Population
and Development has, to the broad satisfaction of the vast majority of more
than 150 governments, managed to agree an international document which meets
this extraordinary goal.
There were reservations to words in the text from some Moslem countries and
the predictable objection of the Vatican and its staunchest Catholic allies
over abortion and related issues. But few in Cairo felt these had detracted
from the central thrust of the conference's document, which provides a
complex, and costly, global programme of action for stabilising world
population growth beyond the year 2000.
There is nothing new about the problem Cairo addressed. As the text's
preamble explains, the world's population will have risen from the present
5.6bn people to between 7.8bn and 12.5bn by 2050, according to low and high
variants of present UN projections. Only implementation of the text's
programme would keep population growth close to the low variant, it states.
What is new from Cairo ('revolutionary', according to some) is the shift in
emphasis in the means of stabilising population growth: away from a
mechanistic focus on sheer numbers and the simple provision of family
planning services towards a 'holistic' developmental attack on population
problems which places enhanced womens' rights at its core.
As the text puts it, the programme 'commits the international community to
quantitative goals in three areas that are mutually supporting', which it
states as 'education, especially for girls; infant, child and maternal
mortality reduction, and the provision of universal access to family
planning and reproductive health services'.
To the delight of the myriad womens' groups lobbying the conference, very
few states quibbled with the document's focus on the 'empowerment' of women,
even though such feminist language and the rights implicit in the term were
unfamiliar, even alien, to many states.
Far more contentious was the definition of 'reproductive and sexual health'.
For many Moslem countries this new concept was at first too laden with
connotations of licentiousness to be acceptable, and much of the
negotiations focused on stripping from this concept any offending
ambiguities while retaining what mostly western health professionals
considered to be a vital international definition of an essentially new area
of health care.
It was a shift, said one, from a focus on the 'plumbing' of reproduction to
a broader conception of maternal health and women's rights, along with an
acknowledgment of the 'pleasures sexual life can give'.
In the end, said one delegate, the Moslem participants 'totally understood'
the concept, and endorsed it. Indeed, western negotiators had nothing but
praise for their Moslem counterparts, notably Iran, Egypt and Pakistan,
which a European delegate called 'conscientious, trustworthy and informed'.
For the Vatican, and a handful of hard-line Roman Catholic states, however,
the concept of 'reproductive health' could be stripped of what, in their
view, amounted to endorsement of abortion. These countries stood alone,
since, despite pre-conference talk of an 'unholy alliance' between the
Vatican and some Moslem states, none took shape. Abortion in most Moslem
countries is, anyway, permitted when the mother's life is at risk.
The Holy See's chief intent in Cairo was to prevent the document from being
open to the interpretation that it enshrined a right to abortion. Its dogged
fight did at least succeed in keeping the issue at the centre of
negotiations all week, much to the chagrin of numerous developing countries
which had wanted the focus placed more firmly on the 'development' part of
the conference's title.
A whole week was spent anguishing over one paragraph (8:25), which stated
that while abortion should not be promoted as a method of family planning,
governments should nevertheless address it as an important health concern.
But Cairo closed with the Vatican's opponents claiming victory. As even one
Holy See delegate admitted ruefully, having had 30-40 states behind it
before the conference, it ended with just a handful of hardline allies.
Moreover, as Mr Nicolaas Biegman, Dutch ambassador to the UN put it: 'The
Vatican was not able to turn the spirit of the document, because its spirit
is individual choice and giving individuals the right to plan their families
in their own way, including with contraception'.
Whether such lofty concepts translate into action in the shanty-towns of Rio
or the slums of Cairo is the Dollars 17bn question - the sum the document
says must be devoted to reproductive health programmes worldwide in 2000,
rising to Dollars 21.7bn (Pounds 14.4bn) in 2015.
Donor countries such as the US, UK, Japan and others pledged more money at
the conference to such programmes, but the programme of action places the
burden of resources, some two-thirds of the total, on countries to provide
themselves. Whether this burden will be carried remains an open question,
particularly in the poorest countries where population growth is greatest.
But many at the conference argued that the nit-pickingly-argued language of
the document already would, in fact, make a difference.
According to Ms Susanne Rance, a member of the Bolivian delegation and head
of the Bolivian Reproductive Rights Committee, an internationally-agreed
text on 'reproductive rights' would provide a powerful shield for her own
non-governmental organisation and the Bolivian government against what she
said had been persistent attacks by the local Catholic church on their
family planning programmes.
'They had been arguing that our programmes were coercive. Now we can point
to the document and say these are fundamental health issues and
internationally backed,' she says.
Other delegates saw the worth of the conference in having simply forced more
than 150 countries to concentrate on their own population policies. 'It's
just bound to freshen every government's mind on the subject,' one Canadian
delegate said. 'That's achievement enough and had occurred before the thing
even opened.'
The effects of Cairo 94 cannot properly be assessed now, or perhaps until
the next UN population conference 10 years hence. One certainty is that the
world's population is set to grow by at least 90m a year until then. Whether
the Vatican's message will be so clearly heard then, above the millions of
new voices is perhaps less sure.
Editorial Comment, Page 19
