British Gas is expected to announce its first price increases for domestic
customers since 1991 today, in line with the current rate of inflation. The
company is also expected to increase standing charges which have not gone up
since 1990.
The move came after the company yesterday turned in a better than expected
third-quarter performance as its corporate restructuring programme gathered
pace.
The third-quarter after-tax loss of Pounds 164m on an historical cost basis
was well below the Pounds 180m-Pounds 240m range predicted by analysts. It
was also well below last year's third-quarter loss of Pounds 225m.
British Gas usually reports a loss in the third quarter, the period of
lowest demand for natural gas in its main UK market.
The price rises are likely to provoke some controversy after the government
yesterday signalled the introduction of legislation to open up the household
market to competition by 1998. British Gas has often warned that the removal
of its monopoly of supply to 18m households could lead to higher prices for
some customers.
The new price package is expected to include a system of discounts for
customers who pay by direct debit. These form the most profitable part of
British Gas's domestic business. Mr Richard Giordano, British Gas's
chairman, recently said he hoped to double the 3m users paying by direct
debit.
He said the massive corporate restructuring exercise to prepare the company
for competition was ahead of schedule.
About 7,000 jobs were eliminated in the first nine months this year, he
said. A total of 25,000 jobs will be shed over the next few years.
He said growing competition in those markets already liberalised and
regulatory pressures continued to hamper earnings. But the results so far
this year have benefited from colder weather and a drop in interest charges.
Operating profits for the nine months were Pounds 897m (Pounds 845m) on
turnover of Pounds 7.06bn (Pounds 7.08bn). UK gas supply profits rose to
Pounds 594m (Pounds 515m).
The sale earlier this year of Bow Valley, the Canadian oil and gas
exploration and production company, helped cut the nine-month net interest
charge by Pounds 70m to Pounds 197m.
The disposal of Bow Valley contributed to the fall of turnover in the
exploration and production division from Pounds 771m to Pounds 742m. But
operating profits of Pounds 143m (Pounds 146m) were hit only slightly.
Analysts said this reflected the relatively high cost of Bow Valley's
production. The division's remaining assets in the division were lower cost
and therefore more profitable.
Attributable profits for the nine months were Pounds 466m (Pounds 409m).
Earnings per share were 10.7p (9.5p).
Lex, Page 22
