Security and the desire for income are uppermost in many investors minds.
After years of high inflation and high interest rates which led to easy
double-digit returns in the building society, investors are only just
beginning to acknowledge that low interest rates are not an aberration but
may become the norm.
Fund management groups have been working hard to come up with products to
meet the desire for income, and this week the government pitched in with the
launch by National Savings of a Pensioners guaranteed income bond which pays
monthly income.
The fixed rate of 7 per cent gross for five years is the best on the market
for sums as low as the minimum investment of Pounds 500 (see Page IV). The
snag is that only those who are aged 65 and above can take out the bond and
there is a limit of Pounds 20,000 per person.
What should other investors do? James Capel and Newton are the latest in a
line of investment houses to launch products allowing investors to make
regular withdrawals to supplement their income.
Both have been careful to avoid the word income in their product titles,
since they cannot guarantee that stock market performance will be good
enough to replenish the original investment.
James Capel, which forms part of HSBC Asset Management, has branded its
product the 'Generator' Personal Equity Plan, while Newton's latest unit
trust is called the 'Distributor Fund'. How do they work?
The James Capel Pep is attached to its UK Tracker fund, which attempts to
match the performance of the FT-A All Share index. Investors either put in a
lump sum (the minimum is Pounds 3,000 and the maximum is the Pep limit of
Pounds 6,000), or choose to invest a monthly minimum of Pounds 50.
They can then select a payout capped at 7.5 per cent, which will be paid
directly into their bank or building society account on the 15th of each
month (those choosing the savings plan have to build up to the Pounds 3,000
first). The payout can be varied, so investors can choose to reinvest their
dividends for capital growth. Charges are an initial 5.25 per cent initial
with an annual fee of 1 per cent, compared to 0.5 per cent on the fund
itself, because of the extra administration involved.
The Newton unit trust is based on a similar idea. It allows investors to
select a regular 'distribution' of up to 9 per cent which will be paid
quarterly. There is a Pep facility at no extra cost beyond the fund's fairly
steep 6 per cent initial charge and 1.5 per cent annual fee. The fund will
initially have a 65 per cent holding in UK equities, 10 per cent in
international equities and a 25 per cent holding of UK and international
bonds.
Any fund paying out more than the current yield on the FT-A All-Share of
about 3 per cent is going to have to rely on the growth of the market to
maintain the original capital. Otherwise, investors will find that their
capital is being paid back to them as income - something which they can do
for themselves in the building society.
Newton says that it believes it will be able, over a three year rolling
period, to replace the value, in real terms, of the capital which is
distributed. James Capel says it has fixed the 7.5 per cent maximum on the
basis of UK equities producing a total return over the past 30 years
(1962-92) of 13 per cent per annum.
However, there is no guarantee that equities will perform as well in the
future. Indeed, the total return figure for the the previous 30 years
(1932-62) was 9.5 per cent per annum and it may be lower over the next
30-year period. If performance is not high enough, the fund managers will
have to work very hard to replenish the capital.
How hard they work depends on how much the investor has regularly drawn and
on the performance of the market. The schemes work best, as you might
expect, when the market is buoyant.
The danger is that if the market falls and investors continue to draw, say 9
per cent, from the Newton fund, they may erode their capital to a point
where it cannot be built up to the same level again.
In the early 1970s when yields were low but the stock market was performing
strongly, many investors flocked into unit trust withdrawal plans, which
allowed investors to take a fixed percentage from the fund. However, the
extent of the 1973-74 stock market crash meant that many investors,
particularly those who had chosen to make withdrawals of up to 10 per cent,
found that the value of their original capital was all but wiped out.
Unlike Hypo F &amp; C's High Income plan, launched last year, which pays out a
regular 10 per cent a year, the level of withdrawals in the James Capel and
Newton products is left to the investor. This has the advantage of giving
him the ability to turn off the income tap when the market underperforms but
it also places on him the responsibility to do so. The danger is that if
investors becomes dependent on regular withdrawals for their income, they
may find it impossible to cut back.
There is nothing inherently wrong with these schemes, and indeed they may be
useful in fulfilling many people's needs for income, so long as the investor
knows the risks and is happy with the general investment strategy of both
funds and with the track record of the managers.
