An onshore breeze carries a whiff of sewage to wrinkle the noses of
shipowners lounging at the yacht club on the Greek island of Andros.
Andros town, the capital, boasts a main street paved with marble and a
renowned modern art museum, but it lacks a waste treatment plant. Some
Andriot mansions have cesspits, but an estimated 80 per cent of the town's
waste pours straight into the Aegean Sea.
This does not amount to much in winter, when the population shrinks to
around 2,000. But summer is a different matter, with more than 15,000
visitors and expatriate Andriots packing the beaches at weekends.
'The outlets aren't close to places where people swim. But a municipality on
a wealthy island ought to have a sewage treatment plant,' says Mr Leonidas
Voulgaris, the mayor.
It was only after Andros was included in a European Union environmental
programme last year that plans for a sewage treatment plant were approved by
the government. The town council had already paid Dr100m (Pounds 274,000) to
lay a network of pipes. The EU will cover the Dr200m cost of building the
plant.
However, the project is now delayed by a 'not-in-our-backyard' protest by a
village close to the proposed site for the plant.
'It won't be an eyesore, and the outfall pipe goes 200m out to sea to dump
the waste 30 metres deep. But they're still raising objections,' says Mr
Voulgaris.
Andros's sewage disposal problems are typical both of islands and large
Greek cities. It has taken more than 10 years to build a sewage treatment
plant for Athens on the deserted islet of Psyttaleia in the Saronic Gulf,
together with an undersea pipeline to carry waste from the city. It is due
to start operating this autumn.
About 700,000 tons of industrial and household waste are dumped untreated
into the Saronic every year.
Another 20,000 tons yearly of oily slops from ships also end up there,
according to figures published by Anakiklosi, a Greek ecological group
acting as a consultant for the environment ministry.
'For three to five kilometres each side of the main outfall, the sea can't
sustain life and the seabed is covered with a thick layer of sludge
containing heavy metals,' says Mr Philip Kerkitsos, an environmental
scientist at the University of the Aegean. 'After the treatment facility
starts up, it will take 10-15 years for the Saronic to recover.'
For a country that relies on sun-and-sea tourism for much of its foreign
exchange income, Greece has been slow to develop an awareness of
environmental cost. Tourism earnings are projected at Dollars 6bn this year,
equal to the total forecast value of Greek exports.
However, attitudes are starting to change. The tourism ministry has launched
a campaign to check up on whether large hotels have switched on the waste
treatment plants they are required by law to install. Several hotels on
Corfu, which attracts more than 700,000 tourists yearly, have been fined for
pumping raw sewage into the sea.
A sizeable percentage of Greece's Ecu2.6bn (Pounds 2.04bn) share of the EU's
new Cohesion Fund is being set aside to build waste disposal plants. By the
end of the 1990s every town with more than 20,000 residents, together with
islands that attract tourists in large numbers, should have a sewage
treatment facility.
Yet even if foreign tourists have abandoned the Saronic, bypassing Athens to
fly direct to the islands, Greeks have few qualms about swimming in it.
About 1.5m Athenians - more than one-third of the city's residents - go to
local beaches every Sunday in July and August, according to an environment
ministry study.
The ministry is criticised by environmental groups for not carrying out
regular water quality tests on beaches near Athens and publicising the
results. On the other hand, ecologists appear to agree that away from
harbours, swimming in the Saronic is not generally hazardous to health.
Keeping the beaches free of litter is this summer's priority. Greece's only
manufacturer of beach-cleaning equipment is working round the clock under a
Dr150m environment ministry project to sweep 135km of beaches around Athens
and on nearby islands at least twice a week.
The company, Ram Europe, undertakes to pick up what ordinary rubbish
collectors leave behind, including cigarette stubs, peach stones and canned
drink stoppers. Mr Theodoros Redzos, general manager, says he worked out a
set of ecological criteria with the environment ministry so that 'plants
aren't disturbed, sand is not removed and the machines leave the shape of
the shoreline intact.'
