An apple a day keeps the doctor away. Eat your greens. A little of what you
fancy . . .
The dietary advice given by these ancient adages seems as fresh as ever
today. And it puts into perspective this week's row over plans by the UK
government to issue detailed new guidelines for healthy eating.
The food industry is lobbying the Department of Health to tone down draft
recommendations circulated by its Committee on Medical Aspects of Food
Policy (Coma), which it says are far more specific than current scientific
knowledge would justify.
Coma proposes, for example, that people should halve their weekly
consumption of cream from today's average of one tablespoon to half a
tablespoon. They should eat only one or two biscuits a day, rather than four
today. And they should allow themselves only three-quarters of a chocolate
bar a week.
On the positive side, potato eating should increase from two to three
'egg-sized potatoes' a day. And people should consume more daily bread: four
and a half slices rather than three today.
Mr Dominic Cadbury, chairman of Cadbury Schweppes, says he recently went
with the leaders of other UK food manufacturers to tell health ministers of
their concern at the way the government's nutritional policy was developing.
'The government is telling people what they should eat - and there is no
scientific or medical justification for that,' he says. 'It is now taking
the level of 'guidance' to absurd levels.'
Consumer groups, however, support the efforts by Coma and other government
health bodies to give the public more specific dietary advice.
'People have got the basic message that they should eat better food, but for
some reason they're not doing so,' says Ms Jeanette Longfield, co-ordinator
of the National Food Alliance, an umbrella organisation comprising 50 groups
from the National Farmers Union to the British Heart Foundation. 'Coma is
trying to give people more specific guidelines - which can only help them.'
Critics of dietary guidelines have made much of the apparent disagreement
between specialists about what makes a healthy diet - and of the way
nutritional fashions change over time. But Dr Mike Rayner, a researcher in
Oxford University's Department of Public Health and Primary Care, says
uncertainties have been exaggerated.
'There are still areas of doubt - for example about the benefits of eating
more fibre and cutting down on sugar - but there are also conclusions which
have not changed for many years,' he says. 'One is the need to cut down on
fats.'
Dietary targets have conventionally been couched in terms of nutrients. For
example, an influential 1992 white paper said the percentage of food energy
derived from all fats should be cut by 12 per cent by 2005 and the
percentage from saturated fatty acids should be reduced by 35 per cent.
Consumer pressure groups argue that nutrient guidelines must be translated
into more comprehensible advice about food servings. 'It's harder to be
prescriptive about foods than nutrients because portion sizes vary,' Dr
Rayner says. 'But messages about nutrients haven't worked because people
don't really understand them. A new approach is needed, even if the food
guidelines are not scientifically perfect.'
In the US, there is greater consensus about dietary guidelines than in the
UK. 'There was much controversy during the 1970s but that has died down and
now the argument is just about details,' says Dr Paul Thomas, nutrition
project director at the Institute of Medicine in Washington.
The Human Nutrition Information Service, run by the US departments of health
and agriculture, publishes a Food Guide Pyramid which goes further than
anything issued by the UK government. The Pyramid has building blocks
corresponding to the main food categories, each with a recommended daily
intake.
The 'bread, cereal, rice and pasta group' forms the Pyramid's broad base,
with 6-11 servings a day. Recommended guidelines for fruit and vegetables
are 2-4 and 3-5 servings respectively. For fats, oils and sweets - the foods
at the tip of the Pyramid - the recommendation is 'use sparingly'.
Dr Thomas says the US industry 'varies in its enthusiasm' for dietary
guidance of this sort but is not campaigning actively against it.
The UK equivalent of the Pyramid is the Plate, launched last month in a
Health Education Authority leaflet. It does not explicitly recommend how
much to eat, though it says that the proportions of different foods on the
Plate reflect the balance people should aim for. Fruit and vegetables take
up 30 per cent of the plate, while fatty and sugary foods are squeezed into
10 per cent.
For Mr Cadbury and other UK food manufacturers, the Plate principle is
unacceptable.
Why then do nutritionists think it is worth trying to influence what people
eat? Because statistics show that at least a fifth of all deaths are linked
to diet, says Dr Sheila Bingham, senior scientist at the Medical Research
Council's Dunn Nutrition Centre in Cambridge. The best estimate is that 30
per cent of heart disease in the UK is caused at least partly by what people
eat.
The nutritional picture is not wholly gloomy. The rapid rise in sales of
skimmed milk, low-fat dairy products and lean meats shows that the message
is getting through to increasing numbers of people.
At the same time, however, consumer groups point out that the ever
increasing availability of cheap, unhealthy manufactured foods means that
people need more and more information and will-power to eat well.
Ultimately, genetic research will probably come to the rescue. Within 20
years, it may be possible to test everyone for genes that make them
susceptible to particular diseases related to diet. If so, nutritionists
will be able to abandon their general messages and formulate a healthy diet
for each individual. Until then, the sensible course is to ignore food fads
and follow the maxim that variety is the spice of life.
