Sir George Russell, chairman of the Independent Television Commission, has
urged the government to make up its mind as quickly as possible on whether
to go ahead with Channel 5.
In a letter to Mr Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary, he warns that
there is a limited window of opportunity for such a channel and that the ITC
wants to decide next month whether to re-advertise the franchise. More than
a year ago the ITC turned down the only bidder for the channel, mainly on
the grounds of inadequate investor commitment.
If a decision to try again is taken next month it would create at least the
possibility of a new television channel, capable of reaching three-quarters
of the population, being on air by the end of next year.
The decision on the future of a channel encouraged by the 1990 Broadcasting
Act has become tangled in a net of passionate arguments about the future
technology of broadcasting, the ambitions of the Department of Trade and
Industry's industrial hopes for digital TV, and powerful vested interests.
At the heart of the argument is the debate over whether it is wise to go
ahead with the last possible national television channel using existing
analogue technology or whether all available spare frequencies should be
reserved for the rapidly advancing digital technology.
Nearly everyone involved in the dispute acknowledges that all television
pictures will be digital one day. By turning television pictures into a
stream of digits, the language of computers, the pictures can be compressed
and at least four channels squeezed into the space presently occupied by
one.
The debate is over the cost and pace of change and, above all, over what can
be offered economically to attract viewers to new digital services given the
public's multi-billion pound investment in television sets.
Many engineers believe the crossover period  - when new services and the
traditional channels such as ITV and BBC1 will have to be broadcast
simultaneously  - could be as long as 15 years.
There is disagreement among engineers over the extent to which an analogue
Channel 5 would pre-empt the development of digital services. Mr Gary Tonge,
ITC controller of engineering, believes the effect would be marginal.
A decision is on hold until the Radio Communications Agency completes a
study on the issue for the DTI, which has control of frequency allocation
and a strong interest in promoting a new digital television industry.
Supporters and detractors are lining up in a predictable way.
ITV is expressing interest in new digital channels mainly because it wants
to kill off Channel 5, which would compete for advertising revenue. The BBC
is taking its traditional stance: if there is to be a new world of digital
television with several hundred television channels the corporation would
like to be part of it.
The British Radio &amp; Electronic Equipment Manufacturers Association is
against Channel 5 using existing technology because it wants to sell the
digital technology to consumers. The Incorporated Society of British
Advertisers is equally adamant that there should be a conventional Channel 5
to provide more competition for advertisers.
Perhaps the most powerful argument of all has come from Channel 5
Broadcasting, one of the consortia planning to bid for the licence if it is
advertised.
Channel 5 Broadcasting brings together Time Warner, the US media giant, MAI,
which controls Meridian the ITV company for the south of England, and
Pearson, owners of the Financial Times. Its business plan envisages spending
Pounds 600m on programmes over five years.
NBC, the US network company, has also expressed interest in putting together
a consortium to bid for the licence and there are almost certainly others
who have not yet declared their hand.
Earlier plans for Channel 5 envisaged using two channels, 35 and 37, now
used for tuning in video recorders. This would have meant an estimated bill
of Pounds 70m for retuning video recorders which otherwise would have
suffered from interference from the Channel 5 signal.
Work by the ITC and NTL, the former IBA engineering division, suggests that
using spare frequencies in some areas and different frequences for small
relay transmitters in others could reduce the retuning bill to between
Pounds 5m and Pounds 20m. This would virtually free channel 35, which could
be used for digital services, but only for single national ones with no
regional variations.
BBC engineers have been exploring the prospects of using these
'single-frequency networks' for extra channels but Mr John Birt, BBC
director general, is emphasising that no policy decisions have yet been
taken and that the BBC would be unable to fund future digital services from
the licence fee.
As Mr Philip Lavin, controller of BBC engineering policy, said at a
conference this week, it is relatively easy to introduce digital
transmission but ensuring widespread adoption of digital receivers by the
public is much more difficult.
He added: 'It is crucial to recognise that technical feasibility must not be
confused with commercial viability.'
