Ernesto Zedillo, presidential candidate of Mexico's governing party, comes
from the same cadre of US-trained economists that has dominated public
policy in Mexico over the past six years, so it is not surprising that he is
a staunch supporter of the pro-market economic and social reforms that have
marked the presidency of Mr Carlos Salinas.
Nevertheless, Mr Zedillo insists that if, as is probable, he wins the
election in August, there will be some significant changes in economic and
social policy. Mr Zedillo diplomatically says the current government has not
had time to embark on all the reforms necessary to make the economy more
efficient, and the country more prosperous.
In an interview, Mr Zedillo highlighted three areas where new policies could
be expected. However, he was careful to support the government's current
conservative macro-economic policy, and underlined his commitment to a
stable currency and low inflation.
Legal reform. Mr Zedillo called for a fundamental reform of Mexico's
notoriously inefficient and corrupt legal system. This is an issue that Mr
Salinas has hardly touched. But after the assassination of Luis Donaldo
Colosio, the late presidential candidate, and the rise in organised crime
highlighted by recent kidnappings, legal reform has become a central theme
of Mr Zedillo's presidential campaign.
Mr Zedillo said he would seek to modernise criminal laws, reform the
judiciary and police and change the role of public prosecutors in the
justice system. Judges, he said, should be more independent of the
government than they are now and more responsive to the public. He hinted at
some form of citizen or congressional input into selection of judges.
Mr Zedillo said that the absence of a strong legal system not only affected
the administration of justice but was an impediment to economic efficiency.
'I believe that one of the essential conditions of sustainable economic
growth is that a rule of law prevails. I am sure that respect for the law
will lead to more investment.'
Micro-economic reform. Mr Zedillo promised to continue deregulation of the
economy, which he believes has not gone far enough. 'Despite the efforts
that we have made in this administration, there are still regulations at the
national and state level that impede the flow of investment and obstruct the
productive process.' Specifically, Mr Zedillo pointed to a simpler tax
system to help medium-sized and small businesses, and significantly would
not rule out a change to the current restrictive federal labour law.
However, the candidate also talked about a more active role for the
government in business. He said that his government would do more to help
business train workers, acquire modern technology, and borrow at low
interest rates than has the current administration.
Democratic and governmental reform. Mr Zedillo insisted that it was
'indispensable to move ahead with democracy - it is an essential condition
for the development of the country.' Disagreeing with those who argue that
recent social and democratic reforms have contributed to current instability
in Mexico, Mr Zedillo said more democratic changes would strengthen the
government's capacity to govern.
Mr Zedillo proposed a decentralisation of Mexico's government, giving more
powers to states to run their affairs. In this he was following closely the
policies outlined by Mr Colosio, for whom he worked as campaign manager. Mr
Zedillo further said he believed that Mexico's impotent congress should be
given more authority to scrutinise legislation.
However, Mr Zedillo appeared to shy away from a reform of the Institutional
Revolutionary party (PRI), which many consider a critical step in the
democratisation of the country. He said: 'The problem of democracy is not
just of the PRI - it is a problem of all the society, of citizens of all the
political parties. What is important for democracy in Mexico is that there
is equitable competition between all the parties.'
Mr Zedillo seems determined to keep the PRI united in the run-up to the
election and apparently sees no contradiction between reaching out to the
more unsavoury elements in the party and promising more democracy. He
vehemently defended Mr Carlos Hank Gonzalez, agriculture minister, who has
been accused of using public funds to rally support for Mr Zedillo, saying
the attacks were orchestrated by the opposition to discredit the PRI.
While Mr Zedillo's campaign is more austere than those of the PRI in the
past, the competition between the political parties is hardly equitable. Mr
Zedillo far outspends opposition candidates and, unlike the others, flies
around the country in a private jet lent by a businessmen and enjoys highly
favourable television coverage.
