Sir, Paul Betts's article on European airline competition ('Struggle at the
airport gates', November 10), underplays one important dimension of the
issue. Fifteen months ago the European Commission appointed its 'Comite des
Sages' (Wisemen's Committee) to propose a way forward for Europe's
floundering airlines.
The Comite's report, widely hailed as a beacon for future development,
concluded that only elimination of state protectionism, and creation of a
genuine 'level playing field' in the European market, would force European
airlines to restructure to be cost-efficient, global competitors.
Shortly after the report was published, the Air France decision was released
 -paying lip service to the detailed Sages conditions, but qualifying each
with legal or bureaucratic nuances effectively to remove the teeth.
Take a few examples:
The report said: 'A privatisation plan must be in place.' The decision
acknowledges: 'Best efforts will be made for privatisation.'
The report said: 'There must be a published independent assessment of any
restructuring plan before implemention.' The decision: 'Has no prior
independent assessment.'
The report said: 'The restructuring should be monitored by independent
experts.' The decision says: 'If the Commission considers it necessary.'
Of course the Sages' recommendations were not sacrosanct - the Commission
was free to accept, reject or amend the proposals. But what is regrettable
for Europe is that the objective analysis and pragmatic safeguards of the
Sages' report have been neatly side-stepped, and political expediency has
played a large role - the very thing which the recommendations sought to
overcome.
Unless the courts amend this decision, or new transport commissioner Neil
Kinnock revisits it, the liberalisation cause will have been set back five
years, and with it the thousands of jobs riding on the travel tourism output
and export revenue that a competitive air transport system can deliver.
Geoffrey H Lipman,
president,
World Travel &amp; Tourism
Council,
4 Suffolk Place,
Haymarket,
London SW1Y 4BS
