By the end of the decade, a new generation of telecommunications satellites
will provide global mobile telephone services, using lightweight
pocket-sized handsets for voice as well as data communications.
Plans for multi-billion dollar global satellite mobile communications
systems such as Iridium, Globalstar and Inmarsat-P are already well advanced
and on target to launch services beginning in 1998. Others, including
American Mobile Satellite, plan to launch satellite-based telecommunications
services in the North American market next year.
Satellites are not new to the telecommunications industry. Geo-stationary
satellites, which operate at an altitude of 22,300 miles, have played a key
role in fixed and mobile telecommunications networks since the early 1960s,
providing voice, data and video links over continents and oceans, maritime
and aeronautical communications where land-based systems are ruled out and
global positioning and tracking services for military and commercial
customers.
They also provide telecommunications facilities to geologists, journalists,
aid workers and others in remote regions of the world using briefcase-size
portable terminals, such as those supplied by Inmarsat, the London-based
74-member International Maritime Satellite Organisation. Inmarsat uses five
operational satellites to provide services to 40,000 customers, most of them
in its specialist maritime and aeronautical markets.
However, projects like Iridium and Globalstar are based on a new breed of
low-earth orbit (Leo) satellites which operate at altitudes of 400 to 1,000
miles. Because they are closer to earth than Geo-stationary satellites,
Leo-based systems will work with less powerful, smaller, lighter and cheaper
equipment.
But there are disadvantages. Leo satellite technology - much of it based on
Reagan-era 'Star Wars' research - is costly and largely untested. In order
to provide reliable global coverage, many more Leos are needed than would be
the case with their higher-flying counterparts which also means a large
number of launches, and an extended roll-out period. In addition, the
satellites themselves will have a relatively short life-span of five to
eight years for Iridium satellites compared with 10 years or more for
conventional Geos.
Undaunted, high-powered international consortia have unveiled proposals for
about half a dozen Leo-based mobile systems over the past few years while
other groups have announced proposals to build new wireless networks based
on conventional satellite technology. As a result, satellite communications
has become one of the hottest subjects in the global communications
industry.
Nevertheless, as KPMG Peat Marwick concluded in a recent study for the
European Commission, 'limits on finance and radio spectrum probably mean
that only two or three of the systems will ever reach the launch stage.'
Among the front-runners are the Dollars 3.4bn Iridium project, conceived by
Motorola, the US-based electronics group, and the Dollars 1.8bn Globalstar
project developed by Loral, the US defence group, and Qualcomm. Both Iridium
and Globalstar have crossed an important financing threshold by raising
initial finance from investors.
Iridium will be based on a 'constellation' of 66 small Leo satellites
weighing 1,500 lb ringing the earth at a height of 420 nautical miles.
Handsets for use of the system will be dual-mode, also allowing calls to be
made on the local cellular network where available.
When a call cannot be routed via the terrestrial cellular network, it will
be relayed to the nearest satellite, transferring between satellites if
necessary, before being beamed down through one of 15 to 20 terrestrial
gateways connected to the public telephone network or direct to its
destination.
A year ago, Motorola raised Dollars 800m from an international consortium,
including Raytheon, Lockheed and Sprint of the US, Bell Canada and 18
Japanese companies including Sony, Mitsubishi and Kyocera as a first stage
towards financing the Iridium project. More recently, a group of Indian
financial institutions agreed to invest Dollars 32m in Iridium and Comsat,
the US satellite operator, is understood to be discussing investing Dollars
70m to acquire a small stake in the project.
As prime contractor for Iridium, Motorola will be responsible for designing
and building the entire network and has a Dollars 2.8bn contract to maintain
and operate the system for five years after its commercial debut in 1998. By
then, Motorola's stake in the project is expected to have fallen from 34 per
cent to 15 per cent.
But Iridium is likely to face fierce competition from Globalstar which has
secured Dollars 275m of equity funding from another international
consortium. Globalstar's list of strategic partners now includes France
Telecom and Alcatel of France, Airtouch Communications of the US, Deutsche
Aerospace, Dacom and Hyundai Electronics of South Korea and Vodafone, the
UK-based cellular network operator.
The company is now in talks with satellite launchers including China's Great
Wall Industries. Two or three are expected to be chosen by the end of the
year. Globalstar will use 48 Leo satellites orbiting at 750 nautical miles.
It has been designed by Loral as a low-cost global access satellite-based
mobile telephone system. Globalstar telephones will be similar in size and
cost to digital cellular telephones and will be able to make and receive
calls anywhere in the world.
A key feature of the proposed Globalstar system is that all calls will be
set up and processed on the ground by a distributed gateway system. Loral
claims the ground processing not only permits a more efficient, less complex
and cheaper satellite network; it also uses, rather than bypasses, existing
communications carriers making it more attractive to them.
For example Vodafone, which has acquired a 10 per cent share in Globalstar
under a Dollars 51m agreement, will have exclusive use of the Globalstar
satellite service in the UK, Hong Kong, Greece, Denmark, Malta and
Australia. In Australia, Vodafone plans to use the satellite based service
to supplement its ground-based cellular networks - when a mobile phone
customer on the Vodafone network goes into an area that is out of range of a
ground base station, the phone can switch to satellite reception, ensuring
total coverage and reliability.
Inmarsat, which had originally planned to build its own Leo system, has
opted instead for a system based on a new intermediate circular orbit
satellites orbiting at 10,000km which it believes will overcome some of the
technical and other problems associated with Leos and meet the concerns of
some its members
The Inmarsat-P system will cost Dollars 2.4bn and be developed by an
affiliate company, at least 70 per cent owned by Inmarsat and its
signatories, which will also invite outside investment. It will use 12 to 15
satellites and be operational by 1999 or 2000.
To supplement revenues from voice traffic, most of these new satellite
systems also plan to provide facsimile, paging, computer data and position
determination services. This will bring them into direct competition with
another group of network operators that plan to use 'little' Leos to provide
non-voice telecommunications services and with Teledesic, a Dollars 9bn
satellite communications project backed by Mr Bill Gates, chairman of
Microsoft, and Mr Craig McCaw, of McCaw Cellular Communications, the largest
US cellular telephone company which was recently acquired by AT&amp;T.
Teledesics envisages 840 little Leos put into orbit 435 miles above the
earth. The system, due to come into operation by 2001, is designed to
deliver high capacity data, video and voice services worldwide using
receivers and small antennas installed in homes and businesses.
Just how large a market there will be for these voice and other mobile
satellite-based services by the end of the century is a moot point. The KPMG
study suggested that the value of satellite delivered mobile phone services
will reach Ecu10-20bn a year within the next decade.
Among the prospective network operators, Iridium expects to have 1.5m
subscribers by 2002 while Globalstar, which promises to be the 'low cost
service supplier', aims to have signed up 2.7m subscribers by the same date,
the bulk of which will be in rural areas and developing nations where wired
systems are not cost-effective.
