Indonesia's industrial revolution has not been without growing pains.
Strikes and demonstrations by factory workers have become increasingly
frequent since the beginning of the decade, and labour disputes have
occasionally turned violent.
The owners of export-oriented factories - for whom cheap labour is one of
the main attractions of Indonesia - are understandably concerned about
rising labour costs and the risk of unrest.
But employers are aware that Indonesian workers are still much cheaper than
most of their counterparts elsewhere in south-east Asia; and they know that
the lower-paid workers of Vietnam and China are starting to demand more
money for factory work.
Indonesia's fledgling independent trade union movement has found support
from a motley collection of allies, including liberal non-governmental
organisations from Indonesia and abroad who have helped to inform workers of
their rights, and the US administration, which has threatened to withdraw
tariff privileges from Indonesian exports to the US if Jakarta fails to
adhere to international labour standards.
Indonesian employers, most of them from the ethnic Chinese minority, have
also unwittingly contributed to the increasing strength of the local labour
movement; some have fuelled the resentment of workers by paying less than
the official minimum wage (currently Rp3,800 a day in Jakarta) or by
treating employees with exceptional harshness; one factory was reported to
have deducted Rp500 from workers' pay each time they went to the lavatory).
Trade unionists already proclaim two martyrs whose names are known by
industrial workers throughout the country: Marsinah, a woman labour activist
and watch factory employee who was tortured, sexually abused and murdered
last year (three of the company's employees were recently found guilty of
the crime but the men say they were forced to confess and the authorities
have been accused of a cover-up); and Rusli, a rubber factory worker whose
body was found in a river in Medan, north Sumatra, following a demonstration
in March that was broken up by riot police.
In April, thousands of Medan workers went on strike, and demonstrations
degenerated into rioting directed at the ethnic Chinese; one factory owner
was dragged from his car and killed before the armed forces restored order.
More recently there have been several strikes on the main island of Java.
The independent Indonesian Welfare Labour Union, established two years ago,
has led the struggle for higher wages and better conditions, but the
government has refused to allow the union to register and occasionally
arrests its officials. Instead, the government insists that workers must be
represented through the officially sanctioned All Indonesia Workers Union,
an organisation headed not by a worker but by a textile magnate who is also
a member of the ruling Golkar party.
Government officials argue that Indonesian workers are not sufficiently
educated to establish their own union and that an officially-controlled
union is justified by the need to maintain law and order. Mr Suwarto,
director general for industrial relations and labour standards at the
ministry of manpower, says: 'How can they organise for themselves without
being guided by the government?'
He adds: 'Here in Indonesia, if there are 50 people carrying banners, in
five minutes there will be hundreds and then thousands - and stone-throwing
 -because of unemployment.'
He acknowledges that the ministry sometimes has difficulties in enforcing
the minimum wage rules and other labour legislation, pointing out that there
are only 700 labour inspectors covering 147,000 companies.
Asked about allegations that employers routinely bribe inspectors to ignore
company malpractices, Mr Suwarto replies that it is impossible for the
government to act against corruption without proof.
Employers, meanwhile, have threatened to lay off workers if wages continue
to rise. They say Indonesian productivity is low and they normally employ
more people than they need as part of an informal social contract involving
low wages on the one hand and job security on the other. With 2.5m school
leavers entering the workforce each year, and an estimated 30-40m
Indonesians either unemployed or underemployed, factory owners say they do
not see much economic justification for increased wages.
The independent trade union (known by its Indonesian acronym as the SBSI,
not to be confused with the government-backed SPSI) argues that wages and
conditions should be improved both to provide workers with a living wage and
to ensure that labourers are treated in accordance with the international
agreements to which the Indonesian government itself has subscribed.
Trade unionists - and foreign businessmen - repeatedly refer to the fact
that whereas wages account for only about 7 per cent or 8 per cent of total
costs for a typical company in Indonesia, bribes for government officials
can account for between 10 and 30 per cent: the obvious way of pleasing
employees and employers alike is to abolish corruption and use the money
saved to raise wages.
The SBSI, which now claims to have more than 250,000 members, inevitably
finds itself straying into the political arena, confronting the government
on such issues as freedom of association (theoretically guaranteed in the
constitution) and the role of the armed forces (which are dominant in
politics and frequently intervene in factory strikes).
'My struggle is to build a strong civil society through a strong trade
union,' says Mr Muchtar Pakpahan, SBSI leader. 'Only a strong trade union
can balance the domination of the military.'
Should the government attempt to close down the SBSI, he says, 'I will
organise a rally to topple the government if the government acts against the
law and against the constitution.'
Some military leaders have likened the SBSI to a subversive communist
organisation, and the Indonesian government may be tempted to emulate its
counterparts in Malaysia and Singapore by suppressing the independent trade
union movement. Even if that happens, Indonesia is unlikely to be able to
resist domestic and international pressure for higher wages and better
working conditions.
This was one of topics raised by the International Labour Organisation's Mr
Heribert Maier, who called for a new Indonesian labour code based on ILO
principles during a recent visit to Jakarta. As he said in a speech to
Indonesian officials: 'The events of the last few years, months or even
weeks in the country have shown quite clearly that the evolution of its
industrial relations has not kept pace with its rapidly developing economy
and industry.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                         STRIKES 1988 - 1992
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Workers     Hours
Year       Number     involved      lost
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
1988         39         7,545      69,213
1989         19         4,245      27,454
1990         61        31,234     316,590
1991        130        64,474     534,610
1992        197        98,764   1,044,519
1993        169        97,807     857,845
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Indonesian Government/US Embassy Jakarta
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
