Documentary credits are well-established as a way of making payment for
export sales, yet fraudsters still successfully swindle sellers, buyers and
banks. Because of the difficulties in stopping or recovering international
letters of credit (l/c) payments, early preventive steps - before deals are
concluded - will provide the only effective safeguard.
Under the documentary credit system, the importer's bank gives an
irrevocable undertaking to pay the exporter against presentation of shipping
documents. Provided the documents appear correct, the bank is obliged to
hand over the money and its customer has to reimburse it.
This can sometimes result in unscrupulous sellers obtaining full payment for
non-existent or sub-standard goods, and the buyer has to foot the bill.
Conversely, the banks can refuse payment, even though the goods are perfect
and comply with the export agreement, if only one of the documents does not
comply exactly with the letter of credit terms. Examples could be the
absence of an 'on-board' notation on a bill of lading specified in the
credit, or the issuance of an inspection certificate by a company other than
the one named in the letter of credit.
In cases such as this, a dishonest buyer may be able to obtain possession of
the goods and either resist payment altogether or hold out for an
unjustifiable price reduction.
According to the UK-based ICC Commercial Crime Bureau - a specialised
division of the International Chamber of Commerce in Paris - one such scam,
involving phoney sugar export deals in Central and South America, is
affecting businesses around the globe.
'Some cargoes being offered to buyers worldwide are often described as
'floating cargo'or 'outside quota' and at a significantly lower price than
the current market price. Buyers are required to present an ICPO
(Irrevocable Corporate Purchase Order) and put up a substantial amount of
guarantee,' says the bureau.
'On each occasion, enquiries . . .have found that the cargoes do not exist
and the proposed transactions are an attempt to defraud inexperienced buyers
and/or their banks. In some cases, money-laundering is also suspected,' the
bureau warns.
In other instances, fraudulent buyers - mainly in Nigeria - trick exporters
into shipping goods to them by forging worthless documentary credits. The
criminals usually request that goods be shipped by air freight; and, in some
instances, fraudulent bank drafts are also presented.
When the exporting company tries to claim payment, it discovers that the
bank which is said to have issued the l/c or the draft, knows nothing about
the transaction. Therefore, suppliers should contact their banks to check
the authenticity of documents before releasing goods, but exporters are
sometimes reluctant to do this for fear of losing what seems to be a genuine
order.
Exporters are also losing money through frauds on documentary collection
operations. Under this procedure, the seller presents the shipping
documentation to the importer through the banking system, and the bank in
the buyer's country releases the documents to the importer against payment.
The buyer needs to have these documents in order to obtain possession of the
goods. However, in some instances, dishonest buyers are able to obtain
delivery of the goods without payment by presenting forged documents to the
carrier or warehouse.
Mr Lin Kuo, assistant director of the ICC Commercial Crime Bureau, suggests
that companies can considerably diminish the fraud risk by applying a simple
four-part check list:
Know your customer as well as you would know your enemy. Companies should be
satisfied with the standing and integrity of the customer they are dealing
with before entering into any binding agreement. The customer's competitors
can often be the best source of information in this respect.
Never rely one hundred per cent on documents presented to you. The golden
rule is check, check and check again.
Remember, 'you never get anything for nothing,' and if the deal is 'too good
to be true,' it probably is, says the bureau.
In addition to informing yourself fully on the risks of frauds and
precautions that can be taken, make sure that your employees are also fully
informed and aware in these respects.
The agreement to effect payment on letter of credit terms is made between
buyer and seller when they strike their export deal. The importer then
instructs its bank to issue the appropriate documentary credit. Normally,
this is notified to the exporting firm through a bank in the exporter's own
country.
The exporter may do little more than glance at the incoming letter of credit
to ensure that the amount is right, and then file it away until the time
arrives to claim payment. However, if it subsequently discovered that the
seller's documents do not comply strictly with the credit terms, it is too
late to put matters right.
An importer who suspects that he may have been defrauded after the credit
has been issued and the goods have been shipped, usually stands little
chance of stopping the bank from paying. This is because courts in most
countries have held that bankers' irrevocable payment undertakings are
essential to the conduct of international trade, and should hardly ever be
interfered with.
In most instances, the buyer will be left with no remedy other than to sue
the seller for return of the money.
