Microprocessor technology has brought profound changes to the computer
industry, starting with personal computers (PCs) in the 1980s and working
its way up to the most powerful mainframe and supercomputers many of which
are now built around microprocessor chips.
As the inventor of the microprocessor and by far the largest manufacturer of
these devices, Intel has reaped most of the benefits of this trend. The
company earned a record Dollars 2.3bn last year, up from Dollars 1.07bn in
1992. Revenues grew by 50 percent to Dollars 8.78bn.
Strong demand for PCs is driving Intel's growth. However, the company is
facing intensifying competition both from companies that aim to 'clone'
Intel microprocessors and from others that hope to establish new designs as
the next industry standard.
The most immediate challenge to Intel comes from Advanced Micro Devices, a
Silicon valley neighbour and former ally that has developed clones of
several Intel microprocessors.
Intel and AMD have been battling in the courts over intellectual property
rights for almost a decade. Although some legal matters have yet to be
resolved, AMD has recently gained the upper hand. Meanwhile, AMD is
expanding its production of its 486 microprocessors, which match the
functions of some of Intel's top-selling chips.
AMD said recently that it plans to ship more than 900,000 486
microprocessors in the current quarter, up from 350,000 in the previous
quarter, and is aiming for a 25 per cent share of the world market for PC
microprocessors.
In a significant blow to Intel, Compaq Computer, the second largest PC
manufacturer after IBM, recently announced that it will buy, for the first
time, some of its microprocessor chips from AMD instead of Intel. The shift
represents a strong endorsement for AMD that could influence other PC
manufacturers.
Cyrix, another US chip company with ambitions in the Intel-compatible
microprocessor market, is also expected to increase its sales as a result of
a recent manufacturing agreement with International Business Machines.
IBM will manufacture Cyrix's equivalent of Intel's 486 and Pentium
microprocessors in 'non-trivial quantities,' the companies said recently. As
well as supplying these chips to Cyrix, under the five-year deal IBM will
also sell about half of the chips, either to its own PC operations or to
outside customers.
The agreement with IBM will significantly expand Cyrix's opportunity to
participate in the microprocessor market, said Mr Jerry Rogers, president
and chief executive of Cyrix. At present, Cyrix holds approximately three
per cent of the PC microprocessor market, compared with Intel's dominant
share of at least 80 percent. This arrangement has bruised Intel's
long-standing relationship with IBM. The companies have been technology
partners ever since IBM chose an Intel microprocessor for the first IBM PC,
thus establishing Intel technology as the standard for the PC industry.
A new entrant into the Intel-compatible microprocessor field is United
Microelectronics, a Taiwanese semiconductor manufacturer. The UMC chip,
introduced this month, is a relatively slow version of a 486 microprocessor
suitable for low-end PCs. UMC said that it expects sales of its new chip to
reach NTDollars 800m this year and NTDollars 2bn next year. The primary
target of UMC's efforts is Taiwan's large PC 'motherboard' industry. Dozens
of Taiwanese companies produce the main circuit boards that go inside PCs
for US and European computer companies.
Anticipating legal challenges from Intel, UMC said that it has filed
pre-emptive actions in Taiwan and France to challenge the validity of one of
Intel's key microprocessor patents.
None of Intel's competitors can, however, come close to matching its
resources. This year, for example, Intel is planning to spend Dollars 2.4bn
(Pounds 1.60bn) on new production plants and equipment and an additional
Dollars 1.9bn on research and development.
These investments will enable Intel to deliver new generations of
microprocessor chips that are smaller, faster, more energy-efficient and
less expensive to produce than those manufactured using today's
technologies, said Andrew Grove, Intel president and chief executives.
In the longer term, however, Intel's most formidable challenges may come
from alternative Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) microprocessor
designs. Apple Computer's recent introduction of Power Macintosh PC, for
example, represents the entry of a new microprocessor architecture into the
desktop computer arena. IBM is expected to follow, later this year, with a
new generation of PCs based on the same 'PowerPC' chips.
PowerPC was developed collaboratively by Apple, IBM and Motorola, the second
largest US semiconductor manufacturer after Intel. Together, IBM and Apple
aim to establish a 30 per cent share of the PC market for PowerPC by the end
of the decade.
PowerPC has a RISC architecture. Theoretically, this suggests that it may be
faster than Intel's microprocessors. However, PowerPC lacks the critical
base of application software that is available for standard PCs, based on
Intel microprocessors - and the PowerPC performance in commercial systems
has yet to be proven.
Another significant contender in the microprocessor race is Digital
Equipment's Alpha. Another RISC design, it is widely regarded as fastest
commercially available microprocessor technology.
Digital has introduced several products, including a powerful desktop
computer, based on Alpha chips. The company says that demand for these
products has been very strong, with sales increasing by 66 percent in the
latest quarter.
However, Digital has so far had limited success in winning support for Alpha
from other computer manufacturers. Broad support, both from computer and
semiconductor companies is an essential element of establishing a new
microprocessor standard.
Sun Microsystems has, for example, licensed several chip makers to produce
its Sparc microprocessors and recently reached an agreement to collaborate
in development of new, faster versions of the chip with Fujitsu of Japan.
The companies together plan to invest more than Dollars 500m over the next
five years on the design and development of new Sparc microprocessors and
related technologies.
Among the non-Intel microprocessor architectures, Sun's Sparc has achieved
the greatest market penetration to date.
Another contender in the microprocessor race is Hewlett- Packard's PA/RISC,
the technology at the heart of all of HP's computer products (except PCs).
HP now offers PA/RISC computers ranging from Dollars 4,000 desktop machines
to mainframe-performance systems.
In March, HP announced the latest version of PA/RISC with features
specifically geared to handle video and multimedia applications, which
typically require more processing power.
With competitors nipping at its heels, Intel is accelerating the pace of its
microprocessor technology development. The company recently slashed the
prices of its latest Pentium microprocessors and introduced new versions
that outperform the PowerPC chips used by Apple.
The strong momentum behind Intel's microprocessor technology will make it
difficult for any competitor to overtake the industry leader. However, it is
unlikely that Intel will be able to maintain its almost exclusive hold on
the PC microprocessor market for much longer.
