With subtitled films breaking out all over, it is time to start those
up-down-across eye movement exercises. Special agility will be needed for
the French dialogue (lots of it) in Krzysztof Kieslowski's Three Colours
Red, opening this week. The film rounds off the Polish director's tricouleur
trilogy with a piquant blend of comedy, mystery and garrulous
philosophising. The theme is 'fraternity', the setting Geneva. Irene Jacob
plays the young model who becomes enmeshed in the life of a retired judge
(Jean-Louis Trintignant) with a fondness for electronic eavesdropping. The
visuals are dazzling - look how the title colour is picked out in each scene
 -and the performances expert. But is there also a hint of deja vu in this
farewell movie, revisiting old themes, from Europe's top film-maker, who
recently announced his retirement?
At the London Film Festival, subtitles by the vanload. But three movies this
week make reading the bottom of the screen worthwhile. Ang Lee's Eat Drink
Man Woman is a delicious comedy of food and love from the Taiwanese who gave
us The Wedding Banquet. Neak Sre's Rice People is a powerful, tragedy-prone
tale of the land from Cambodia. And in Italy's Dear Diary,
comedian-filmmaker Nanni Moretti (best director, Cannes) hops between three
mournfully funny tales in the Woody Allen style.
To give us language-wrestlers a rest, British cinema is also well
represented. Highly spoken of: Danny Boyle's Glaswegian thriller/black
comedy Shallow Grave. Personally vouched for by me: Anna Campion's Loaded, a
spooky tale of psycho-gothic revelation. Oddest curio: Charles Massot's
Kabloonak, a movie about movie-making with Charles Dance braving the howling
Arctic as Nanook Of The North documentarist Robert Flaherty.
Finally, more Britishness on video. Four Weddings And A Funeral slips into
cassette form, even while our highest-earning film ever still coins it at
cinemas. The only subtitles needed here are for Hugh Grant's daffy hero, who
speaks with an upper-crust, oh-I-say accent that surely went out with P G
Wodehouse. Only the fact that he speaks it with such champagne brio
convinces us that we almost understand it.
