The chief executive in charge of the most profitable parts of Europe's 13th
largest company has recently been exiled to a simple corner desk in a noisy,
computer-crammed, open plan office in Solihull near Birmingham. His coffee
comes in a flimsy plastic cup, but only when he takes the time to go to the
dispenser. When sitting at his desk his every word can be overheard by
nearby workers.
Visitors seeing his plight could easily mistake him for the classic victim
of a boardroom coup, sent packing from his serene riverside suite in London
to a provincial outpost.
But Harry Moulson, managing director of TransCo, the pipeline and gas
storage company at the heart of British Gas, is merely making a statement
about cultural change at a company in the midst of a restructuring and
re-orientation exercise of a scale and complexity rarely attempted.
Three years ago British Gas was a stable, some would say stuffy, monopoly
utility steeped in a public service ethos.
Today, after a series of government reviews and bruising battles with its
regulator and would-be rivals, the chill winds of market competition are
increasingly being felt. In particular, British Gas faces upheaval in its
main domestic business and the prospect of a sharp drop in market share once
competition is phased in, beginning in 1996.
The scale of the management challenge is formidable - 'unlike anything ever
attempted by a big multinational oil company,' according to one industry
observer close to the company. On top of a radical corporate restructuring -
in which it will shed its integrated status, along with 25,000 jobs, a full
third of its staff - the company is trying to secure a premier position in
the rapidly evolving but intensely competitive international gas industry.
As Richard Giordano, its new American chairman and Cedric Brown, chief
executive, emphasised last Thursday, however, a new structure and strategy
are worth little unless there is a wholesale change in corporate culture.
For most of its history British Gas has been a deeply inward-looking,
strongly hierarchical organisation, with as many as '13 management and
supervisory levels between the chief executive and the guy who dug holes in
the streets', according to Moulson, whose unit includes Pounds 19bn worth of
gas pipeline and storage assets.
The hierarchical structure was built around semi-autonomous 'gas generals',
who ruled the 12 regions into which the UK business was divided. Many of the
generals' lofty corner offices and private dining rooms at the old regional
headquarters now stand vacant, their occupants having fallen victim to the
decision last March to disband the regional structure in favour of five
national business units.
But have the bureaucratic, anti-competitive attitudes ascribed to the 'old
guard' withered with their passing?
Many of British Gas's competitors remain sceptical. At least that is the
message conveyed in their public statements aimed at the politicians who
have yet to decide whether to put forward the legislation needed to turn the
government's commitment to competition into a reality.
Others who deal closely with the company, including Clare Spottiswoode,
director general of Ofgas, the company's regulator, insist that there has
been a cultural change, at least at the highest levels.
She notes that senior executives in charge of the various business units
often assume conflicting positions in negotiations with Ofgas, with, for
example, the trading side of British Gas lining up against TransCo
executives.
Spottiswoode, who believes cultural change at British Gas is a prerequisite
to the effective introduction of competition in the domestic gas market,
wonders, however, whether the competitive spirit is being embraced further
down the ranks.
Senior British Gas executives share her concern. One recently commented that
'middle ranking managers are scared to death' of the changes taking place.
That is not surprising, given the fact that all employees are having to
re-apply for their jobs as part of the restructuring.
But leading the rank-and-file to the new competitive world also flies in the
face of the company's history.
'Employee empowerment' is hard to sell to a workforce which 'has spent the
last 30 years in a command and control environment,' admits Moulson.
That style of management can be traced to Sir Denis Rooke, the strong-willed
chairman who served from 1976 until he stepped down in favour of Bob Evans
in 1989.
His tenure was marked by substantial technical and engineering achievements,
not least of which was the Dollars 1bn (Pounds 670m) conversion of 12m
households from manufactured coal gas to natural gas. At the time he
described the programme as 'perhaps the greatest peacetime operation in this
nation's history'. Sir Denis also helped to dispel public doubts about the
reliability and safety of gas as a fuel by emphasising a 'belt and braces'
approach to business.
Such an attitude befits a company in which serious failures can literally
blow up in management's face. But it also fostered a bureaucratic mentality
and an aversion to risk-taking.
'To avoid risks, you put in lots of traps,' says Moulson. He cites as an
example the long paper trail that until recently accompanied even the most
routine requests to authorise work on gas connections to commercial and
industrial customers. 'There were 28 handover points for the request, which
took an average of 27 days to process.'
That process has since been cut to six handover points within five days. But
other examples of the 'belt and braces' approach persist. A case in point is
the Central Area Transmission System gas terminal on Teeside, where the
first new connection to the high-pressure national gas transmission system
in 10 years is to be built. In the initial talks with the terminals
operators British Gas said it wanted to station a 10-person team in a
separate building on the site to oversee the connector. When questioned as
to why it needed such extensive facilities, British Gas simply said that was
the way it had always been done.
Steady persuasion by its partners eventually resulted in the company
acknowledging that the job could be done by one person sharing an office in
the existing administration building. Breaking down such entrenched
attitudes is a priority for the heads of the business units.
Moulson's decision to give up the private office and dining room may be a
largely symbolic gesture, but it sends a message that the old barriers to
communication between senior executives and their staff have come down.
'British Gas executives have traditionally not been very good at listening,'
notes Moulson. 'They were much better at telling.'
TransCo is well on its way to reducing the 13 management levels to just five
or six. But not all of Moulson's attempts to break down internal barriers
have succeeded. Many manual workers react to talk of 'empowerment' with
suspicion, even though Moulson tries to reassure them that it means nothing
more than 'having a go and trying different things'.
Many senior managers can also be uncomfortable with the more open style.
'All too often you ask someone what he thinks of an issue and the response
is: 'I can give you a paper on that',' bemoans Moulson.
The emphasis on 'openness' extends to TransCo's dealings with its customers,
which include the trading divisions of British Gas as well as the 30 or so
independent gas marketers. Last year many of the independents accused
TransCo of deliberately hindering their operations in the industrial and
commercial gas markets now open to competition. They believed it was part of
a campaign to block wider competition.
TransCo executives say those problems resulted from the speed at which the
competitors captured market share and from shortcomings in a technical
system which have now largely been overcome.
They also claim that the new commercial culture at Solihull has eradicated
the doubts and suspicions of all but a handful of the independents. They
concede, however, that many independents are less sure that the
anti-competitive attitudes have changed at the district level.
The transition from a cosy monopoly to the competitive market may be even
more wrenching for the 8,000 or so staff employed by Public Gas Supply, the
Staines-based business unit which will have to compete head-on with the
independent gas marketing companies when the domestic market of 18m
households is liberalised later this decade.
Mike Alexander, the PGS chief executive, is also cutting out many layers of
management. But unlike his counterpart at TransCo, whose workforce will
remain relatively stable, Alexander will have to slash personnel numbers in
order to come anywhere near to being competitive with the independents.
The need to cultivate a more commercial approach among PGS staff is if
anything more urgent, given the fierce competition expected from would-be
rivals.
In addition PGS, whose main function is to handle routine customer accounts
and complaints about their bills, is unlikely to find stability at the end
of the restructuring exercise.
Anne Hemmingway, head of the Southampton-based Southern division, says
employees often tell her what a relief it will be when the current round of
uncertainty over jobs and structural changes is behind them.
Her answer, she says, is always the same. 'What makes you think it's going
to to settle down?'
Senior PGS executives concede that instilling commercial attitudes in people
who freely admit that they joined British Gas for a quiet, orderly office
life and job security will not be easy.
'Our task is to get people buzzing,' says Hemmingway. That 'buzz' is evident
among the first supervisors in Southampton chosen to undergo a course that
will help them to 'allay the fears and stop the panic' among their more
junior colleagues.
In recent weeks they have spent most of their time in a room plastered with
posters extolling the virtues of customer care and employee empowerment.
They acknowledge that it may be a problem to persuade many junior staff to
take responsibility for even simple tasks, let alone convincing them to take
advantage of customer contacts as a possible 'selling opportunity'.
They also agree that many of their middle-ranking management colleagues may
not make the transition from supervisory roles to one in which the emphasis
is on 'coaching, counselling and assessing'.
It will be some months before executives know if the change in attitudes
which such words imply will take hold. There is little doubt, however, that
British Gas has at least begun the 'complete and radical transformation' of
the culture which Cedric Brown last week identified as a key to future
success.
