The collapse of Ireland's coalition government seemed inevitable last night
as Mr Dick Spring, the Labour leader, announced his resignation as deputy
prime minister.
He said the other five Labour party ministers would also quit the Fianna
Fail-led government after he accused Mr Albert Reynolds, the prime minister,
of misleading the Dail, the Irish parliament, about the handling of a child
sex abuse case.
A government confidence motion expected in the Dail this morning is now
likely to be defeated.
The political uncertainty, amid speculation that the country could be forced
to an early elections, has cast a deep shadow over progress on the Northern
Ireland peace process.
With a possible delay in forming a new administration, officials last night
acknowledged the negotiations between London and Dublin on the framework
document for a durable constitution would be put on hold.
There was even the possibility that the crisis in Dublin could cause London
to delay its undertaking to bring Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing, into
exploratory talks by Christmas. It almost certainly means the forced
rescheduling of next week's planned Anglo-Irish conference on the peace
process.
Mr Spring's decision came at the end of a day of high political drama in
which Mr Reynolds, in a last-ditch act of political contrition aimed at
regaining Labour support, had admitted a mistake in appointing Mr Harry
Whelehan, the attorney-general, as president of the High Court. Mr Whelehan
has been under fire for his department's failure to act for seven months on
a request from Northern Ireland to extradite a priest later convicted of
child sex abuse by a Belfast court.
Mr Reynolds last night seemed certain to go to President Mary Robinson to
seek an early dissolution of parliament and an early general election.
However, there was speculation that the president would use her powers under
the constitution to force the parties to create a new coalition within the
existing parliament.
One factor is likely to be a wish to do as little damage to the peace
process as possible.
Some elements within Fianna Fail were last night pressing for Mr Reynolds to
be replaced as leader ahead of the confidence vote, on the grounds that a
change might avert defeat. The favourite to replace Mr Reynolds under those
circumstances would be Mr Bertie Ahern, the finance minister.
Dublin was in a sombre mood yesterday after Mr Reynolds had struggled to
save his political career. In a 45-minute address to the Dail, Mr Reynolds
offered what he called the 'full facts, the unvarnished facts' on the
extradition case. He said he had acted unwisely in the appointment of Mr
Whelehan.
After three adjournments the Dail was in its fourth sitting when Mr Reynolds
conceded his error in the appointment and said he was unware he had been
given misleading information when he made a statement on Tuesday about the
sex abuse case. But Mr Spring said that the new evidence had been in the
prime minister's possession.
Labour pulls rug, Page 3
Unionists reassured, Page 10
Editorial comment, Page 21
