Ofgas, the gas industry regulator, yesterday broadly accepted a pricing
system proposed by British Gas for the use of its transportation and storage
facilities by commercial rivals and its own trading arms.
It will for the first time separate out the costs of sending gas through the
different tiers of the national gas grid.
The pricing system clears the way for British Gas to split, as required by
the government, its two trading arms - Contract Trading and Public Gas
Supply - from TransCo, the new name for the company's pipeline and storage
division.
As a monopoly British Gas has not needed to separate the cost of
transportation but the introduction of competition and the requirement to
separate the trading and transportation functions has required it to devise
pricing guidelines for all potential users of the system.
Ms Clare Spottiswoode, Ofgas director-general, said the 'proposals . . . are
a reasonable first step forward towards creating a more transparent and
cost-reflective pricing regime'.
There were fears last year that the introduction of the new method would
lead to transportation price increases of 20 per cent over three years.
Ofgas said yesterday that the new method would lead to a price cut of 2.7
per cent to users of the grid in October.
The watchdog accepts the 'long-range marginal cost' pricing method put
forward by British Gas but has 'reservations' that it could lead to 'large
price variations between regions', one of the most politically sensitive
issues associated with gas liberalisation.
It says it will limit such price volatility by imposing a curb on
fluctuations of more than 10 per cent.
It has also agreed to TransCo charging uniform prices on the regional
pipeline system, even though that involves a 'degree of cross-subsidy
between customers'.
British Gas and independent gas marketers say they will need to see an Ofgas
decision on how much TransCo will be allowed to charge for the pipeline
before they can fully assess the impact of the proposals.
That decision is expected by mid-month.
