The Rajang river, Malaysia's longest waterway, is a mile wide at Sibu, a
small town not far from the coast of Sarawak. Old tugs chug by, pulling log
booms to freighters waiting out at sea. Saw mills and plywood factories dot
the river's banks.
Sibu is the unlikely-looking headquarters for some of the most cash-rich
companies in Malaysia - those involved in the timber business.
Traditionally, these companies have been privately owned, tightly knit and
secretive enterprises run by Chinese Malaysian families. But times are
slowly changing.
Sarawak accounts for about 80 per cent of the world's unprocessed tropical
timber exports. Pressure by environmentalists and others has resulted in the
state making big cuts in logging, so companies that have grown fat on the
timber industry are looking for other investment opportunities. Many are
planning to put themselves on the stock market.
The Rimbunan Hijau group, based in Sibu, is among the world's biggest
tropical timber companies. It is run by the family of Mr Tiong Hiew King,
who is regarded as the king of Sarawak's timber tycoons. Various members of
the Tiong family are said to control timber concessions in Sarawak amounting
to about 800,000 hectares, an area about 10 times the size of Singapore.
Rimbunan Hijau's overseas timber operations are even bigger. Together with
several other Malaysian companies, the group has moved much of its logging
operations to the tropical forest of Papua New Guinea, where it is said to
have concession areas of nearly 2m hectares. Other log-hungry Malaysian
companies have been opening up operations in the Solomon Islands.
The wealth accumulated from the tropical timber industry is immense. Due
mainly to reduced logging activities worldwide, prices of most tropical
hardwoods have doubled - in some cases tripled - over the past 12 months.
Late last year, the Tiongs announced a MDollars 1bn (USDollars 387m), plan
to go public through a reverse takeover of the stock market listed Berjaya
Textiles, part of the Berjaya group, one of Malaysia's most aggressive
conglomerates.
Eager share traders have been licking their lips at the prospect of one of
the country's biggest privately-held enterprises moving on to the stock
market. Last year, the Kuala Lumpur market went up by 98 per cent. Some of
the most actively-traded stocks were timber-associated and much smaller than
the Tiong empire.
Mr Philip Ting, head of Sarawak Securities, the state's only broking house,
says that timber tycoons like Mr Tiong feel that they will gain
respectability by going public.
'The patriarchs who usually run these companies are also under pressure from
a younger, foreign-trained generation who want to introduce more modern
methods and use the company's resources to diversify - not merely to cut
down trees and sell them,' says Mr Ting.
This process has already begun in the case of the Tiongs. The family is
Malaysia's biggest plywood producer. It also owns a publishing business
which includes the country's largest selling Chinese newspaper. The Tiongs
have extensive property and plantation holdings and a 20 per cent stake in a
medium-sized bank.
Among the family's overseas assets are a large cattle ranch in Australia, a
timber mill in China and property in Singapore. A brother of Mr Tiong living
in Singapore is said to use the family holdings to trade in global equities.
Analysts say that families like the Tiongs feel that going public will
provide some insulation from political uncertainties and from the pressures
on their activities by environmental groups.
Sarawak is a very timber-oriented state. The state minister for the
environment is also head of one of the biggest timber companies. Mr Tiong
has built strong alliances with leading local politicians.
The Tiongs also want to insulate themselves from uncertainties overseas. The
activities of Rimbunan Hijau and other foreign timber companies operating in
Papua New Guinea have come under increasing official scrutiny.
Environmental groups say that the timber companies have accumulated too much
power and are resisting official controls on the industry.
Another problem for the timber tycoons is that Kuala Lumpur's bureaucrats
are taking a growing interest in the private concerns of the country's
wealthy particularly those involved in the logging industry.
'Timber companies have been getting away with too much,' said one finance
ministry official.
'Log export values have been understated or logs have been sold at a loss to
other family members in Hong Kong before being re-exported to Japan or South
Korea at great profit.'
In recent months revenue officials have mounted a number of raids on the
offices of Sarawak timber companies.
Malaysia's Securities Commission has frequently said that companies wishing
to go public must be prepared to divulge more about their activities.
A lack of transparency in some of Rimbunan Hijau's operations is thought to
be one reason for an official delay in approving the Berjaya deal.
'These timber companies have very large resources but if they stay private
there is only so much they can do,' says Mr Ting of Sarawak Securities.
'They see other Malaysian companies building big conglomerates and want to
do the same. The only problem is that a few family secrets have to be let
out of the bag.'
