<P>
Photo, 1989: Mayor Herbert Pfuhl poses high above today's Johnstown, Pa., which 
is observing the 100th anniversary of the second-worst disaster in U.S. 
history. The flood devastated the city and nearby mountain villages. Associated 
Press; Photo, 1889: BEFORE: South Fork Dam and its private lake before dam 
collapsed. ; Photo, 1889: AFTER: Survivors of flood stand near homes destroyed 
when dam broke. ; Photo, 'Every person was warned, oh, long before it broke. Oh 
yes, they were warned. Every time it rained, they said the dam was going to 
break and it didn't. And, of course, when it happened, why, nobody thought it 
was going to happen and nobody ran -- but us.' -- Elsie Frumm 100 YEARS AGO: 
THE JOHNSTOWN FLOOD 1. On May 31, 1889, a steady rain caused the earthen South 
Fork Dam to break, sending lake water swirling into the valley below.2. The 
first town struck was South Fork, where 20 to 30 houses were destroyed and the 
flood claimed its first victims.3. The raging waters were temporarily dammed up 
by a railroad viaduct. When the viaduct collapsed, the water broke free with 
violent force.4. The saw mill town of Mineral Point was struck with the renewed 
force of the wave. Thirty families lived on the village's single street, but 
when the flood passed, only bare rock remained. 16 died.5. A witness said the 
water by now was almost obscured by the debris, resembling "a huge hill rolling 
over and over" tossing up logs high above its surface. At East Conemaugh, 50 
died.6. As the river straightened out, the flood gathered speed and power. 
Woodvale was leveled. 314 died.7. The flood hit Johnstown with full force, 
bearing the remains of the Conemaugh Valley. The time was 4:07 p.m., 57 minutes 
after the dam had broken. Hundreds more died. Stranded people floated on a huge 
jumble of debris measuring 30 acres consisting of trees, telegraph poles, 
buildings, and trains. This pile jammed at a stone bridge in Johnstown which 
became for a time an island of safety, but the jam caught fire and 80 people 
died. FIVE WORST U.S. NATURAL DISASTERS ; Map, 100 YEARS AGO: THE JOHNSTOWN 
FLOOD, Associated Press ; Table, FIVE WORST U.S. NATURAL DISASTERS; Map, 
Johnstown 
</P>
