SHROPSHIRE farmers, like their counterparts throughout the UK, are feeling
the strain. Markets for their products are increasingly clogged. The level
of subsidies is declining as the European Community seeks to bring its
agricultural support under tighter control and prepare for a dismantling of
farm subsidies under any agreement which may be reached with the
international trading community within the framework of the GATT talks.
What sets Shropshire aside from other counties is the diversity of its
agriculture. Unlike, say, arable Lincolnshire, it is genuinely mixed. On the
plain, in the north and north-west of the county, there is emphasis on dairy
farming. The eastern side is largely arable, but in the hill country of the
south and south-west beef and sheep farming predominates. Holdings tend to
be smaller where the ground is higher, along the Welsh border, and larger
further to the east. For the most part they have shared in increasing
mechanisation and higher productivity.
But within this general and geographical pattern, changes are taking place
under the influence of the external pressures which are gradually changing
the shape of the industry. Because the tight economic policies followed by
the UK government coincide with the particular farming problem that more is
produced than the markets can absorb, and because many farmers are
over-capitalised, financial pressures are forcing a drift off the land. In
many cases, income is the same in money terms, and hence less in real terms,
than it was four years ago.
'There is growing unease,' says the county council, 'amongst the rural
community that the continuing reduction in farm income and investment in the
rural activities is causing major difficulties. As yet, little exists in
statistical terms ng.'
Certainly there are manifestations of difficulty. One is the effect on the
local food processing industry, which has seen farm co-operatives in
difficulties and the closure of of the J. P. Wood plant at Craven Arms and
the Dairy Crest plant at Ellesmere. Such closures are only partly offset by
the decision of, for example, Muller of Germany, to establish a yogurt plant
at Market Drayton. The overall problem is that cash drains out of the rural
economy and affects the fabric of support businesses, such as retail, farm
machinery and transport.
The declining rural economy has led to diminished competition for labour and
this has had a significant effect in making Shropshire wage rates among the
lowest in the UK. In turn this creates social problems, not least the
concern about the availability of affordable housing in rural areas.
At the same time, financial strains in the industry hasten changes in the
shape of farming. There is a trend towards the consolidation of farming
units. This has been happening for some years, but now, in the dairy sector,
some four per cent of producers are leaving the industry each year. And the
process is likely to speed up. 'The trend towards having less farmers will
be intensified over the next year or two unless there is major change in EC
or national support,' says Mr Bill Hall, regional business management
adviser at the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service.
Further, the problems of the industry and, indeed, their mixture with the
more general national process of decentralisation from the conurbations,
have led to volatility of land prices. The market for farm land has been
distorted by the desirability or otherwise of the residence which happens to
be on it and by the ability to sell milk quotas.
Depending on the area of the county, land prices vary from Pounds 1,200 to
Pounds 3,000 an acre. A milk quota is worth roughly Pounds 0.35 a litre, so
that at the top of the market land with a milk quota may reach Pounds 4,000
an acre. But, Mr Hall comments, 'there is quite a lot of land not finding
buyers at the asking price.'
The desire of the affluent in urban areas to move into the countryside is in
some cases changing the pattern of land ownership in rural Shropshire. The
process has not gone as far as it has in the Thames Valley or the Cotswolds,
but there is, for example, a growing number of Wolverhampton businessmen
among farm owners. On one hand, the opening of the M54 motorway into
Shropshire has opened up the possibility of commuting to Birmingham and the
Black Country towns, while on the other parts of the county are within reach
of the North Wales corridor.
All of this points to a rural economy in the process of change. The problems
of the sector have led to a greater concentration on diversification and
this is advocated with increasing urgency by the ministry of agriculture,
the Agricultural Development Advisory Service and the local authorities.
Such diversification is taking the form of providing facilities for tourism,
the development of specialised products - cheeses, ice cream and so on - and
a certain expansion of organic farming. The horticultural sector is not
well-developed, although is a long-established business based on direct
selling to the public in the areas adjacent to Wolverhampton and around
Shrewsbury.
But the desire to widen the scope of the rural economy by attracting new
forms of commercial activity that sit easily with the acknowledged charm of
the Shropshire countryside has been hindered by the lack of serviced land
outside the immediate area of Telford. This is not an area of activity in
which the private property development sector has shown much interest. Hence
the decision of the County Council to go ahead and provide such sites with
its own funds near, for example, Shrewsbury, Market Drayton and Bishops
Castle.
'Once serviced land is in place, the private sector will come', officials
said confidently. But that, presumably, will be after the recession.
