THE WORLD'S large computer manufacturers have become used to rehearsing the
superficial reasons for the present crisis in the information technology
business, a malaise which has brought many of the best-known names in data
processing to the brink of disaster.
These include:
The spread of open systems, computer networks based on standard industry
components which cannot command the gross profit margins inherent in
proprietary designs. The gross margin built into a mainframe computer sale
can be 70 per cent or more; for PCs and workstations, it can be less than 30
per cent.
A seemingly never-ending decline in the cost and growth in the power of data
processing equipment which has further squeezed manufacturer's margins. A
high performance workstation can cost less than Dollars 1,000 for every
million instructions per second (mips) of computer power. Mainframes
typically cost more than Dollars 100,000 per mips. For many, but not all,
tasks it is possible to substitute low cost workstation power for mainframe
power.
The growing importance of service suppliers and systems integrators who put
together hardware and software from disparate sources to satisfy their
customers' requirements. New competitors for the traditional industry as a
result of this change include management consultancies such Anderson
Consulting and Price Waterhouse as well as software houses and value added
resellers.
A slackening in demand for computer systems which has been apparent in the
US for some time and is becoming evident in Europe. The reasons are complex;
they include saturation in some areas of the market, dissatisfaction with
the results of continued computerisation and, in the UK at least, high
interest rates.
The effects of these changes have been shattering for many companies. In the
US, Unisys, the result of a merger between Sperry and Burroughs only five
years old, lost Dollars 436.7m in 1990 and suspended payment of dividends on
both its common and preferred stock in an attempt to reduce debt which stood
at Dollars 3.7bn at the end of that year.
In Europe, Groupe Bull, the French state-owned manufacturer announced a loss
of Pounds 700m for 1990 and said the French government had agreed to provide
Pounds 400m in capital support to the company over 1991-92 in addition to
Pounds 270m earmarked for research and development into Bull's open systems
designs.
Unisys and Bull are simply the most spectacular victims of the sickness
affecting the industry; almost every mainframe or minicomputer company in
the US and Europe is demonstrating declining profitability if not actual
losses.
Earnings per share at IBM, the world's largest computer company, for
example, have been on a plateau for six years now. The company has spent
more time and money than most over the past three years in attempting to
bring its expenses into line with sales, but earlier this month it shook the
stock market with a warning that its sales in the first quarter of 1991
would be significantly weaker than expected; Wall Street analysts were
downcast after the company's apparently strong recovery in 1990.
The key to what is happening is the uneven nature of the picture. Suppliers
of PCs, workstations and high powered small systems have not been damaged to
anything like the same extent as mainframe and minicomputer manufacturers.
Compaq Computer, for example, the world leader in high powered PCs reported
sales in 1990 of Dollars 3.6bn, up 25 per cent from 1989, while net income
was Dollars 455m, up from Dollars 333m the previous year. Its growth was
chiefly driven by international sales, up 54 per cent, while revenues grew
only 5 per cent in the US.
Apple Computer, a PC pioneer which has tended to go its own way in
technological development, had comparatively stagnant sales and earnings in
1990, but began a spectacular turnaround after the launch of new,
aggressively priced computers featuring its proprietary 'Macintosh'
technology.
Pyramid Technology of the US which makes high performance mid-range
computers using the 'Unix' operating system increased revenues by 93 per
cent last year and its pre-tax profits by 110 per cent. The Pyramid machines
are colloquially described as 'Unix hot boxes'; for prices between Pounds
34,000 and Pounds 500,000, they will outperform a mainframe. Other hot box
suppliers include Arix and Sequent.
New players are entering the industry, often from unexpected directions.
Nippon Steel, for example, the world's largest steelmaking concern has
developed notebook computers which it is marketing in the US and Europe as
part of a broad plan to diversify into computers and communications.
All of this is evidence that the traditional computer business is being
displaced by a new industry, with which it has little in common, as surely
as the traditional Swiss watching making industry was brushed aside by
Japanese electronic timepiece manufacturers.
This new computer industry has its origin not in traditional data processing
but in the semiconductor industry and its expression in PCs and
workstations.
The traditional industry is characterised by proprietary computer designs
which lock customers into individual suppliers; prices are set to yield high
gross profit margins which are used to finance substantial direct sales
forces. These are the primary conduits between the manufacturer and the
customer. Applications software is developed chiefly by the customer's own
software staff, perhaps with the help of a software house.
The new industry is very different. Machine designs are similar between
suppliers because they are based on widely available, industry standard
microprocessors. Most of the research and development work has been carried
out by the semiconductor manufacturer. Compaq, for example, spends about
half the industry average on research and development.
Because margins are so narrow, direct sales forces are economically unviable
and sales take place principally through 'channels' - dealers, software
houses, value added resellers and systems integrators. The key to success,
as in the case of Compaq, is a strong positive relationship with the
channel.
Operating software is standard - usually a variation of the Unix system.
Applications software is packaged, developed by software specialists who
prefer to write programs which will run on a wide variety of machines rather
than tie themselves to a single manufacturer.
The question, therefore, is whether the members of the old industry are
sufficiently flexible to become new industry players, or whether they are
doomed to extinction. Against this background, arguments about the value of
state aid to national champions appear increasingly redundant.
At present, most experts agree that only IBM is safe; it has the
determination, flexibility and, most important, the financial security to
change course decisively.
The future of the Japanese mainframe manufacturers, Fujitsu, Hitachi and
NEC, IBM's chief competitors is unclear. They continue to prosper in their
fast growing home market, but have yet to face the challenge of open systems
and networked computing which is causing their Western competitors so much
heartache.
Swiss watchmakers found salvation in fashion. An equivalent safe haven for
the traditional computer industry is not yet in sight.
