When Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission, assembled the
chiefs of the EC's civil service in March to lambast them for lack of focus,
he alighted on the head of the environment directorate to make his point.
'I want an environment policy, not endless packages for migratory birds,' he
is quoted as saying by one of those on the receiving end of the
tongue-lashing.
Only weeks later he appears to have got one - a policy, moreover, which may
square two and a half of the three circles surrounding the Community's
environmental effort.
This has enabled Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC environment commissioner, to
claim that 'we have reached a turning point in EC environmental policy . . .
a point where the environment and the single market are on an equal
footing'.
The claim seems large. Yet already there are signs of more streamlined
decision-making and greater effort to frame policies for all EC members.
Eventually, Brussels could have a much stronger hand in setting the 'green'
agenda. Controversially, it wants economic growth kept within bounds set by
what the environment can stand. As one example, the Commission would like a
'green tax' on all forms of non-renewable energy, to curb consumption.
Another concern for companies is the Commission's plan to get them to report
annually on their effect on the environment. Under current thinking these
'environmental audits' for industry would mostly be voluntary. But they
would be compulsory for larger companies in high 'eco-risk' sectors such as
chemicals and steel.
The edge of EC environmental policy is at present blunted by:
the normal requirement for unanimous approval of legislation by the EC
Council of Ministers, which tends to pull proposed standards down to the
lowest common denominator;
the consequential tendency of the richer, 'northern' member states to press
ahead unilaterally with stricter measures, which threaten to fragment the
single market;
the failure of the Community as a whole to match rhetoric - and even formal
policy - with action, classically instanced by member states' inability to
agree on a site for the European Environment Agency (EEA) which they voted
to set up a year ago.
Mr Ripa di Meana's optimism will be borne out only if the Commission's new
environmental offensive progresses on all three of these fronts. Brussels
has advertised this new determination by asking the member states to make
the Treaty of Rome 'greener'. It has asked the inter-governmental conference
on political union, which is revising the treaty, to change the rules so
that environmental legislation is decided by qualified majority vote in the
Council - as most single market directives already are. This form of voting,
instead of unanimity, requires a weighted majority, with the largest member
states commanding the most votes.
The Commission also wants the treaty to commit the EC to 'sustainable
growth', and to require environmental criteria to be integrated into other
Community policies. 'Never before has the Commission so clearly stated that
we have to get equal status between the environment and growth - without
which growth itself is put at risk,' the green bespectacled environment
commissioner enthuses.
If endorsed by the inter-governmental conference, the proposed changes in
voting requirements could raise standards significantly for legislation on
the environment. In strict procedural terms, the unanimity rule is waived
only when the Council decides unanimously it will vote by majority. 'I doubt
whether Jonathan Swift at his best could have thought of that particular
formula,' snorts Mr Ken Collins, the Labour MEP who heads the influential
environment committee of the European Parliament.
One Commission official says a change in voting rules will achieve a 'middle
common denominator', whereby environment provisions will be less quickly
'overtaken by time, events and technological developments'. He cited the
Commission's most glowing recent success: tight controls on car and lorry
emissions pushed through in the past 10 months. The parliament cajoled the
Commission into setting high standards and presenting them to Council as the
'harmonisation' of national regulations.
This device exploits a grey area in the treaty as amended by the Single
European Act. To use the device the Commission must prove that the
environmental measure it proposes is dealing with distortion of competition.
Four out of nine pieces of law examined by environment ministers in March
passed this test.
But despite this advance, member state challenges to majority voting are
becoming more frequent. The Commission's lawyers and the European Court of
Justice, moreover, monitor use of single market procedures for environmental
measures.
The UK, for example, may well challenge the Commission's choice of majority
voting for its proposals to standardise landfill operations for waste
disposal. This case poses the dilemma acutely. The Commission feels certain
it could not win unanimity for a worthwhile law. Yet under current provision
for majority voting, member states can ignore or go far beyond what is
agreed - creating the vision was designed to iron out.
But the success of the vehicle emissions legislation which emerged under
this procedure has yielded an interim, more richly-textured device, which
the Commission has adopted as its new policy framework. Its goal is to
prevent the richer and greener EC members with stricter rules from
contributing to a 'two-speed' Europe.
The new framework aims to bridge an EC north-south divide, reining back
states such as Germany and Netherlands, which have tougher standards, and to
lash forward countries such as Spain and Portugal which see less need for,
and can less easily affordsuch standards.
From now on, the Commission proposes a two-stage approach, modelled on the
vehicles emissions legislation: a first, compulsory package of laws,
followed by parallel, more stringent targets for the Community as a whole to
aim at, but which individual member states can progress towards at their own
speed. Fiscal incentives can be used to speed up the obligatory standards
and - only after these have been achieved EC-wide - to bring forward the
tougher norms.
The intention is to end the chaotic proliferation of national incentives
which are threatening to undermine Brussels competition policy. Germany, for
instance, has tried unilaterally to introduce vehicle emission standards
beyond current EC policy through tax concessions on cars incorporating
advanced catalytic converters. This would give such cars a price advantage,
and possibly constitute a barrier to imports of cars falling below these
standards.
Just as important, if some member states were to follow their own green
path, the credibility of a common environmental policy would be shredded.
This would undermine the Commission's ability to enforce viable measures on
the EC as a whole.
But the success of the automotive package, appears to be encouraging more
aggressive thinking inside the Commission on how to achieve a balance of
incentives and disincentives for environmental ends.
No one would accuse the ebullient Italian commissioner himself of thinking
small. His most ambitious project is undoubtedly for a mixed carbon and
energy tax, in line with the EC's commitment last October to stabilise
carbon dioxide emissions at their 1990 level by 2000.
When an embryonic plan for a straight 'CO tax' leaked two years ago it was
derided as lunatic. 'Then, I was just caressing it,' Mr Ripa di Meana
recalls fondly, 'but now, we have won the right to discuss it.'
In improbable alliance with Mr Antonio Cardoso e Cunha, the conservative
energy commissioner from Portugal, Mr Ripa di Meana has developed a more
rounded proposal which the European Council is to report on by July. His own
deadline for action is 'the other 1992' - next April's world climate
conference in Brazil, where a convention to combat global warming is
supposed to be signed.
The plan - which the Commission may still water down  - has been refined to
keep the 12 together, and to emphasise competitive advantage.
The core idea is that while a levy on fossil fuels according to their carbon
content would provide the greatest incentive to reduce emissions, it would
fall most heavily on coal, then oil, and last, gas, while not touching
nuclear energy. This would have an uneven effect across the EC, penalising,
say, Spain, while rewarding France's extensive nuclear capacity.
But a CO levy with a tax on non-renewable energy sources would even out the
effect, and could, the Commission believes, be introduced in a fiscally
neutral way by member states. The risk of the Community not acting jointly
is, once again, that Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands will go ahead with
their own, potentially market-distorting plans.
The second emphasis is therefore to sell throughout the EC the merits of a
so-called 'no regrets strategy'. This means it should have clear
shorter-term benefits, competitive and environmental, to compensate for the
scientific uncertainty about the long-term effects of global warming.
Mr Jos Delbeke, senior economist in the Commission's environment directive,
has listed the benefits for the Centre for European Policy Studies
think-tank. These included improved energy efficiency and security;
diminished acid rain; more efficient transport policy, and relief of traffic
congestion (which the single market will exacerbate); a catalyst to industry
to bring on line new capital goods and technology which uses less energy and
fewer raw materials. 'Japan has a comparative advantage in terms of
energy-efficient equipment . . . and that is the market of the future,' Mr
Delbeke underlines; a fillip for greater harmonisation of fiscal policy; and
greater macroeconomic convergence within the EC through common transport and
energy policies.
Nice balance would be needed, with offsets to ensure no loss of
competitiveness, Mr Delbeke stresses. 'It is not the idea to create
deserts.'
Balance of a different sort - the 'you-scratch-my-back' variety  - has
prevented the EC from agreeing on a location for the European Environment
Agency. France wants a deal on the location of the EEA (Copenhagen and
Madrid are front-runners) to be made conditional on confirmation of
Strasbourg as the permanent home of the European Parliament.
Mr Ripa di Meana's anger at France's de facto veto is matched only by his
scorn at her partners' refusal to dirty their hands in the dispute. Without
the EEA, many other of his legislative ambitions will be stalled.
The agency's core job will be to gather accurate statistics on the EC
environment. But it is also the key to a storehouse of measures, including:
'eco-labelling', a plan to institute an awards system for
environment-friendly products; and plans to introduce annual environmental
audits for industry. In the absence of these measures, national labels
following different standards, and voluntary audits without guidelines
allowing comparison, are proliferating. The EEA is also vital for regular
updating of existing directives, taking in technological advances member
states might otherwise incorporate on their own.
Mr Ripa di Meana says he will shortly be publishing a report on the EEA
fiasco deliberately intended to embarrass the member states. 'To have here
blackmail - and that is the word to be used  - is not acceptable,' he
vituperates. Harsh words, but the environment will not be seen to be on the
same priority level as the 1992 programme until battles such as those over
the siting of the EEA are won.
