OFFSHORE MAY have become a more respectable place, but a number of its tax
advantages have been whittled away. The latest move was announced in the
Budget, against offshore trusts.
Since 1981, it had been possible to set up an offshore trust to hold assets
 -shares, for example  - which could then be sold free of capital gains tax,
so long as the money remained offshore. If it was ever brought back to this
country, tax would be charged, but meanwhile, the trust assets could
generate income on the full amount.
Existing trusts will still be able to benefit, but only so long as no
changes are made and no capital is paid to a UK beneficiary. The proposals
also mean that it will not generally be worthwhile setting up a new trust.
An early victim of a Inland Revenue clampdown was the so-called roll-up
fund. Instead of paying out dividends to investors, roll-up funds would
accumulate them into the capital value of their shares. This turned a
potential income-tax liability into one of capital gains, which at the time
was cheaper.
This loophole was closed in 1984, when the Inland Revenue stipulated that
all gains - income and capital  - would be liable to income tax, unless the
fund qualified for what was called distributor status. The primary criterion
for this was that the fund had to distribute at least 85 per cent of its
income as dividends, on which investors would then be liable to income tax.
A more recent measure involved 'umbrella' funds. These are investment
companies that offer different classes of share, or sub-funds. Each is
invested in a different area, typically a range of international stock
markets, bonds and currencies.
It used to be possible to 'convert' shares from one sub-fund to another
without incurring capital gains tax. This was a significant advantage over
onshore unit trusts, where any switch, even between funds managed by the
same group, counts as a disposal.
Umbrella funds have since been brought into line, and conversions will now
incur CGT if the gains are above the annual exempt allowance, currently
Pounds 5,500.
So are there still reasons for the UK investor to look offshore? Yes,
indeed.
While tax-avoidance may have been more or less ruled out, tax-deferral is
still a useful possibility.
Take roll-up funds. Now that capital gains tax is charged at the same rate
as income tax, these are certainly back in the picture. There is still one
disadvantage - as all gains attract income tax, the investor doesn't have
the benefit of the Pounds 5,500 CGT allowance.
But on the other hand, tax is not payable until the investor sells his
shares in the fund. So the liability can be deferred until, say, a time when
his income-tax rate is lower. Better still, if he moves abroad, he may
escape tax altogether.
Distributor funds, meanwhile, leave the investor in much the same tax
position as an ordinary unit trust. But here again, there is a brief period
of deferral, as income is paid gross and the tax bill arrives later, which
may have cash-flow benefits. The one caveat is that distributor status is
applied for retrospectively - funds must submit their accounts to the
Revenue for approval at the end of the financial year. Failure could have
significant consequences for investors, which means in turn that funds are
likely to be ultra cautious in their operations.
The other reason for considering offshore funds is the variety of
investments they encompass. Although there are now over 1,300 UK authorised
unit trusts, there are still areas they do not cover; for example, property,
commodities, currencies and futures-and-options contracts.
This is due to change shortly, with wider investment powers being granted to
unit trusts, but offshore funds are likely to retain an advantage for a
while. First, several unit trust management groups are wary of moving into
these areas, which they see as carrying greater risks and more
administrative demands. Second, the offshore funds have experience and a
record.
Most of the funds that are readily available to UK investors are based
within Europe and offered by subsidiaries of well-known UK companies, such
as Fidelity, Schroder and MIM Britannia. With EC harmonisation, the
differences between these and onshore investments will inevitably blur.
Meanwhile, this could be a golden age for offshore investment, with
regulations in place to reduce risks, but still some tax and other
advantages for the canny investor.
