TECHNIQUES to monitor monetary growth across Europe will be vital to the
operation of the new European central bank, due to be set up during the
final stages of economic and monetary union (Emu). Officials at the Bank of
England, in conjunction with other European central banks, are working on a
novel, highly secret approach to this subject. The FT has stumbled upon a
Bank briefing paper on the project, part of which we reproduce here.
The European Aggregates Targeting (EAT) programme is aimed at finding
monetary indicators that will faithfully monitor changes in the pan-European
economy. That is no mean task, given the range of economic and cultural
conditions across the continent.
Britain's role in EAT can be traced to the mid-1980s. Disillusioned with the
performance of existing monetary aggregates, a small team of Bank officials
started work on a Grand Unifying Theory (GUT) of monetary targeting. The
group explored new thinking that went beyond conventional monetarist
economics. It drew on people skilled not just in this field but in
biochemistry, an area where Britain has a world reputation for innovation.
The GUT team's radical approach paid off with the theory that changes in the
UK money supply could be modelled on genetically-induced interactions during
the digestion of food. The influences of genetic programming on this process
were found to be similar to the way that factors such as wage claims,
unemployment and production efficiencies affect the money supply.
The practical relevance of the GUT ideas was established in a programme of
tests, which used human volunteers with a range of genetic characteristics.
Virtually all aspects to the trials were satisfactory. Outbreaks of
inflation were characterised in the GUT model by localised physiological
disturbences. Ingestion of specific foods accurately simulated external
economic shocks; lobster for an England cricket victory, rice pudding for an
oil-price rise and a well-grilled steak for a broadside from the Bundesbank
on price control.
More quantitatively, the studies held out the prospect of a new regime of
monetary indicators - code-named Biological Universal-Rule Parameters, or
BURPs - which would be far better than any previous monetary aggregates.
Mr Nigel Lawson, then chancellor, was elated with the project's success. But
Mrs Thatcher, then prime minister, was more sceptical; apart from her own
personal disagreements with Mr Lawson, she had little confidence in the
practical capabilities of UK biochemists, whom she had never forgiven for
failing to patent monoclonal antibodies.
After Mr Lawson resigned in 1989, the GUT work foundered - until Mr John
Major took over as prime minister and recognised its significance to Emu. Mr
Major, whose straightforward eating habits based around a liking for ice
cream and brown sauce are well known, was instinctively attracted to the GUT
concept. He also seized upon the work as a demonstration of how Britain
could use its capabilities in the monetary field to the benefit of Europe,
following up the UK's pioneering studies on the hard Ecu currency. After Mr
Major broached the matter over dinner with the other European heads of
state, EAT was born.
EAT has led to the establishment of several loosely linked projects across
Europe. Germany, France and Denmark have led the way with a joint effort,
the Strategic Alliance Aimed at Monetary Indicators (SALAMI). Italy has its
Provisional Attempt at Short-Term Aggregates (PASTA) project, while Spain is
working on the Critical Inflation-Target Reduction Scheme (CITRUS).
EAT has found that, despite the cross-border differences in genetic
programming and eating habits, the same basic theories hold across the
entire continent. Although it is too early to be sure, we can hold out the
hope that ultimately EAT will produce an all-encompassing monetary index for
Europe, provisionally labelled the Highly Operational Target Aimed at
Inflation Reduction, otherwise known as HOTAIR.
