After having seen the first part of Same Old Moon at the re-opening of the
Oxford Playhouse last month, one went to its arrival in London with the
heart somewhere between the knees and the boots. Yet it is amazing what hard
work and a better stage can bring. This is not another Dancing at Lughnasa,
and not only because Geraldine Aron does not write as well as Brian Friel -
it would be hard to do that. Ms Aron's piece also lacks the imagination and
the ability to create a world on its own that are so conspicuous in Dancing.
But, seen at the Globe, it is not a bad play.
The Oxford theatre is cramped and box-like, perhaps fatally so. The Globe
has space enough to illustrate the title. The moon shines on Dublin, Galway,
London and such faraway places as Rhodesia (as Zimbabwe then was) and
Australia. The question is whether it is always the same moon. One answer is
given by the Irish barman who turns on the wireless and hears of the
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbour. 'Always the same old news,' he says in
disgust as he turns it off. In other words, it depends on the way you look
at it.
Brenda, now beautifully played by Gabrielle Reidy with a confidence that the
same actress did not have in Oxford, is catholic, Irish, and wants to get
away and write. She has a father who appears to dislike her. Almost on his
deathbed he confesses it is because they are too similar. He admires her,
however, because unlike him she does not think that it is always the same
old moon. She goes off and does things.
The play has some strong vignettes. A nun demonstrates to Brenda the act of
procreation with a phallus-shaped biscuit and a doughnut. Brenda exchanges
one of her first kisses in return for a ride on a bicycle: it is the bicycle
that gets bent and broken. Best of all is the letter from the Vatican in
response to Brenda's appeal to the Pope. It is signed by Monsignor Flaherty
who adds in brackets 'formerly Martin Flaherty' of a road in Galway.
There are also some cliches: too many attempted jokes about sex and
catholicism. It is not particularly funny that Brenda's father (played by
James Ellis and looking curiously like Sir Bernard Ingham) should adopt all
the prejudices of an Alf Garnett when he arrives in London, complaining
about Pakistanis running the hospital and Jews running the country. A
longish sequence which is devoted to what happens to women when they start
wearing a dressing gown must have been played at least a dozen times before,
though I suppose it has a twist at the end: it is the fear of the same old
dressing gown that spurs Brenda on again.
For my taste it is too Irish, sentimental and maudlin, but others may well
like it and Jenny Killick's direction has improved beyond measure since
Oxford.
