The outcome of the next general election will be influenced by the
electorate's acceptance or rejection of the new council tax announced
yesterday. Plans have also been published for streamlining local government
by introducing a single tier of authorities in place of many county and
district councils. FT writers report on the proposals and their implications
THE NEW local tax would benefit all two-person households in the Labour
London borough of Lambeth, but in marginal Tory Bath such households in the
54 per cent of homes worth more than Pounds 88,000 would pay more. That
suggests either altruism or a belief that some supporters can be taken for
granted.
A more complex picture emerges beyond those extreme examples of the massed
ranks of figures provided by the government to illustrate how the council
tax would work.
The numbers themselves are subject to some caveats. They are based on bills
and not on actual amounts paid, so that the real benefit to people who did
well from the community charge reduction scheme, because they live in homes
that had low rateable values, will be less than the headline difference
suggests.
The reduction scheme has been added to the central government grant, leaving
a lower amount (Pounds 6.8bn) to be raised from local authorities, and the
cost of collection has been assumed to be 40 per cent of the cost of
collecting the poll tax.
In general, however, Tory marginals will breathe a sigh of relief.
Mr David Martin, the Tory MP for Portsmouth South, has a majority of just
205. With a Portsmouth city council poll tax at Pounds 179, households of
two or more people in five of the seven bands - 94 per cent of homes - would
pay less under the new tax.
In Pendle, where Mr John Lee, the Tory MP whose majority is below 3,000, has
been an outspoken critic of the poll tax, the gains for two-person
households look impressive.
Almost 70 per cent of homes fall within the lowest two property bands, under
which two-person households would gain from the switch to the new system.
With the release of the figures halfway through the local election campaign,
the first test of how well they survive sustained political debate may come
in the Monmouth by-election to be held in mid May.
Although most single-person households would be worse off under the new
system, households of two or more in the roughly three quarters of homes
valued below Pounds 90,000 would benefit.
Will it be enough?
