WHEN Mr Lewis Preston, the World Bank president, visited Egypt last month to
review economic reforms he urged quicker progress in making structural
change and warned against falling behind in commitments.
'A great deal has been achieved, but a great deal remains to be done,' he
said. 'Time is of the essence. It is crucial that the momentum of economic
reform be maintained to realise sustainable growth as soon as possible.'
Behind Mr Preston's words lie fears among IMF and World Bank officials that
Egypt, having made an exemplary start in fiscal and monetary reform, will
falter when it comes to overhauling its crumbling, but politically
sensitive, public sector which accounts for some 70 per cent of industrial
activity.
Officials say Egypt is too cautious in determining state-owned enterprises
for rationalisation and divestiture and in initiating sell-offs to private
investors.
They blame entrenched bureaucratic interests, such as those represented by
the General Authority for Investment (GAFI), for the laggardly approach to
structural reform. One official observed that 'perhaps the most constructive
thing we could do would be to dynamite GAFI.'
While Egypt has attracted much favourable attention recently for its
successful implementation of a fairly rigorous IMF programme, and for new
legislation aimed at liberalising various aspects of its economy, grave
misgivings continue to be expressed about its commitment to
politically-risky reforms of public-sector dinosaurs.
'The reality is that they have to create 600,000 jobs a year. Their export
of labour is getting to the point of saturation. They need growth and that
requires new private-sector investment,' said a western economist.
'What is required is for the private sector to reach a critical mass of
confidence and start investing in employment-generating activities, and that
clearly is not happening.'
An IMF official says lack of progress on liberalising the public sector
should not be judged too harshly, since Egypt had embraced one of the 'more
courageous' austerity programmes put forward by the Fund for less-developed
countries.
It has curbed growth in the money supply; brought the deficit under control,
reaching an IMF target of 7 per cent of GDP in 1991/92; reduced subsidies on
a wide range of items; markedly improved its balance of payments; stabilised
its currency; and built up a healthy central bank reserve of about USDollars
7bn.
The World Bank, which set aside some Dollars 300m of a Structural Adjustment
Loan and an additional Dollars 100m to help cushion redundancies, is worried
that once momentum slows it will be difficult to regenerate. Hence Mr
Preston's warnings.
An increase in Islamic extremist agitation has made the ultra-cautious
Egyptian authorities even more nervous about structural reforms which may
cause redundancies and risk unrest in the streets.
The government, through its newly-created Public Enterprise Office (PEO),
has identified 20 enterprises, either wholly state-owned or joint ventures,
for privatisation. These small to medium-sized enterprises in areas such as
cement, food processing, textiles and chemicals are being evaluated some
under a scheme funded by the US Agency for International Development.
A representative of the PEO, defines the privatisation criteria for Egyptian
enterprises: 'They must be profitable, medium-sized, not governed by too
many regulations. They must have minimal labour problems, be non-strategic,
attractive to investors and pose no environmental hazards.'
This would seem to rule out, for the time being, the state-dominated
financial sector, including banks and insurance companies, the national
carrier EgyptAir, and heavy manufacturing industries.
Potential investors and aid donors remain sceptical of a new public-sector
law designed to facilitate privatisation. Concerns persist that the law,
which groups Egypt's industrial enterprises in 27 holding companies, adds
another layer of bureaucratic control, making divestiture and
rationalisation even more difficult.
Likewise, bankers and local businessmen warn that while new capital markets
and banking regulations will improve the regulatory environment,
bureaucratic attitudes are impeding progress towards a more liberal economy.
A prime example is a proposed paper mill in upper Egypt, using the cane
residue from local sugar refineries. The project, vital to an Egypt almost
totally dependent on imported paper, has been caught up in unaccountable
bureaucratic delays since the mid-1980s, defying central efforts to impose a
solution.
The episode stands as an extremely bad advertisement for Egypt's claims that
it craves foreign investment in employment and wealth-generating local
industries.
Both the IMF and World Bank, in their combined efforts to keep Egypt on the
straight and narrow path of reform, will be engaged in further consultations
throughout the rest of the year. The IMF, whose 18 month stand-by agreement
with Egypt expires in November, will begin talks next month on new
arrangements.
A Fund official said one option was to conclude an enhanced structural
adjustment facility (ESAF), under which concessional finance would be
available for structural change to complement the World Bank programme.
Egypt's May 1991 standby agreement was restricted to balance of payments
support.
There would seem to be few serious impediments to Egypt reaching agreement
with the Fund so it can continue debt rescheduling in line with last year's
agreement with the Paris Club of creditor nations. A 50 per cent reduction
in Egypt's Dollars 20bn debt to its Paris Club creditors is being achieved
mainly through phased interest rate cuts. Total foreign debt stands at
Dollars 40bn.
The World Bank, which has disbursed half of a Dollars 300m structural
adjustment loan, is seeking further trade liberalisation, including tariff
cuts, and accelerated public-sector reforms before releasing the second
tranche. It says there is no timetable for the release but hopes Egypt will
warrant a further reward by the middle of next year.
 ----------------------------------------
Fact sheet
 ----------------------------------------
GDP:              EPounds 126.7bn (1991)*
                   Dollars 38.4bn (1991)*
GDP per head:         Dollars 688 (1991)*
GDP growth rate:      2.5% pa ('87-91)*
                              1.5% (1991)
Inflation rate:      19.1% pa ('87-91)*
 ----------------------------------------
Major exports (1990)            (%) total
 ----------------------------------------
Energy products                      50.2
Manufactures                         24.6
Raw materials                        19.9
Food                                  5.3
 ----------------------------------------
Major imports (1990)            (%) total
 ----------------------------------------
Manufactures                         66.2
Food                                 20.2
Raw materials                         9.9
Energy products                       3.7
 ----------------------------------------
* Estimates
 ----------------------------------------
