AT THE end of the shift at the Tabacalera de Garcia cigar factory in the
free trade zone in La Romana in the south-east of the country, 1,000
workers, mostly women, stream through the gates.
The scene is repeated at factories in the 22 other free trade zones in the
country, 12 of which are privately owned and the others owned by the state,
and which provide 8m square feet of factory space. Five more free trade
zones are being built and another seven are planned.
Mr Jose Seijas, a director of the Free Zone Association, and general manager
of Tabacalera de Garcia, says the 140,000 workers employed in the free zones
across the Dominican Republic would otherwise have been involved in farming
or domestic services with low productivity. The factories have contributed
to relieving unemployment in the country.
The free zone is a virtual enclave, a designated area outside the national
customs and tax territory, and which offers exemptions on taxes and duties
on a range of light industries and services. Production in the free zones is
mainly for export. They are islands of industrial efficiency which benefit
from the special conditions and incentives.
The expansion of free zones in the Dominican Republic has been dramatic.
Exports from free zones in 1980 accounted for 5 per cent of the country's
export earnings. By 1988, exports from the zones were valued at USDollars
515m, about 35 per cent of export earnings. Free zone exports in 1990 were
valued by the government at Dollars 840m.
Investors are drawn to the free trade zones because of a range of
incentives. The depreciation of the Dominican peso over the past five years
has made wage rates compar- ative, particularly against those paid in the
US. Proximity to the US market has also assisted in drawing investors to the
free trade zones.
The main activities are the production of apparel, foot- wear, electronic
assembly and pharmaceuticals. Rather than investing in a free zone, some
companies have used Domin- ican businesses to produce for them under
contract.
'Companies in the free trade zones were originally all foreign-owned, but
there is now a tendency for Domin- icans to own companies,' says Mr Bernado
Vega, one of the country's leading economists. 'The foreign owners were
mainly Americans, but today there are investors from Taiwan and South Korea
who are seeking easy access to the European Community market.'
The growth of the Domin- ican free zones has been encouraged by the
Caribbean Basin Initiative, a preferential trade programme extended by the
US to selected countries in the region. Dominican officials say the
prospects for expansion of the facilities are good, with the country's
recent access to the Lome Convention, a treaty which grants preferential
entry to the European Community market.
Being insulated, the free zones have not been affected much by the economic
prob- lems which have overtaken the Dominican Republic in recent years. But
businessmen are questioning how long they can remain apart from the domestic
economy, and whether it would not be in the government's interest to declare
the entire country a free trade zone.
'Free zone companies are looking at ways to increase sales to the local
economy,' said Mr Seijas. 'They are trying to create more links with local
suppliers.' Since the free zones operate under a different fiscal regime,
commerce across the fence with the local economy is treated as foreign
trade.
The continued expansion of the free zones is threatened by local and
international developments. The poor quality of the electricity
infrastructure in the Domin- ican Republic has forced the owners and
operators of the free zones to install their own power plants, increasing
their operational costs and those of their clients. Mexico's likely
membership of the North American Free Trade Area could also reduce the
compet- itive advantage which free zones in the Dominican Rep- ublic and
other countries in the region have in trading with the United States.
