MR John Major was given a warm but not uncritical welcome by MPs as he
outlined the deal struck at the weekend's Edinburgh summit in the Commons
yesterday.
With government benches packed with loyalists and leaders of the other main
parties broadly in favour of what was agreed, Euro-sceptics were left with
relatively few opportunities to register dissent.
More surprising was the subdued tone adopted by many Maastricht opponents
when they were called on to speak. That in turn encouraged the loyalists,
who urged the prime minister to press ahead post-haste with the bill
implementing Maastricht 'even if it means staying up all night for a couple
of weeks'.
An ebullient Mr Major responded by pledging the bill's return to the Commons
shortly after the Christmas recess.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, targeted his criticism on the
'downgrading' of unemployment as a matter for concern 'throughout the whole
of the British presidency'.
With unemployment in Britain rising twice as fast as in any other EC
country, a return to economic growth and the stimulation of employment
should have been a crucial objective of the summit, he argued. 'Given the
appalling prospect of sharply rising unemployment, why was there no proposal
for an emergency economic programme right across the whole community?'
Mr Smith also taunted his opposite number that another summit outcome
appeared to be that the social chapter of Maastricht was 'alive and well and
fully supported by all other member states'.
But he welcomed both the settlement of the Danish question and the
enlargement plan, which he said would provide the EC with 'a new and healthy
dynamic.'
With Mr Paddy Ashdown away in Bosnia, it was left to Sir Russell Johnston,
the Liberal Democrats' European spokesman, to laud the summit's 'positive
outcome' that had consolidated progress towards European union. He asked for
Mr Major's assurance in the light of the Danish agreement that he did not
favour 'any two-tier solution for the community.'
In his opening address the prime minister hailed 'Britain's achievement' in
bringing Europe's member states together, arguing that making a success of
Britain's EC membership was not a matter of idealism but 'of hard-headed
self-interest'.
The EC had 'reached decisions on issues which many thought were insoluble,'
he said.
Later, following questions from a number of Scottish MPs, he highlighted a
distinction between subsidiarity - moving powers from international level to
national - and devolution - moving them from national to regional level.
There was a widespread and UK-wide appreciation of the importance of the
union.
Among the more vocal Euro-sceptics Ms Teresa Gorman, Tory MP for Billericay,
renewed her campaign for a referendum, saying Mr Major had no 'moral right'
to agree to finance the demands made by other EC countries 'without
consulting the British people'.
Mr Peter Shore, the Euro-sceptic Labour MP for Bethnal Green and Stepney,
observed that Mr Major knew 'the difference between presentational and
substantial success, and you also know the difference between the applause
of European leaders and the applause of your own people'.
Adopting an ironic tone in the wake of the lavish praise for Mr Major
profferred by a succession of loyal Tories, Mr Ron Leighton, Labour MP for
Newham North East, predicted that his 'superhumanly brilliant' triumph would
leave most Europeans unmoved because it did not 'address any of their
concerns'.
