EXECUTIVE information systems have been around since the mid-1980s but it
has taken developments in other areas since then to get them widely
accepted.
Recent studies suggest that over 40 per cent of the top 1,000 companies in
the UK now have these systems and that 7,700 managers in those companies use
them. The number of users is expected to grow by 30 per cent this year.
In theory and, increasingly, in practice, executive information systems are
the answer to senior management's prayers. They unlock the masses of data
stored in different systems across an organisation and present it as
colourful, graphical summaries. Users can seek further detail by touching
areas on the screen or using a simple keypad or conventional keyboard, but
the emphasis throughout is on ease of use.
The raw data behind the charts and graphs comes from the traditional
corporate or departmental systems handling order processing, stock control
and so on. Other possible sources include external databases or news
services, word processors and electronic mail systems.
The executive information system's role is to extract the relevant data from
many sources and present it as information in the formats demanded by the
users, often on a personal computer connected to a central system. The PC
can usually be connected to gather the latest data and then used on its own
for examining the information.
The format and content of each chart have traditionally been fixed when the
system is set up. The idea was that the system would reflect the periodic
management briefing book.
There are simple links between charts: an executive could move from a
consolidated sales graph to a chart about a troubled subsidiary and then to
a region and down to an individual shop, product or salesman - each time at
the touch of a key or a spot on the screen.
Instant access to summary information, the potential for highlighting
exceptions or variances with budget and the ease with which executives can
find the reasons for a variance, in terms of an individual salesman's
performance, have thrown up major implications for entire organisations.
Users have pointed out that with paper reports, if a problem is highlighted
at a monthly directors' meeting, someone is asked to gather information for
the next meeting. An executive information system provides the detail
immediately.
This in turn means people further down in the organisation, close to the
problem, have to confront realities and react quickly: they can no longer
fudge an answer for senior executives, because those executives have the
hard data.
The direct access to information and closer ties between with junior
managers also mean the top executives no longer need all the support people
who in the past would have been responsible for gathering data and turning
it into information reports. In some cases companies have cut three or four
layers of management after setting up an executive information system.
Even so, views on the success of the systems have been mixed, at least until
recently. At the start of the 1990s studies by Business Intelligence, a
research company which largely specialises in executive information systems,
found that although 75 per cent of managers had seen improvements in
financial control, information quality and problem solving, similar numbers
reported no advantages from replacing existing paper systems.
Mr David Harvey, a director of Business Intelligence, says the
disappointments were largely due to a failure to apply technology properly.
'Simply replacing the briefing book is like using a racehorse to pull a
cart,' he says. 'Too many of these companies failed to think through exactly
what they wanted. You have to think about how the system can change the way
the organisation is run.' However, two separate recent developments are
starting to change attitudes towards executive information systems and to
expand their use.
First, in the past year suppliers have responded to developments in
so-called client-server computing, open systems and graphical user
interfaces and have built more flexibility into their systems.
Established and traditionally mainframe computer systems are now being
offered for PC networks. Where systems used to draw data from corporate
files into their own databases specifically for their own use, they now
provide direct links into popular database systems such as Oracle and
Ingres. In addition, system development aids are being provided so that a
user company's computing specialists can set up screens and the links
between them.
'Originally executive information system suppliers provided a closed package
of user interface software, processing software and data, but now we're
separating the components and going for open systems architectures,' says a
spokesman for Pilot Executive Software, which vies with Comshare for the
title of market leader.
Prices have also moved more into line with what PC users expect: traditional
mainframe systems have cost tens of thousands of pounds to set up;
Comshare's new offering starts at Pounds 13,700 for 10 networked PCs.
The second development affecting executive information systems is in
business thinking.
'Traditionally finance has been the only measure of corporate finance and
executive information systems have tended to provide financial reports,'
says Mr David Harvey at Business Intelligence. 'But now there is pressure to
redefine business performance measurement and bring in other factors.'
Such developments have helped increase both the use of executive information
systems and users' satisfaction with them.
At Norwich Union, for example, a Comshare system is used daily to look at
relevant news from the financial press and analyse it under headings such as
insurance companies and disasters. Yorkshire Water monitors trends in water
quality, as well as capital investment and human resources.
The expanding application of executive information systems seems to have
brought greater user satisfaction. New research by Business Intelligence*
shows that 33 per cent of users mention tangible benefits, 58 per cent
intangible benefits and 10 per cent both. Only 4 per cent report no
benefits.
In addition two-thirds say their systems have 'substantially' improved their
decision making, largely through the ability to get to the bottom of
exceptions.
The expanding application and the increased satisfaction are leading to
wider use. In the Business Intelligence survey 40 per cent of respondents
said they would have over 50 users within two years and a further 20 per
cent expected similar growth in the next three years. In 7 per cent of
organisations there would be 1,000 users by 1997.
Such growth perhaps explains why suppliers, while keeping EIS as their
product name, are increasingly changing the meaning to enterprise
information systems.
*Understanding Executive Information Requirements. Business Intelligence,
Forum House, 1 Graham Road, London SW19 3SW; Tel: 081 544 1830
