THERE IS a continuing and growing demand for reinsurance, particularly
catastrophe protection. Insured values increase and maximum potential
exposures rise, but this type of business is inevitably volatile. Lloyd's is
the second or third largest reinsurer in the world, and reinsurance of all
types represents more than half its premium income.
As a consequence of the type of business they write, reinsurers have carried
the brunt of catastrophes which coincided with a period of exceptional
over-capacity and low premium rates. Lloyd's was never likely to escape the
claims its competitors have suffered, and its entrepreneurial nature and
constraints on its reserving capability exacerbated the losses and their
effects.
The next few years will show to what level individuals are prepared to be
sources of risk capital to bear this volatility, particularly if they cannot
build up reserves for the purpose of mitigating the worst effects.
The Rowland task force examining Lloyd's put it this way: 'Lloyd's
underwriting skills and appetite for risk enable it to compete effectively
to provide high-level catastrophe insurance and reinsurance. However, its
capital structure is not well matched to this business of volatile profit
streams. Full pay-out of profits from an 'annual venture' will inevitably
result in highly volatile returns.'
In spite of the disadvantages and an at least temporary reduction in market
capacity, there is little doubt there is a continuing and growing role for
Lloyd's as a source of reinsurance capacity. Richard Hazell, deputy chairman
and a reinsurance underwriter, said: 'There is no question about it. The
pure reinsurance market is not large enough to service the needs of the
industry.'
Lloyd's exercises its greatest influence in reinsurance as well as direct
business in the marine market where it has always been a world leader.
Lloyd's controls about 30 to 35 per cent of the marine reinsurance market.
In non-marine, its share is perhaps 1.5 or 2 per cent, though syndicates
often lead business which is substantially placed elsewhere.
Excess of loss business is by a substantial margin the largest type of
reinsurance that the market writes. It peaked as a proportion of the
market's total income in 1990 with the collapse of the spiral of excess of
loss retrocessions, but in 1991, excess of loss business was still
responsible for 36.2 per cent of the market's premium income.
Alan Grant is the underwriter for syndicate 991, one of only three new
syndicates in Lloyd's this year. The syndicate has a capacity of just over
Pounds 15m and it is expected to rise to about Pounds 25m for 1993. He
writes various types of reinsurance including long tail business. He
describes the exercise of getting the capacity as one of convincing names
'that it was the right time in the underwriting cycle to start a new
syndicate even if it was a difficult time in the capital supply cycle.'
He stressed the importance of not confusing excess of loss business, a
mechanism no different from buying motor insurance above a deductible, from
retrocessions of excess of loss where the risks may pass around the same
market several times. 'What we sold to the membership is that we are
bringing fresh business into the market; we are not recycling business from
the market.'
Potential catastrophe exposures have exploded. The largest North Sea
platforms have insured values of between Dollars 2bn and Dollars 3bn.
According to Munich Re, natural disasters are becoming ever more costly. It
says that the burden of claims from natural disasters was eight times higher
in real terms in the 1980s than the 1960s.
Typhoon Mireille in Japan in September 1991 was the most costly wind storm
loss in insurance history. Insured claims reached Dollars 5.2bn, though, for
once, Lloyd's has not suffered heavily. In 1990 losses from natural
disasters reached the record total of Dollars 15.3bn.
Said Munich Re: 'This trend is primarily the consequence of increasing
population density, especially in conurbations, and the simultaneous
increase in the concentration of values, as well as the phenomenon of people
and industry settling in coastal areas and other regions that are
particularly exposed to natural hazards.'
The volatility of catastrophe risks and the Lloyd's system of reconstituting
each syndicate every year would be less significant if names were better
able to offset good years against bad. Neither names nor syndicates are
allowed tax deductions for equalisation reserves, deductions in good years
which can be brought back into the underwriting account to soften the blow
of a serious loss.
The task force concluded that Lloyd's should be able to continue to write
catastrophe business but that to do so competitively, names needed to be
able to build up equalisation reserves. It said: 'Lloyd's is at a severe
competitive disadvantage since its principal European competitors enjoy
advantageous tax treatment on reserves for both past and future losses.'
Talks are still taking place with the Inland Revenue over the possible
creation of a form of equalisation reserves which could be used to provide
cover for large variations in underwriting performance. 'Reserving has
become an issue of acute concern within the market,' commented the task
force.
Seeing themselves as providers of capital for the insurance industry, the
reinsurance industry is now telling direct insurers what the cost for that
capital is now. It is not just taking the form of higher prices,
particularly in the marine market where retrocession capacity has contracted
most sharply, but also in requiring direct companies to carry more of the
risk themselves. Richard Hazell said: 'The reinsurance market really decided
it had lost enough money.
When Hurricane Andrew hit the southern states of the US in August, the
effect of these increased retentions emerged. Lloyd's was not expecting to
face serious claims until insured damages reached around Dollars 3bn. Terry
Hayday, chief executive of the insurance division of underwriting agent
Sturge Holdings, commented: 'Had the same loss occurred three years ago, the
situation would have been different.'
Perhaps the biggest single excess of loss contract in Lloyd's covers the
shipowners' liability insurers, the International Group of P &amp; I Clubs. The
clubs this year have to retain Dollars 15m of each loss instead of Dollars
12m in 1991. The top limit has dropped from Dollars 1.25bn to Dollars 1bn,
and the premiums have increased between 91 per cent and 144 per cent
depending on the type of ship insured.
The clubs as a group are co-insuring 7 per cent of the bottom layer of the
excess, and because of a shortage of capacity in Lloyd's, the brokers used
the Bermuda-based XL, a company set up with capital from industrial
policyholders during the liability insurance crisis of the 1980s, to
complete the slip.
In spite of these encouraging signs, losses from the most recent years are
leading to resignations, and many remaining names are wary of increasing
their underwriting limits, Lloyd's capacity is expected to drop by 20 to 25
per cent.
