JAPAN's Fair Trade Commission is investigating Victor Corporation of Japan
(JVC) for possible violation of Japan's anti-trust laws.
The case illustrates the growing assertiveness of the FTC in taking on
mainstream Japanese companies and raises fundamental questions about
business practice in Japan.
The case may prove to be a landmark, since it could determine the extent to
which companies which hold patents covering standard electronic formats can
control the sale of products using those formats.
In this case, JVC, which holds patent rights on the widely-used VHS video
format, is alleged to have prevented C&amp;B, a small Japanese computer service
and product development company, from marketing an improved VHS video
recorder which it developed in 1986.
Even if the facts of the case are confirmed, the FTC would be breaking new
legal ground if it concluded that JVC's behaviour constituted an abuse of
its market position and therefore a violation of antitrust law.
JVC yesterday said: 'We fully believe that JVC has never done anything that
infringes the law.' C&amp;B, which stands for computers and business, had
developed an address system for a video recorder that allowed a video
machine to be operated by a computer. It subsequently signed contracts with
NEC Home Electronics and Sharp, which made the machines on an original
equipment manufacturing basis.
After first shipments, however, NEC and Sharp held discussions with JVC and
then stopped production of the machines. Mr Kim Moon-Jae, president of C&amp;B,
says he was told that JVC, as holder of the VHS patent, would not let them
proceed.
JVC confirmed that the case has been investigated by the FTC. It said
however that it was important for JVC to assure compatability of VHS
products.
A spokesman said: 'If many different systems came out perhaps consumers will
be confused. JVC has to watch carefully to see whether it is good for the
consumers.'
Mr Kim said that C&amp;B lost Y5bn (Pounds 21.5m) as a result of having
production of the video recorders halted. Its annual sales have plunged from
Y1.5bn five years ago to Y150m today.
Should the FTC rule against JVC, it would only be able to issue a
cease-and-desist order. In principle, C&amp;B could bring a suit to recover
damages, but this would be difficult in the Japanese courts.
Although the dimensions of the case appear small, the issues have
international implications.
