AUSTRALIA'S Labor government faces a difficult by-election following the
resignation from parliament yesterday of Mr Bob Hawke, the former prime
minister.
Mr Hawke's retirement follows his defeat by Mr Paul Keating, the former
Treasurer (finance minister) in a bitterly fought Labor leadership battle in
December.
Labor is expected to lose Mr Hawke's suburban Melbourne seat in the
by-election, which must be held within three months. Mr Hawke had a majority
of 8 per cent at the last general election in 1990, but Labor's popularity
has plunged over the past 18 months as the government has struggled to cope
with recession and rising unemployment.
The government is likely to put off the poll as long as possible in the hope
that the economy will begin to recover following a statement to be made by
Mr Keating next week.
However, a bad result could further damage the party's fading chances of
winning another three years in power at the next general election, which
must be held by mid-1993.
Mr Hawke said he had decided to resign because his growing business
commitments would not allow him to continue to represent his constituency
'in good conscience'. The former prime minister is understood to be
negotiating with Mr Kerry Packer's Channel Nine television station to
present a series of programmes about world leaders he met while in office.
He has appointed IMG, the personality management group which represents Mr
Greg Norman, the Australian golfer, to seek other business interests in the
media and the international lecture circuit.
Mr Hawke also said he wanted to spend more time with his family,
particularly his wife Hazel, who underwent an operation in Sydney this week
to remove a benign tumour from her brain.
Mr Keating said Mr Hawke's eight-year term as prime minister - Australia's
second longest - had been a period of 'historic change' in which the nation
was transformed into a modern diversified economy.
However, there was unease among some Labor leaders about the style and
timing of Mr Hawke's announcement, which was made in an interview on Channel
Nine, for which he was paid.
