It was tempting, in the late 1980s, to write off Silicon Valley. Some even
called it the 'next Detroit'; the latest example of the declining
competitiveness of American industry. It appeared that the valley's famed
entrepreneurial spirit was being crushed by the onslaught from Japan.
Look again. Today, this northern California complex of high-technology
industries is brimming with confidence.
'People think this industry is maturing,' says Mr Steve Jobs, chairman of
Next Computer and as co-founder of Apple one of the valley's most celebrated
entrepreneurs. 'They are so wrong. Every time a technology window opens
there is an opportunity completely to rearrange the industry.' He agrees
that the targeting of a new venture has to be more precise. 'At Apple, we
threw a dart at a white wall and where it landed we painted a bull's eye. At
Next we are trying to do something far more ambitious because the market is
more sophisticated.'
If the technological opportunities seem boundless, so too is the valley's
capacity to exploit them. Thanks to the momentum of innovation and
entrepreneurship which began before the war and accelerated in the 1960s,
Silicon Valley has a rich infrastructure of electronics engineers,
subcontractors, venture capitalists, public relations advisers, headhunters
and lawyers, all of whom have a part to play in getting a venture off the
ground. 'I could start a semiconductor company on the telephone from my
home,' says Mr Wilfrid Corrigan, chairman of LSI Logic, a leading
semiconductor manufacturer.
Mr Andy Grove, chairman of Intel, the world's largest maker of
microprocessors, compares it to the theatre business in New York which has
an itinerant workforce of actors, directors, writers and technicians, as
well as experienced financial backers. By tapping into this network you can
quickly put a production together. It might be a smash hit, like 42nd
Street, or it might be panned by the critics. Inevitably the number of
long-running plays is small, but new creative ideas keep bubbling up.
'Silicon Valley is a technology crucible,' says Mr Irwin Federman, who ran a
leading semiconductor company in the 1970s and is now a venture capitalist.
'Every engineer in the valley has at the back of his mind that if he comes
up with an interesting product he can start a company. Not too many
opportunities get wasted.'
Mr Dick Moley, an engineering graduate from Manchester, came to the US in
1961 to work for the engineering group Westinghouse in Pittsburgh, then for
Hewlett-Packard in the valley. 'I saw all these start-ups and I thought -
I'll be a wimp if I don't try it.' He was part of the team that created
Rolm, a pioneer in computer-controlled private telephone exchanges. He is
now running another start-up, Stratacom, inventor of the 'frame relay'
method of squeezing large quantities of data through narrow bandwidth
telephone lines.
Silicon Valley's family tree, displayed on many office walls, goes back to
the 1950s. Mr Corrigan, a Liverpudlian who came to the US in 1961, and Mr
Grove, a Hungarian emigre, both worked for Fairchild Semiconductor, the
progenitor of a long line of entrepreneurial companies. Fairchild itself was
a spin-off from Shockley Laboratories, set up by Mr William Shockley,
inventor of the transistor, in 1955.
But the valley is no respecter of grey hairs. It is a meritocracy in which
everyone has a chance to succeed. It matters little where you come from, or
what you have achieved in the past, only what you can contribute today.
'The American dream lives in Silicon Valley,' says Mr Jerry Sanders,
chairman of American Micro Devices (AMD) and another Fairchild veteran. It
attracts people, according to Mr John Sculley of Apple, 'who are willing to
roll the dice and lose it all'.
But it is not a get-rich-quick casino. It is risk-taking allied to intense
effort; casual style that lightens the grind of 60-hour weeks; brashness
combined with professional pride and a desire to build great companies;
intense competition tempered by a respect for the individual.
This last characteristic is widely attributed to Hewlett-Packard, one of the
valley's oldest companies; it was founded just before the Second World War.
'Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard had a very positive view of human potential,'
says Mr Jobs. 'That was their greatest gift to the valley; they saw people
as part of the solution, not part of the problem.'
Yet even Hewlett-Packard cannot live by corporate values alone. It is
threatened by upstarts, such as Sun Microsystems which invented the
workstation market, aimed precisely at the professional and scientific
customers which Hewlett-Packard had regarded as its own. Having painfully
absorbed Apollo, one of Sun's rivals, Hewlett-Packard is now storming back,
winning market share in the workstation sector.
This ability of the larger companies to re-invent themselves under
competitive pressure is emerging as one of the valley's strengths. After its
success in the early 1980s, Apple had to undergo what Mr Sculley, chairman
and chief executive, calls 'a series of wrenching re-births' before
recovering its momentum.
Mr Sanders at AMD has flirted with disaster on several occasions. 'When you
have survived a few crises, it gives you a sense of assurance about
yourself, a kind of self-worth,' he says. One of AMD's crises came in the
mid-1980s when part of its design team left to form Cypress Semiconductor.
There are those who question the value of the constant fragmentation of the
industry through spin-offs and start-ups. Mr Sanders, for example, argues
that Cypress 'will never become an important global competitor'.
Does the Silicon Valley model discourage the creation of strong, global
companies capable of taking the long view? Mr Grove at Intel insists on the
need for 'agile giants' in the semiconductor business, but the agility, he
acknowledges, comes in part from the newcomers sniping at their heels.
A start-up, Chips and Technologies, caught Intel napping in the mid-1980s by
offering personal computer 'chip sets', a kit of semiconductor parts to
build a personal computer. Although Intel was at the time the sole supplier
of the microprocessor 'brains' chip for PCs, the sale of chips that surround
the microprocessor was an important portion of its business.
'In retrospect it was a simple thing to do,' says Mr Grove. 'They thought of
it, we didn't'. More recently a product announcement from another minnow,
Cyrix, caused the Intel share price to drop by 15 per cent in one day.
There is also a 'Wild West' aspect to the valley. Today's gun-slingers are
trigger happy with lawsuits, aimed at would-be competitors allegedly
infringing patent rights. The plethora of litigation demonstrates that even
neighbours and personal friends can be brutal competitors. 'We have learnt
to live in an environment where we are violent competitors one day, allies
the next,' says Mr Sculley.
Even Japanese rivals can sometimes become allies, as evidenced by several
trans-Pacific technology and marketing agreements. The technological
achievements of Japanese companies, in manufacturing for example, are
recognised and even admired in Silicon Valley. However, there remains a
strong undercurrent of resentment - the result of Japan's alleged refusal to
buy American chips - among veterans of the semiconductor industry.
Outsiders have also dubbed US chipmakers 'Japan bashers', yet there is no
sign of racial disharmony in the valley. Indeed, it is a melting pot of
Asian, European and South American immigrants. Getting rich is a strong
motivator and one that few are embarrassed to acknowledge. Hence the
importance of stock options, which give employees a stake in the success of
fledgling companies.
A move by Congress to tax companies on stock options granted to employees is
being vociferously opposed by valley executives. 'It would change
everything,' says Mr Rodger Higgins, another British transplant who arrived
in Silicon Valley 10 years ago and recently joined Clarity Software, a
start-up company developing office applications programs for computer
workstations.
But the Silicon Valley method of creating wealth is by building, rather than
by speculating. 'Whatever has been created here that has been really
important,' says Mr Sculley, 'has been done with an incredible amount of
passion behind it.'
The sources of new science are the universities - not only neighbouring
Stanford, which has played a seminal role in the valley's development.
Apple, for example, took over work on speech recognition that had started at
Carnegie Mellon University. Radical innovations within the valley itself,
like the integrated circuit, are rare.
'Silicon Valley people,' says Mr Sculley, 'are great connoisseurs of
technology.' When one of the so-called 'paradigm shifts' occurs, the
entrepreneurs are quick to move in. Many believe that Silicon Valley
companies are on the cusp of just such an opportunity, created by the
marriage of computer and communications technology to create a broad new
class of mass market products ranging from hand-held computers to
interactive entertainment systems.
Apple's recently unveiled 'Newton' technology, is a prime example. Early
next year Apple will launch a hand-held 'personal digital assistant', a
device designed to help people keep track of appointments, and scribbled
notes, send fax messages and arrange meetings. But Apple is not alone.
Already, dozens of new Silicon Valley ventures have being formed to ride the
new digital consumer electronics wave.
Whether this new technology fulfils its promise, Mr Grove of Intel is surely
right to stress that business success in the 1990s and beyond will depend on
speed - responding faster to market conditions, getting information around
the country faster, making strategic changes faster. In an environment where
product lives are shorter - 'there are no safe havens', as Mr Federman puts
it - the hyper-competitive atmosphere of Silicon Valley, with its adaptable
giants, cheeky spin-offs and ambitious start-ups, is an American asset which
no other country has yet been able to match.
