SIR BRYAN Carsberg, the new director general of Fair Trading, has proposed a
more radical approach for UK competition policy. The former
telecommunications regulator believes that lessons could be learnt from the
regulation of privatised utilities. These lessons may, however, be more
limited than Sir Bryan suggests, given the range of instruments already
available to deal with anti-competitive behaviour.
For the UK regulatory regime has already made good use of the flexibility it
enjoys for dealing with simple or complex monopolies. In most cases, the aim
is to promote competition, the consumer's best guarantee against excessive
prices and poor quality goods and services. Anti-competitive practices can
be forbidden, with the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) enforcing undertakings.
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) can recommend divestment by a
company under investigation to improve competition. Occasionally, as in the
investigation of the brewers, the MMC report may propose restructuring the
industry - though rarely on the scale of anti-trust actions in the US, where
large companies have been divided into several smaller companies.
These remedies often work slowly, especially where the aim is to reduce
barriers to entry - attracting new competitors can take time. It is this
which has led Sir Bryan to ponder whether lessons could be learnt from the
experience of regulating the newly privatised utilities, where regulators
have taken an increasingly tough stance to curb abuses of monopoly power.
Past successes
For example, British Telecom was until privatisation a monopolist in the
provision of UK telephone services. Rather than go for divestment, Sir Bryan
as regulator forced BT to open up its network to competitors such as
Mercury. He also required the company to disaggregate its various businesses
to eliminate cross-subsidy. Similar approaches have been taken by other
regulators. British Gas has had to make it easier for independent suppliers
to sell gas, for example. And the electricity industry was restructured
before privatisation to create competition in generation between existing
generators and to encourage new entrants.
Sir Bryan particularly highlights the lessons which can be learnt from the
experience of price capping the utilities. Their price rises are limited to
a percentage each year related to the retail price index (RPI). Thus from
next year, BT is to be limited to RPI minus 7.5 per cent which, with
inflation at present rates, means price cuts. Water companies have more
complex formulae which allow for real price increases, with the scale
related to the amount of investment required by each company to meet
environmental and other objectives. Where it was difficult to encourage
competition, such controls offered an alternative option to hold down prices
and force up efficiency for the consumer's benefit.
Last resort
Regulation of prices by the competition authorities is nothing new, however.
As Sir Bryan points out, seven cases referred to the MMC since 1970 have led
to direct price controls, including the price cuts on tranquillisers in 1973
and on contraceptive sheaths in 1975. More recently, Swedish Match was
required to freeze match prices for two years, in addition to giving other
undertakings.
Nonetheless such remedies should be used only when there is very little hope
of encouraging competition, not least because they may make it harder for
competitors to enter the market. Sir Bryan's success in capping BT prices
has undoubtedly been welcomed by the consumer. But lower prices make it
harder to tempt new entrants into the market, especially when they must
compete against BT with all the economies of scale which the former
nationalised company enjoys.
Sir Bryan is to be commended for highlighting the innovative approach taken
by the utility regulators. But the regulators have not yet succeeded in
breaking the effective monopolies of the former nationalised industries. The
promotion of competition is the most powerful weapon at his disposal at the
OFT, and there is little so far to learn on this from the experience of the
utilities.
