It can come as a shock when the company secretary learns that the
photocopier in the corner is costing more to run than the managing
director's Jaguar.
But the modest piece of machinery, churning out images with the help of a
photo-sensitive drum, has reproduced a financial nightmare for many British
companies.
For some small businesses, its installation has proved ruinously expensive
and led to bankruptcy. Mrs Ann Orchardson shut her office services business
in Glasgow after succumbing to the 'sharp practice' of a copier salesman.
Other, larger organisations have made lengthy and costly efforts to have
their machines removed. One London company has been confronted with a demand
for nearly Pounds 500,000 after trying to hand back 30 machines. And Mr Paul
Winner, head of a London public relations company, was told it would cost
Pounds 135,000 to return two ageing photocopiers worth Pounds 7,000 each
when new. Chelsea Football Club, Guinness, British Airways and several
councils and health authorities are among those reported to have had
complaints.
The Confederation of British Industry says hundreds of companies and
organisations have been caught out by the photocopier 'scam'.
The problem lies not with the machines themselves but with the 'copy plan'
agreements. These amalgamate the capital cost of financing the equipment
with its running costs, to give a charge for each copy run off the machine.
Customers are freed from the business of choosing, operating and buying
machines by signing a contract for a specified number of photocopies each
month at a negotiated price per copy.
Mr Alan Kay, a Worcester-based accountant, rues the day his practice signed
a copy plan: 'The scheme is a licence to rip off businesses. A deal which is
sold in terms of pennies and invariably signed by someone with little
authority can end up costing a fortune.'
But the formula has proved attractive. Estimates suggest that there are up
to 250,000 copy plan agreements in force in the UK, representing a Pounds
1bn-plus market which has been growing rapidly.
Copy plans have been welcomed as a marketing ploy by some photocopier
manufacturers, dealers and leasing companies which finance the packages.
Some leasing companies are owned by large financial institutions. Their
parentage, however, has not prevented claims that some of their activities
are anti-competitive and highly questionable. One regional fraud squad,
along with the Inland Revenue, has been examining the activities of one
large leasing subsidiary.
Following an investigation last year by the Office of Fair Trading into the
selling practices of one photocopier distributor, the industry was thought
to have cleaned up its act.
But a renewed wave of protests from customers suggests that widespread
abuses remain. The Department of Trade and Industry will shortly raise the
issue with the OFT.
Customers complain that copy plan contracts involve the ultimate in 'small
print' deception, concealing enormously expensive obligations in the guise
of flexible business agreements. Among the most regular criticisms are:
contracts which run for seven or even nine years, several times longer than
the average life of the equipment;
hidden annual increases in copy costs;
any variations in the agreement can mean a completely new contract, of which
the customer is often unaware; the cost of settling old agreements is added
to the undisclosed capital value of new equipment; the total cost of a
contract is not disclosed.
The Finance &amp; Leasing Association claims most current complaints are the
legacy of old, unsatisfactory contracts. It says new forms of contract now
in use mean the problem has largely been overcome.
In January, the association issued guidance notes for members to ensure
leasing documentation is clear and concise, along with advice for customers.
It also says leasing deals should not extend beyond the reasonable working
life of the equipment.
Mr Neil Grant, director of the association, says it has received no
complaints since the new guidance notes were issued, and stresses that any
companies breaking the code will have membership withdrawn.
'There are 400,000 copier agreements in existence and the rate of complaints
involving copy plans has been around 1 per cent. There will always be sharks
out there. Customers must be sure they are fully aware of what they are
signing.'
The association, however, only represents about 80 per cent of the finance
and leasing sector, and some of the biggest operators in the photocopier
market are not members. One is Southern Business Group, the photocopier
supplier which, unlike most of its competitors, provides equipment and
necessary finance. The company has come under criticism in the past for some
of its contractual practices, but now offers copy plan contracts which it
says are retrospective and no longer hold any nasty surprises. SBG, however,
still expects its customers to sign up for nine years.
Mr David McErlain, SBG managing director, claims misrepresentation and even
fraud are still rife among some copy plan companies. 'The problem continues.
Even if contracts are cleaner, a lot is down to the tactics of the salesman.
The OFT has an awesome weapon at its disposal, the removal of consumer
credit licences. It must use it for the sake of the whole industry.'
Mr Marcus I'Anson, a director of UTAX (UK), which imports photocopier
machines, says copy plans continue to damage the copier industry and should
be strictly controlled. 'Copy plans remain an easy route to an awful lot of
money for the finance companies involved. The clandestine nature of these
contracts makes it ridiculous to claim caveat emptor.'
Growing unease about bad publicity has led Canon, the Japanese manufacturer,
to endorse copy plan contracts which it regards as fair. Rank Xerox has just
launched an improved code of conduct which it hopes other equipment
suppliers will emulate.
Pressure is also mounting for changes in the law to eradicate the copy plan
problem. The Campaign to Clean Up Copier Contracts is working with the
Association of Electronics, Telecommunications and Business Equipment
Industries on a code of good practice.
It also wants ministers to extend to companies and other organisations the
same level of protection available to private individuals under the Consumer
Credit Act. This would include a two-week 'cooling-off' period.
Critics of copy plan schemes emphasise that victims of unfair agreements
should not assume they are helpless. There is evidence that, when faced with
the threat of litigation, some suppliers walk away, even deserting their
equipment.
According to Mr Neil Aitken, a partner with McKenna, the solicitors,
customers must take advice on the terms of their contracts before giving in
to a copy company's demands. He says that grounds for challenging copy
company claims can include misrepresentation and defences under the Unfair
Contract Terms Act.
Some leasing companies appear reluctant to pursue a contract claim through
to judgment, however. Though they might win, their reputation could be
damaged. Further blots on the copier business would not be welcome.
