MATSUSHITA Electric Industrial, Japan's biggest consumer electronics
company, yesterday said it had entered talks with American Telephone and
Telegraph (AT&amp;T), the US telecommunications group, that could lead to a
joint venture to develop pen-based portable computer systems.
The talks are the latest in a trend in which consumer electronics companies
are joining forces with computer technology companies to develop products
aimed at re-igniting growth in the industry, which has been suffering from a
lack of new product successes.
Apple Computer is talking to both Sony and Sharp about possible joint
product development. Intel, the world's leading microprocessor maker, has
agreed with Sharp to develop flash memory devices, which could replace
magnetic recording devices in a wide range of consumer and computer
products.
While Matsushita, Sony and Sharp are hoping to gain technology and software
capability, the computer companies are seeking partners that understand
consumer products, that have efficient manufacturing capability, and
effective distribution networks. The companies believe the market for
portable, multi-function devices combining computer and audio visual
technology is potentially huge, although all have maintained strict secrecy
about products under development.
Matsushita also confirmed it was talking to Electronic Arts, a
California-based computer game software developer, about joint development
of video game equipment.
Matsushita said nothing had yet been agreed with either company, and it was
talking to other companies about possible partnerships.
Matsushita said last week its consolidated pre-tax profits in the current
fiscal year, ending this month, would fall by 43 per cent compared with last
year.
Sony earlier said that its parent company would post its first full-year
operating loss. Although the poor results at both companies reflect a
downturn in the business cycle, they also result from the inability to
stimulate consumer demand with the current product line-up.
The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the Japanese business daily, said yesterday that
Matsushita and AT&amp;T were aiming to develop portable pen-based computer
systems that would have a wireless communication function.
The devices would use an operating system developed by Go Corporation, a
California-based software specialist, while Matsushita would provide liquid
crystal display technology.
In the video-game market, Matsushita is considering taking an equity stake
in San Mateo Software Group, which was established by Electronic Arts.
The aim would be to develop game and educational products using
high-definition pictures, high-speed data processing, and compact disk read
only memory.
Although Matsushita is not usually seen as a trailblazer in consumer
electronics, it has tremendous marketing power and has been highly
successful in the past at reading trends in consumer tastes, and developing
profitable electronic devices.
