MR JOHN MAJOR yesterday foreshadowed a bitter confrontation next month with
Tory critics of the Maastricht treaty by dismissing a public challenge to
his authority from the party's Euro-sceptics.
Downing Street officials said Mr Major, who last night flew to Egypt to
attend a weekend service marking the 50th anniversary of the battle of El
Alamein, was determined to re-start the ratification process next month.
But as Labour indicated that it might join Tory critics in opposing the
early return to Westminster of the Maastricht bill, Mr Major left open the
option of a tactical retreat on the precise timetable for ratification.
The officials said the prime minister wanted to make 'progress' with the
legislation before the Edinburgh summit in December. But he accepted that
the line-by-line consideration of the legislation in its committee stage
could be broken up into several stages, perhaps spanning Christmas. That
would ensure that disgruntled Conservative MPs would not have to stay at
Westminster 'night and day' to get the legislation through.
Senior ministers privately ridiculed as 'hysteria' a call by Lord Tebbit,
the former cabinet minister, for MPs to reject ratification even if that
forced Mr Major's resignation as party leader.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, told rebel Tory MPs the
government would not jeopardise the 'national interest' over problems on its
own back benches. If Mr Major was obliged to tell other EC leaders he could
not deliver on the treaty it would mark the end of British influence in
Europe.
Interviewed in today's Daily Express, Mr Major said the Maastricht bill was
not 'an optional extra' that could be ditched. 'It is an agreement that we
have reached. Europe is vital to our domestic economic interest. It is about
our prosperity, our jobs, our future.'
After a week which has seen the government's authority further undermined by
its enforced climbdown over coal closures, cabinet ministers sought to
reassure Tory MPs that Maastricht would not deflect the government from its
determination to secure economic recovery.
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, said early recovery was the
'overriding objective'. He argued that the recent fall in the value of the
pound would not lead to a renewed burst of inflation, and echoed Mr Major's
clear hint earlier this week that a tight public spending round would pave
the way for a further interest rate cut.
The fresh row over Maastricht followed an 'ambush' on Thursday evening by
Euro-sceptics on the Tory backbench 1922 committee. The executive, which is
dominated by MPs on the right of the party, called for a delay in the
legislation until economic recovery was under way. But despite a public
reinforcement of that message yesterday by Sir Rhodes Boyson, a leading
member of the committee, there were signs the executive was backing away
from direct confrontation.
Mr George Robertson, Labour's Europe spokesman, sought to increase pressure
on Mr Major by suggesting Labour could join Tory rebels to delay the
ratification process until next year. But Downing Street insisted the
Maastricht 'paving' debate on November 4 would be followed later in the
month with the start of the committee stage.
Lord Tebbit said treaty opponents would not be distracted by Mr Major's
threat to resign if defeated in the Commons. 'Maastricht is more important
than any individual and, therefore, whether the prime minister would resign
or not is not material in the terms of the debate.'
Labour demands new deal, Page 5
Backbenchers in news, Page 6
