THE BRITISH government will withdraw the bill to ratify the Maastricht
treaty from parliament if France votes 'No' in the referendum later this
month, Downing Street said yesterday, underlining the crucial significance
of the result for Britain and the rest of Europe.
Officials also confirmed that contingency plans were being drawn up to cope
with the political and economic turbulence that would follow an outright
rejection of Maastricht by the French electorate on September 20.
Britain, as the current president of the EC, would expect to take the
initiative in picking up the pieces of the process towards economic and
political union. Contingency plans are being drawn by the Foreign Office.
Plans for co-ordinated action by European finance ministries and central
banks to deal with the probable turbulence in the currency markets that
would follow a 'No' vote will be discussed at this weekend's informal
meeting of EC finance ministers in Bath.
Analysts warn that a 'No' vote could trigger an even stronger flow of funds
into the D-Mark, pushing weaker currencies such as sterling closer to their
floor levels in the exchange rate mechanism, and forcing monetary
authorities either to raise interest rates or to mount expensive currency
support operations.
Britain's decision to scrap the Maastricht ratification bill in the event of
a 'No' vote contrasts sharply with that of other European governments
In Italy, Mr Emilio Colombo, foreign minister, said that Rome should try to
ratify the treaty in at least one house of parliament before September 20 to
show commitment to European integration.
In Bonn, a German foreign ministry spokesman declined to speculate on his
country's ratification process.
'It's downright foolish politically to start speculating now about what
would happen if the referendum in France is negative,' spokesman Mr Hanns
Schumacher told journalists.
'We hope for a positive result. The future of Europe is at stake.'
The British government is facing renewed domestic criticism over its stance
on Maastricht, with some evidence of confusion among MPs about what the UK
is trying to achieve.
Mr David Howell, Tory chairman of the all-party foreign affairs committee of
MPs, said he thought British commitment to Maastricht had been shown to be
'lukewarm' by the insistence on 'opt outs' from economic union and the
social chapter.
Any way out of the Maastricht agreement would be 'very bumpy' but the demise
of the treaty after a clear French rejection was probably less troublesome
than trying to support a treaty that had diminishing support, he said.
Officials insist that Mr John Major, the prime minister, is committed to the
Maastricht deal. They point out that a rejection of the agreement would cast
a deep shadow over the UK presidency, detracting from the UK's priorities of
completing the single market and extending links with central and eastern
Europe.
British Euro-enthusiasts have criticised Mr Major's refusal to take part in
tonight's French television debate with President Francois Mitterrand on the
treaty, while Euro-sceptics believe insufficient account has been taken of
the Danish rejection of the agreement.
Mr Major's decision not to take part in the French television debate can be
seen as routine political caution.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, said Mr Major had a peculiar way
of showing his desire for the UK to be at the heart of Europe, and added
that it would be no surprise if other EC countries received the impression
that 'the British commitment to Maastricht is lukewarm at best'.
The government has made it clear that even the narrowest of rejections by
the French will stop the ratification process, but it continues to emphasise
its keenness for the treaty to be approved by all 12 EC-member countries.
