THE US yesterday stepped up its diplomatic offensive in Rio de Janeiro,
ahead of President George Bush's arrival at the summit, which reaches its
climax today.
While Mr Bush repeated in Washington that he would not sign one of the
summit's central treaties, on biological diversity, US summit delegates
sought to improve their image in Rio, where the US has been largely
isolated.
There remain critical problems to be resolved at the summit before more than
100 heads of government arrive. Germany and Brazil were last night
co-ordinating negotiations in an attempt to bridge differences on finance
and forests. Delegates were hopeful of an agreement on finance, but a pact
on a set of non-binding forest principles was in disarray as the first heads
of government, including Mr John Major, UK prime minister, arrived.
Forests have proved the most contentious issue of the summit and 17 hours of
negotiations appeared only to have widened north-south differences. Mr Kamal
Nath, forestry minister of India - the most obstructive country on agreeing
the declaration - described the position as 'a stalemate'.
After German and US-led ministerial meetings throughout the day, there was
new optimism that agreement might be reached on most points of the forest
principles, with the enticement of increased aid apparently being offered
and a softening of the position of Malaysia, which had taken a hard line.
Mr Celso Lafer, Brazil's foreign minister, said: 'The expectation is that we
can wrap everything up by the end of the day so that we have time for
documents to be processed, translated and distributed by Sunday.'
US administration officials, meanwhile, kept up attacks on the environmental
records of other countries which they say have unfairly criticised the US.
They singled out the high number of threatened German fish, mammal and bird
species, as well as the level of imports of tropical woods into Japan and
the European Community.
Mr William Reilly, administrator of the US Environment Protection Agency,
announced measures to strengthen the conference's treaties. The US wanted a
'prompt start' on the climate change convention to limit greenhouse gases.
This included quick ratification, stricter monitoring of power station
emissions, and a detailed national action plan to reduce greenhouse gases.
Mr Bush vowed as he left for Rio yesterday he would stand firm in his
refusal to sign the summit convention on biological diversity.
With the UK having agreed to sign the convention, aimed at protecting global
species, the US is likely to be the only big country holding out against it.
But Mr Bush said the convention contained provisions that had nothing to do
with bio-diversity and which could hinder US economic growth.
