FIFTY YEARS ago this week saw the publication of the Beveridge Report on
Social Insurance and Allied Services, which led to the foundation of the
post-war welfare state.
The welfare state developed an institutional structure - the disappearance
of charitable hospitals, the growth of local authority social services
departments - that made it look as though the ancient British institution of
charity would be relegated to a marginal role in society.
Half a century later, the position is very different. Charities are being
invited to become partners in the delivery of mainstream welfare services
that in recent times have become regarded as the state's automatic
responsibility. Demand for services provided by charities is rising as a
result of financial pressures on the welfare state. And recent innovations
such as self-governing trust hospitals and opted-out schools are drawing
state institutions into more charitable fund-raising themselves.
This watershed for charity in Britain coincides with another. Charity law is
catching up with a sector that, in spite of its collecting-box image, has an
income of 3 1/2 -4 per cent of gdp. Accounting practices, invest ment
policies, the responsibilities of trustees and charity management are all
undergoing the biggest re-examination of recent times.
The long-awaited new Charities Act was one of the last items of legislation
to pass through parliament before the general election. Its provisions are
being brought into effect during this year and next.
One central purpose of the Act is to strengthen the Charity Commissioners'
powers to regulate charities and respond to abuses - for example by removing
trustees and appointing receivers and managers.
Charities will face legal penalties in future if they fail to submit reports
and accounts annually to the commissioners; something many smaller ones have
neglected to do in the past. Other provisions in the Act tighten up on
fund-raising activities.
In an economic climate which is hampering real growth in charities' donated
income, much attention is being given to securing maximum return on
investments. The Act will add to this focus on investments and - although
charity investments are tiny compared with pension fund investments - the
sector is therefore attracting the attentions of competing fund managers.
Under the Act the Official Custodian, a public office which holds an
estimated Pounds 1.25bn of charity property, will divest itself over the
next five years of assets held on trust for charities. Smaller charities
will now have to appoint asset managers or - in one of several potential
pressures for charity amalgamations - merge with bigger organisations or
establish federal arrangements with other small charities.
The Act gives the home secretary power to relax the 1961 Trustee Investments
Act which requires a division of charity investments between 'wider-range'
investments in shares and 'narrower-range' ones in gilts. This would add to
the professional investment advice needed by charity trustees and - along
with many provisions of the Act - the skills required to function as a
trustee. Research points to urgent training needs to equip trustees for
their responsibilities.
Investments account for about 15 per cent of total charitable income. The
biggest source of income - more than half the total - is in fees and grants
for services. Donations account for about 20 per cent. The Charities Aid
Foundation (CAF) reported last month that total income of all charities, on
an upward trend since the 1970s, had fallen in real terms between 1985 and
1990.
This overall downturn is not reflected in the performance of some of the
biggest charities; the income of the top 400 grew by 6 per cent in real
terms last year. The CAF suggests that big charities may be getting bigger
because of their greater professionalism in activities such as advertising
and direct mail, and because they are less reliant than the rest of the
sector on government grants.
The government wants charities to take a greater role in delivering welfare
services. Ministers hope that many voluntary organisations will take the
opportunities offered by next April's community care reforms, intended to
enable elderly and disabled people to be cared for at home rather than in
institutions.
In a bid to stimulate voluntary sector involvement in public services, the
government's ministerial group on the voluntary sector has decided to update
and reissue guidance to civil servants.
This follows a report published by the National Council for Voluntary
Organisations (NCVO) in September, expressing disappointment at the slow
progress since publication of a government report in 1990 on funding for the
voluntary sector and its partnership with the public sector.
Mr Michael Jack, the home office minister who chairs the ministerial group,
says the government wants the voluntary sector to grow; it is committed to
creating a climate in which a diverse range of voluntary groups can
flourish.
'It is therefore important that government policies do not overlook the
potential
contributions of the voluntary sector, or inadvertently place unreasonable
burdens on voluntary groups.'
However, at a time when there is little increase in individual or corporate
donations to charity, the sector's immediate concern is over the impact of
public spending constraints on financial support from central and local
government. This is likely to be a problem for local voluntary groups in
1993; many are totally dependent on local authority finance.
There is also continuing anxiety in the voluntary sector about the possible
impact of one of the government's showpiece policies, the National Lottery.
Charity managers worry that this will divert income from other fund-raising
activities; an NCVO survey shows that a substantial number of people would
give less to charity and buy lottery tickets instead; charity will be only
one of several causes to benefit from the lottery proceeds. British charity
managers look apprehensively at the Republic of Ireland, where a national
lottery was followed by a fall in charity fund-raising.
While the recession has had an impact on income, there is evidence that the
sector is further handicapped by attitudes towards the role of charity. The
latest British Social Attitudes survey, published last month, points to
problems which both the government and the voluntary sector must solve if
they are to expand the sector's influence.
Fifty years on from the Beveridge Report, the view that the state should be
the provider of basic welfare services is widely held in Britain. The survey
refers to the public's 'persistent attachment to the principles of
collective provision underwritten by taxation.' This so-far-unshakeable
attitude makes it difficult for the government to succeed in efforts to
persuade the public to become more generous in their support for charity.
The problem revealed in the attitudes survey is that more than a third of
the public apparently believe that 'most are wasteful in their use of
funds.'
The new Act, the economic climate, a competitive market for funds and
contracts and recruitment of managers with experience in other sectors are
all helping to make charities more businesslike and efficient. When demand
for its services is out-stripping resources, the voluntary sector urgently
needs to find ways of communicating that message.
