SEVERAL THOUSAND neo-Nazis, from Germany, Austria and further afield, were
descending on Passau today for the annual convention in the town's Nibelung
Hall of the far-right Deutsche Volksunion.
Passau is a beautiful place, situated on Bavaria's eastern border at the
point where the Inn and Danube rivers meet. These visitors, however, are not
here for the beer. They have come to whip up persecution of Germany's
foreign workers and refugees, to give sieg-heil salutes and to demand racial
purity in a reunited fatherland.
Their choice of Passau, a placid, bourgeois, Catholic and conservative
community with a tradition of anti-semitism, is not accidental.
Adolf Hitler loved the place. He was born 30km away at Braunau on the
Austrian bank of the Inn. He lived in Passau as a small child (and narrowly
escaped drowning). His first serious backer was the local brewing magnate.
The bishop, too, welcomed him, hanging the Nazi banner in the cathedral.
Heinrich Himmler lived here; his father taught at the high school. Adolf
Eichmann and Ernst Kaltenbrunner came here to organise the Anschluss.
There were three concentration camps in the town. In the last hours of the
war, some 5,000 slave workers, mainly Russian, Polish and Czech prisoners
producing V-2 rockets deep inside the cliff on the Danube's northern bank,
were marched out to slaughter: their genitals were shot or sliced off and
then they were buried alive.
All this, Passau forgot.
Then, nearly 40 years later, an innocent schoolgirl from a well-connected
family started asking questions.
Anna Elisabeth Rosmus is an unlikely-looking Nemesis. She is short and
plump, with a round face, small hands and tumbling blonde hair. This is the
girl who single-handed, and ignoring threats to her life, exploded the
post-war conspiracy of silence that had allowed prominent Passau Nazis to
disguise themselves as former resistance men and remain community leaders.
Rosmus forced her fellow-citizens to confront their own ugly past - in the
process Germans call, with understandable awkwardness,
Vergangenheitsbewaltigung.
I picked my way past roller skates and children's bicycles scattered outside
a bungalow on the edge of the town. I found Anja (as she is usually called)
wearing a pair of fake-fur tiger slippers. There were tigers on the wall,
too, along with prizes awarded for her books and articles.
'I love tigers,' she said. 'They have strength and energy, but contained.
Like a cat.'
Are neo-Nazis really such a threat? I asked. They are few in number, mostly
young and ill-educated. 'We had the same question in the Twenties,' she
replied. 'Everybody here said it was crazy to think about these people. We
have a saying: if a dog is barking he cannot bite. These people are
interested in making trouble and a few are serious criminals.
'But the main problem is those who listen to them, not real fascists but the
conservative and silent majority - people who are little bit lazy, who don't
use their intelligence. It is so easy to say: 'If there is only one
solution, let's adopt it]'
But the neo-Nazis have no political power, I objected.
'Not for the moment. In '25 and '26, the Nazis had no political power.'
But wouldn't there have to be a very serious economic collapse in Germany
for these people to win power?
'I don't think it has to be a real economic disaster; I think it would be
enough if people have the impression of a serious problem.'
A third of workers in the former GDR were going to lose their jobs, she
said. They were in the same situation as in the Twenties. Many West Germans
were afraid of unemployment, too.
Rosmus accuses the media of creating the impression that foreign workers and
refugees are taking all the spare jobs and houses. The politicians were
veering to the right in order to win the growing racist vote. And the
Bavarian government was hypocritical: it was recruiting Poles for cheap farm
labour but trying to keep quiet about their presence.
I asked her whether the German constitution should be changed to make it
easier to identify bona fide refugees. Wasn't it dangerous for any society
to admit a sudden wave of outsiders?
'I see this problem, but I don't think it should be solved by giving away
the constitution. The problem could easily be managed if the time between
arrival and the asylum hearing was shortened.' (At present it can take two
or three years.)
Twelve years ago, at the age of 20, Anja became the town's golden girl when
she won a national essay prize on the subject of freedom in Europe. The
bishop, a friend of the family, brought her flowers and the mayor gave her a
silver medal. The following year she came third. This time the subject was
'My home town, 1933-39.'
Researching her second essay, she found the leaders of her community
curiously forgetful. What they said did not accord with scraps she had heard
at the family dinner table. But by now she was married to Manfred, her high
school teacher, and they had a daughter, Nadine. She had no reason to
persist.
Yet she did persist. She contacted Jewish survivors (though not Jewish
herself), so adding emotional engagement to intellectual curiosity. She
started a book, sued the municipality for access to the files, was sued in
turn, and began to unmask some pillars of the Passau establishment. Word
spread, and Michael Verhoeven, a film-maker from Munich, transferred her
story to celluloid.
Her marriage broke up. She was spat on and attacked in the street. She was
under guard in hospital for the birth of her second daughter, Salome,
following a death threat. A restaurant in Munich where she had spoken was
smashed to bits - the gang got the wrong date. Insults, of which 'Jewish
whore' was the least, were left on her telephone. Her letters were
mysteriously intercepted. She was suspended from the university for four
years.
Things have abated for Passau's avenging angel, but she still gets
threatening calls and she dare not go out alone at night.
Rosmus had explained why Passau, because of its isolation and Catholic
reverence for authority, was so vulnerable to Nazi xenophobia and remained
so ambivalent about Hitler's defeat. But I still did not understand why she
had done it. So I took her to dinner, accompanied by Salome, now 7, who fell
asleep over a pizza in her Shrove Tuesday carnival outfit. The pair were
delivered and collected by Anja's fast-driving mother.
Why were you different? I asked. You grew up here, too.
'Well, it's a good question. In my youth I wasn't different from the rest.
There's one little reason: my father (a teacher and magistrate) is a refugee
from Silesia and even though he's quite well known here and in the Bavarian
ministries, he is never regarded as one of us. He is respected, but he is a
guest. I noticed this.
'He is the most typical German employee. He strictly fulfils whatever he is
ordered to do. He is an extremely correct person. From him I learned a
strict feeling for justice.
'On the other hand, there is the whole family of my mother. They were
extremely active in the Catholic church. They are religious not out of
tradition, but because they believe in Christian ethics.' She described how
her mother and his brother (now a monsignor) as teenagers in 1943 went from
house to house with a petition against the deportation of an outspoken
priest.
'So from this side I have the feeling you have to support anybody who needs
it. Even if I am not at all religious anymore, the ethics I accept.'
You must be more than a bit obstinate, I said.
'Even as a little child I made difficulties in the school. I was a good
pupil but if there was something against justice in the class I stood up and
complained. So, since my earliest childhood I stood up, a bit like my mother
did.'
Her marriage folded because her husband came from a conservative family.
They were small farmers, she said, who had borrowed money from a Jew and
were absolved the debt by one of Hitler's edicts.
So your husband disagreed with what you were doing?
'Yes, extremely. How could you dig up these things? How could you be friends
with the Jews? When a survivor came to the house he left. He could not
accept a Jew in his house. And I could not accept his keeping silence.'
You must admit, looking at it from his point of view, that it was very
difficult.
'Yes, yes. It was for both sides. I think my point of view is the right one.
But I accept it was a problem for me, a problem for him.'
Do you have a feeling of pride in what you do?
'No, not at all.'
Perhaps you enjoy the attention?
'No. No. That is a bit strange. It is also a consequence of my father's
education.'
Don't you wonder if you are not yourself a bit crazy to spend so much of
your life and energy on this thing?
'No. Because the more I am working the more I meet survivors; and this is
the reason for me to go on. These are victims, suffering victims, people
from former times but still suffering now in our day. And the next
generation has it, too. When our parents and families are destroyed, we are
not complete.
'Really, justice, personal freedom are the centre of my identity. I love
these more than this broken marriage.'
Perhaps you are too intolerant, I said. Passau may be particularly bad, but
all over Germany there are millions of people who were Nazi sympathisers.
'Yes, sure. But I don't have problems with these ordinary people.'
Who are your targets then?
'I am interested in the real guilty person, a man who had power and who
abused this power, who is personally responsible for thousands and thousands
of murdered people. We have such a person living here in my neighbourhood.'
(She mentioned a name).
As the old Nazis die out, Anja Rosmus is coming to the end of a phase. She
wants to complete her degree in sociology, do a doctorate at Passau
University (if they will accept her) then teach and research on race
discrimination and xenophobia.
I asked her what she would do if she had to switch careers entirely. 'Be a
journalist]', she said, without hesitation.
'If I had been 20 years older I would not have done it. For the first few
years it was a terrible experience. I didn't know what was to come, but I
would not have done different even if I did. If others spoke out, I wouldn't
have to.'
It takes a particular kind of selfish courage to practise Anja Rosmus's
brand of altruism. Even if she herself has become used to the isolation and
the threats, her career has upset the lives of her parents and children.
Yet if in a democratic age citizens will not speak out for fear their own
flesh and blood will suffer, who will speak when tyranny takes over? There
are no more concentration camps in Passau to frighten dissenters like
Rosmus. But then there were none in the Twenties, either.
