MRS Margaret Thatcher launched a fierce attack on the European Community's
federalist ambitions yesterday, calling for the creation of a looser
confederation that would return power to individual nation-states.
Speaking at The Hague to the Global Panel, an economic forum, the former UK
prime minister avoided directly challenging her successor, Mr John Major,
who has pledged to keep Britain at the heart of Europe.
But, speaking just days before an expected rebellion by anti-federalist
Conservative MPs against the prime minister's signature of the Maastricht
treaty, she did little to disguise her anger at the pace of European
integration.
She accused the EC of rushing towards a federalist structure before the EC
was enlarged to include eastern Europe. 'It hopes to construct a centralised
super-state in advance - and irrevocably - so that the new members will have
to apply for entry on federalist terms,' she said.
She warned that a tightly-knit Community would not be able to curb the
ambitions of a united Germany. Its power could be best 'contained' in a
looser Europe in which the US maintained a significant presence.
In a looser structure, other governments would be free to form a coalition
against Germany. By contrast, 'a common foreign policy . . . is liable to
express the interests of the largest single factor', she said.
Mrs Thatcher criticised the European Commission for drawing up directives in
'back rooms' and the European parliament for lacking Europe-wide political
parties and political debate.
'Instead of a centralised bureaucracy, the model should be a market - not
only a market of individuals and companies, but also a market in which the
players are governments,' she said.
European governments should be free to compete with each other for
investment. Rather than forcing governments to go forward together at the
same pace, the EC should allow a multi-speed Europe to emerge.
'We should aim at a multi-track Europe in which ad hoc groups of different
states - such as the Schengen Group - forge varying levels of co-operation
and integration on a case-by-case basis,' she said. The group is made up of
eight EC members committed to a free travel zone.
Mrs Thatcher was careful to praise Mr Major, saying that he had ensured
'that we would not have either a single currency or the absurd provisions of
the Social Chapter forced upon us'.
Downing Street was concerned not to provoke a public row. Despite
acknowledgment by senior ministers that the tenor of Mrs Thatcher's remarks
was seriously at odds with Mr Major's approach, officials said the prime
minister agreed with some of the detail of her remarks.
The focus of Mrs Thatcher's criticism was the European Commission and its
monopoly on the power to introduce legislation. 'The work of the Commission
should cease to be legislative in any sense,' she said. 'It should be an
administrative body.'
Speech extracts, Page 4
Editorial comment, Page 8
Spirit of solidarity: a personal view of Europe by Hans-Dietrich Genscher,
Page 9
