MR JOHN MAJOR survived the most critical test of his political career last
night when the House of Commons voted by a nerve-wrackingly small majority
to back the government's commitment to the Maastricht treaty.
Amid extraordinary scenes at Westminster as cabinet ministers and party
managers struggled until the moment of the vote to contain a rebellion by
Tory Euro-sceptics, MPs decided by 319 to 316 - a margin of just three - to
back resumption of the Maastricht ratification process.
With Liberal Democrats giving crucial support to the government, the MPs
rejected by 319 to 313 an amendment tabled by Mr John Smith, the Labour
leader, calling for a halt to ratification until after next month's
Edinburgh summit.
The perilously narrow government majority came after a strong warning from
Mr Major that reneging on the treaty would leave Britain 'scowling' in
frustration on the fringes of Europe. As colleagues judged that his
successful gamble had saved his premiership, the outcome was being claimed
by others as a turning point in the government's battered fortunes.
The victory followed the most intensive and frantic government effort in
recent memory to head off revolt on its own back benches. Sir Norman Fowler,
the Conservative party chairman, said it 'symbolised the support in the
Conservative party' for Mr Major, adding that it would serve to draw a line
under the government's recent rough patch.
The resuIt prompted a bitter attack by the Labour party on the Liberal
Democrats, whose decision to vote with Mr Major gave the prime minister his
majority. Led by Mr Paddy Ashdown, 19 of the 20 Liberal Democrats voted for
the government. Mr Ashdown was accused by Labour's shadow cabinet of
throwing a 'lifeline' to a prime minister who planned to use next week's
Autumn Statement to announce swingeing public spending cuts.
More than 30 Tory Euro-sceptics were unmoved by the day-long mixture of
threats and promises from party managers demanding loyalty to Mr Major. Some
26 defied the prime minister by voting against the government motion.
Another seven abstained.
On Mr Smith's amendment 23 Tories rebelled and 10 abstained. But many Tory
MPs who had previously opposed Maastricht were pressured into giving their
reluctant support to save Mr Major's premiership.
With the Ulster Unionists and other minor parties ranged against it, the
government - which has a paper majority of 21 over all other parties - was
saved only by the votes of the Liberal Democrats.
In a tense and frequently angry debate which quickly became a test of the
prime minister's authority, Mr Major said the outcome could decide Britain's
future in Europe: 'The essential question is simply: are we or are we not in
this country to play a central role in Europe's development?'
In spite of the breathtakingly close finish, ministers said that the vote -
acknowledged by leading Euro-sceptics to have represented their best hope of
wrecking the ratification process - would mark a watershed in the fortunes
of Mr Major's beleaguered government.
The focus of its attention would now switch to promoting economic recovery.
The government's hope is that the endorsement of its European strategy will
help to restore political and economic confidence.
But there was acknowledgement also that the harsh decisions facing the
cabinet later today over the public spending cuts needed before the Autumn
Statement threaten further unrest over coming weeks.
Ministers hope an early interest rate cut and Mr Major's promised economic
recovery package will ease the pain, but are nonetheless bracing themselves
for the possibility of potential Tory revolts once the extent of the
spending curbs becomes apparent.
The prime minister, who gambled on last night's vote in an attempt to
restore his shaky authority at home and to strengthen his negotiating hand
in the Europe, said that the detailed committee stage of the Maastricht bill
would now restart before the Edinburgh summit.
But acutely conscious that yesterday's debate will not calm the Tory back
benches, Downing Street signalled that there would not be a drive to push
through the legislation. Instead MPs can expect only a cursory debate before
Christmas with the most of the detailed committee stage of the legislation
deferred until the new year.
In the preceding debate Mr Major said that an attempt to renege now on the
Maastricht treaty would severely damage Britain's economic prospects.
He added that the 'centralist' Europe feared by the Euro-sceptics was most
likely, 'if we do stand aside and let others run Europe, while Britain
scowls in frustration on the fringes'.
Clashing repeatedly with Mr Smith over the opposition amendment, Mr Major
added: 'I have to tell the House, and I have to tell the country, that we
cannot continue to make a success of our membership of the Community unless
we ratify the treaty that we have agreed to'.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
NARROW MARGIN OF VICTORY
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                           With            With          Number of
                     Government      Opposition        Tory rebels
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Labour amendment            319             313                 23
Government motion           319             316                 26
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
PM survives another day, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 20
Lex, Page 22
