MR HELMUT KOHL, the German chancellor, yesterday rejected the idea of a
'two-speed' Europe and urged Britain to keep to the path of integration with
the other 11 members of the Community.
Mr Kohl, who has strong domestic reasons for proceeding cautiously towards
European economic and monetary union, said the Community should stick to the
timetable of a single currency by 1999. A two-speed move would mean a small
number of Community countries would achieve monetary union in a much shorter
timescale.
He insisted that renegotiating Maastricht was out of the question, in spite
of opposition to it in Denmark and Britain.
Public opinion in both Germany and France was also likely to be strongly
sceptical about a two-speed move to European union, which would leave out
key nations that both countries regard as economic and political allies. 'We
want Britain to be with us, we want a Europe of 12, we don't want a
two-speed Europe,' Mr Kohl told a press conference in Luxembourg.
His message to Britain is likely to be reinforced by the French government
when Mr John Major, the prime minister, visits Paris today.
In spite of the growing split in the Conservative party over Britain's
European policies, President Francois Mitterrand is expected to counsel Mr
Major against anti-German rhetoric.
Mr Mitterrand will try to persuade Mr Major to put aside the quarrelling
with Germany sparked by this month's currency turbulence. He will urge Mr
Major to adhere to the plan to ratify the EC treaty this year, French
officials say.
The attempt to persuade Britain to stick to the Maastricht process comes
amid speculation that opposition to the treaty could prompt France and
Germany to forge Emu with a small 'core' of other states.
Neither Paris nor Bonn, however, appears ready to press ahead with such a
move.
Mr Kohl, who is under pressure from domestic critics who say the intended
new European currency might be less stable than the D-Mark, denied that his
government wanted a slimmer Emu.
'There are many rumours,' he said. 'It's like the Loch Ness monster, it
keeps reappearing.'
The chancellor's sentiments were backed up in London by Mr Hans-Peter Stihl,
president of the German association of chambers of commerce and industry. He
suggested that a delay in the Maastricht timetable was more likely than an
overt move to a two-speed Europe.
Mr Kohl said there was no reason to delay the start of negotiations with
other European nations such as Austria and Sweden which have applied to join
the Community. He added that it was wrong for people to fear the emergence
of a European superstate or for them to blame the European Commission
bureaucracy in Brussels for the problems of the EC.
German warns on German influence, Page 2
Germany stagnates, Page 4
