As anyone who owns a car in Ireland will testify, the cost of insuring it is
enough to make you want to take the bus. And it isn't just cars: other
non-life premiums such as employer and public liability are also high
relative to elsewhere in the European Community.
According to a study carried out for the Irish Insurance Federation (IIF) by
the accountants Coopers and Lybrand last year, motor insurance costs in the
Republic of Ireland are in most cases more than twice as high as in the UK.
The study found that the cost of comprehensive cover is 48 per cent higher,
while non-comprehensive cover is 133 per cent higher. But only 38 per cent
of Irish drivers have comprehensive cover, compared to 73 per cent of
drivers in the UK.
The reasons for this are in many cases interlinked. First, as the study
showed, personal injury claims are two and a half times more likely to arise
than in the UK. But perhaps more importantly, personal injury awards are
also much higher. Claims under comprehensive cover are up to three times
more expensive; claims under non-comprehensive cover are five times higher.
The explanation lies in the number of accidents on Irish roads every year.
Based on the number of casualties per vehicle registered in Ireland, there
are two and a half times as many fatalities resulting from accidents than in
the UK.
Irish people are also far more likely to sue for damages than people
elsewhere, according to insurance companies. They say the first notification
of a claim they receive is often a solicitor's letter.
In an attempt to bring down the high cost of insurance and personal injury
claims, the government passed legislation in 1988 abolishing the use of
juries in settling claims. But despite this, the level of awards continues
to be very high.
'The overall cost of litigation and awards has not changed because of the
legislation,' says Mr Aidan Cassells, director general of the IIF. 'They are
more consistent but there has been no significant reduction.'
Mr Eamonn Walsh, managing director of Hibernian, the country's largest
independent general insurance company, agrees that public and employer
liability premiums are high but not out of line with elsewhere in the EC -
'the level of personal injury claim is high but there is no real difference
in cost,' he says. 'It does arise in certain situations, and within
individual companies I think laissez faire management is to blame for the
level of claims by employees. But in general, industrial insurance is
comparable. We do not, after all, have a very industrialised economy. A lot
of our manufacturing is high technology, where there is very little risk.'
All are agreed, however, on the need to reduce the level of court awards -
'something has to be done, either at EC or at national level,' says Mr
Cassells. 'But it is a difficult issue to address. The independence of the
system of deciding awards makes it nearly impossible to change them.'
THE IIF sees a cap on the level of damages as the most logical route for
less serious injuries. The IIF has been active in promoting greater safety
awareness on roads, which, coupled with tougher enforcement of road traffic
laws, led in 1990 to a six per cent drop in the number of accidents.
Insurance companies are chalking up heavy losses in motor and liability
underwriting business. In 1990, the last year for which figures are
available, motor underwriting losses amounted to Pounds 130m, an increase of
12 per cent on the previous year. The good news, though, was that the rate
of growth of losses appeared to be slowing.
Guardian Royal Exchange lost Pounds 36.5m on motor premium income of Pounds
64m. Its subsidiary New PMPA, which rose from the ashes of the collapse of
the original PMPA insurance company in 1984, lost Pounds 11m on premium
income of Pounds 91m.
Liability insurance is also unprofitable. In 1990 companies reported total
underwriting losses of Pounds 54m on premium income of some Pounds 140m.
Indeed, of the 38 companies licenced to write general insurance business in
the Republic of Ireland in 1990, only 11 recorded underwriting profits.
Total underwriting losses amounted to Pounds 171m on premium income of
Pounds 800m. Fire and property insurance showed underwriting profits of
Pounds 7m on premium income of Pounds 168m, with the vast bulk of those
profits generated by the Irish arms of overseas insurance companies.
The high-cost environment has not, however, dissuaded many of the big
overseas insurance companies from competing in the Irish market. In fact,
the non-life market is dominated by the big UK insurers, including Guardian
Royal Exchange, General Accident and Eagle Star. As Mr Walsh points out, the
UK insurers have traditionally seen Dublin as another branch, like Glasgow
or Liverpool.
