WHEN as a child I first heard the expression 'anti-hero', I thought the
speaker was referring to a female relative. There must be an Auntie Hero in
the family, possibly married to an Uncle Villain. I have since learnt the
error of my ears. But I still think of the anti-hero as some kind of
delinquent older androgyne: a person transcending both the sexual divide
between heroes and heroines and the moral divide between heroes and
villains.
September's video anti-heroes - the month is thick with them - illustrate my
point. Warren Beatty as Bugsy (Columbia/TriStar), John Turturro as Barton
Fink (Columbia/TriStar), Keanu Reeves and River Phoenix as two gay hustlers
living on the law's edge in My Own Private Idaho (Fox); even disillusioned,
downbeat Humphrey Bogart in the anniversary-reissued Casablanca (Warners).
Someone once defined an anti-hero as a hero looking into a cracked shaving
mirror. There may still be good looks, integrity, virility: but they have
all become a little scrambled. The subtlest anti-hero of the month is Beatty
as Bugsy Siegel in Barry Levinson's gloriously sweet-and-sour gangster
history about the man who made Las Vegas. It is not just that Beatty for the
first time manages moments of ugliness: receding hair and swelling jowls
giving the one-time pin-up a Nixon look. It is that his surviving charm and
dynamism seem just as winning in a wicked context as they did in the Boy's
Own heroics of The Parallax View or the Comrade's Own heroics of Reds.
Bugsy's ambivalence shocked American filmgoers into shunning the movie. Nor
did they flock to My Own Private Idaho, where writer-director Gus Van Sant
suspends his rent-boy 'heroes' in a tender, dreamy limbo between good and
evil, past and present, reality and fantasy. The film's beautiful threnody
on themes of loss and search - a road movie through American childhoods -
underscores its sometimes deliberately discordant morality.
Movie audiences are disconcerted by central characters who do not display
exemplary moral attributes. Anti-heroes have always been conscripted from
the fringes of the character department. Just as Idaho dares to put a pair
of hustlers-for-hire into the central spotlight, so the Coen brothers'
Barton Fink foregrounds an outright weirdo (John Turturro) who would
normally have been wheeled in and out for a quick madness cameo.
Turturro's struggling writer in Hollywood, circa 1940, is wild of hair,
bespectacled of eye and twittery of manner. He is an anti-hero for the
literary movie tradition: a cracked-mirror answer to all those Glamorous
Authors the cinema has supplied from Gregory Peck as Scott Fitzgerald to
James Mason as Flaubert.
Unsurprisingly, moviegoers stayed away from Barton Fink too. But anti-heroes
are not always box-office poison. The greatest was Bogart. His forlorn and
furrowed mug would crack any mirror at ten paces, and his moral ambivalence
was staunchly cultivated through 50 films. Yet his romantic appeal was
incalculable. In Casablanca he is a piece of human driftwood with hunched
shoulders and a voice like a saw. But he realises - the film realises - that
given the right existential context a man practising Do Your Own Thing
ethics (Bogart) is more charismatic than a man practising duty-bound
derring-do (Paul Henreid).
Finally, let us not forget the anti-heroine. Thelma And Louise (MGM/UA) is
the story of two plainspun women who hop into a car for a freedom-tasting
weekend and discover that the road to good intentions is paved with
hailstones from Hell. With its main characters turning more macho by the
minute, no film could better show the anti-hero(ine)'s tendency towards
gender mutation. And no modern action thriller has given crime and mayhem a
greater pop-tragic stature as the wages of an unjust or unstable society.
