FRANCE and Italy will today call for increased co-operation between EC
members to fight organised crime in Europe under the banner of the
Maastricht treaty.
At a special meeting of interior and justice ministers, the French and
Italians will propose the immediate establishment of a working group
specialising in the fight against the mafia.
They will also call for harmonisation of criminal law in member states to
make international co-operation and crime-busting easier, and acceleration
of the establishment of Europol, a pan-European criminal intelligence
agency.
The ministers of the 12 are also likely to talk about how to handle the
influx of refugees from the former Yugoslav republics, but the meeting will
mostly be devoted to crime-fighting in the EC.
Britain, which holds the EC presidency, arranged the extra meeting at the
request of the Italian and French justice ministers, following the
assassination of Mr Giovanni Falcone and Mr Paolo Borsellino, two anti-mafia
judges in Sicily.
The timing is particularly felicitous for the French government, faced with
a close vote Sunday on the Maastricht treaty. The spread of organised crime
across open EC borders is a spectre raised by No campaigners in France.
'The French were quick to spot that it wouldn't be at all bad if they could
demonstrate that when serious things happen in this area, the 12 rally round
and do something,' said one senior EC official.
As if to underline the point, the Franco-Italian document places great
emphasis on the advantages of inter-governmental co-operation under the
treaty. 'Europeans now have the institutional resources to reinforce
co-operation in justice and police matters on the basis of the Maastricht
treaty,' it says.
Immigration and judicial policy is one of the two 'pillars' of the
Maastricht treaty in which the influence of the European Commission and the
Court of Justice would be limited or non-existent. It would probably survive
even if the rest of the agreement fell apart.
A computer replacing 60m documents will connect customs officers across the
Community as of January 1 1993, Reuter adds.
The Customs Information System network, set to go live in October, will
allow customs offices to send encoded messages about suspected drug
smuggling, fraudulent export certificates and illegal trafficking in arms,
endangered species or cultural treasures.
The system is aimed at goods coming from or going to third countries, not
those moving within the EC.
