DAY 1
IT IS 6.45am, and I am on the Promenade deck, port side, of the Norwegian
Cruise Line vessel Westward, off Baja California, puttering glassily
southward, bound for Acapulco. The ship left Los Angeles last evening.
Along the horizon, flashes of salmon and buttercup are heralding the dawn.
The sea is smooth and pewter-coloured. Everything is beautiful, everything
is perfect. In short, it is exactly the sort of morning that makes Pisceans
sad. Pisceans are often sad; they come especially equipped for it. So to
keep forlorness at bay, I have given myself a serious talking-to: convinced
myself that I am exactly the sort of person for whom a seven-day cruise, Los
Angeles to Acapulco, might have been invented.
The incident that set me off, that triggered my resolve to enjoy myself
wholeheartedly, occured 30 hours ago in the Cafe LA at the Airport Hilton,
where I was studying my American visa in a 17-year-old passport. As I went
to close the passport I noticed, with a shock, the photograph at the front.
Talk about a mess. I had shoulder-length hair, parted like a caveman's, a
smudge of designer stubble (in 1975?), and eyes as big as dinner plates. But
I seemed to be having fun. Even in the photo-booth I had found something to
laugh about, some inconsequentiality that, even 30 hours ago, had made me
laugh again in recognition of the person I was 17 years ago, and the person
I am still: a smile on a stick.
To judge from the Cruise News, the good ship Westward offers non-stop fun.
There is an interdenominational church service, all faiths welcome.
Low-impact aerobics. Capt Peder Vebenstad's morning update via the public
address system. Paddle tennis. Ping-pong. Shuffleboard. Coffee club. Hair
and beauty demonstration. Gym instruction. Fashion show. Tour of the ship's
bridge. Golf clinic. Fitness centre. Cinema. Trapshooting with an officer
(Dollars 10 for ten shots, cash only). And the slot machines in the casino
open at 9am with a free bloody mary for each lucky punter.
At 1pm I attend a session entitled 'Napkin Folding' presented by
inexhaustible cruise hostess Amanda Felts, 24, who is pretty and dizzy and
has a degree in recreation from the University of Illinois. Amanda has been
working on NCL cruise ships for 3 1/2 years. There are 80 people at the
session, learning how to fold napkins.
'Now,' says Amanda, as I enter the dining room, 'this is where the starch is
gonna come in handy with your four loose ends which you're gonna pull
through like this into a bird-of-paradise.'
At 7.45pm there is a cocktail party hosted by Capt Vebenstad, followed by
dinner at the captain's table. The captain is a pleasant sort, as is the
chief engineer, seated on my left. Working extremely hard, I steer the
conversation clear of anything to do with engines. Plates come and go. The
long night unfolds. Absent-mindedly, I place my napkin on the table and roll
it about a bit, teasing the loose ends into a crest-fallen bird-of-paradise.
DAY 2
Still at sea. The fun continues, though I am now seeking out the ship's
quiet places so as to avoid the many ways to spend money that the Westward
offers. Diving classes. Shopping arcade. Casino Royale. Beauty salon.
NCL claims to have pioneered Caribbean cruising in the mid-1960s by offering
cruises out of Miami, then a minor passenger port, on the 11,000-ton
Sunward. Today NCL has seven cruise ships (two more are on the way),
including the Norway (formerly the France, the world's largest passenger
ship), all of which cruise the Caribbean or the Mexican coast.
Built in 1972, the Westward is spacious and comfortable. She can take 821
passengers, though on this cruise there are 464, including 429 Americans.
There is no side to these people. They are Middle America on holiday:
whey-faced from their winters in Iowa, Idaho, Nebraska and New Jersey;
elderly, mostly; unblinkingly Republican and doggedly unsophisticated. If
you want to know how to save 12 cents on the dollar, these are the folk who
will show you how.
DAY 3
Our first port of call: Cabo San Lucas, famous for sports-fishing and
first-rate beaches. As I stroll around the marina, a salesman accosts me:
'Hi there, Sir. Is this your first visit to Cabo San Lucas? What I'm gonna
do is fill in this VIP card which entitles you to a tour of Dreamscape
Condominiums. Only take an hour, Sir. Then, when you're through, I'm going
to give you a Dollars 15 voucher entitling you to dinner at this real nice
place - seafood, prime rib, the best joint in Cabo - just around the corner.
Isn't that great, hey? Hey, man? Sir?'
Back on board the Westward, I glance across at a Russian cruise ship,
registered Odessa, riding at anchor. Its crew has not seen home for almost a
year and is said to be apprehensive.
By coincidence, I am reading the last pages of John le Carres The Secret
Pilgrim, the bit where George Smiley is ruminating on the new world order.
'One day,' says Smiley, 'history may tell us who really won. If a democratic
Russia emerges - why then, Russia will have been the winner. And if the West
chokes on its own materialism, then the West may still turn out to have been
the loser. But . . . sometimes there are no winners at all. And sometimes
nobody needs to lose.'
When I look up again, the Russian ship has stolen from port. All I can see
is pelicans diving.
DAY 4
Mazatlan. The weather is now brilliant, the temperature nudging 80. Thirteen
miles south of the Tropic of Cancer, Mazatlan is billed as the busiest port
on Mexico's west coast and the first big tourist resort south of the border.
Like Hawaii, it is losing the battle against US tourism, which grinds
everything it encounters into popcorn and concrete.
There is one compensation, though. 'Mazatlan,' my driver tells me, 'is
famous for the beauty of its women, who win Miss Mexico more often than
not.' I am sure he is right. There are beauties on every hand, smouldering
and pouting. Then I see a beggar-girl, with black worried eyes. I give her
Dollars 5. She takes the note solemnly, inspects it, folds it, smiles like a
queen. I hope she wins Miss Mexico.
Back on board, on my way to dinner, I see a fellow resident of Biscayne deck
lolling in a chair by the elevator. Although the dress code tonight is
formal, he is wearing purple shorts and his shirt sags open. He is holding,
with both hands, an enormous pink cocktail in which things look to be
swimming.
I ask him if he has cruised before. Yes, he says, this is his fourth cruise
in five years. 'Plus I had a side trip to Acapuk . . . Asapl . . .
Acasapulco, Goddammit. I just can't stop travell'n'
DAY 5 and 6
The weather is getting hotter and the ports of call more exotic: Puerto
Vallarta, where John Huston filmed The Night of the Iguana, and Zihuatanejo,
a wonderfully sleepy spot which I am sorry to leave.
On board the Westward, the pace of life intensifies. The giftshop is now
offering Brazilian amethysts and blue topazes at 'Dollars 10 only per
carat.' According to the giftshop: 'Stones are offered in a variety of carat
sizes to enable accessorizing pendants, rings and matching earrings.' It
takes me such a long time to fathom that sentence that by the time I do, the
Westward has shucked anchor once more and a gold and vermilion sunset is
burning the sea.
DAY 7
Acapulco, the end of the cruise.
Before leaving the ship, I made a point of poking into various suites and
penthouses, because my own cabin was only Category 8. For this cruise and
cabin category, NCL's 1992 UK prices range from Pounds 1,810 (low season) to
Pounds 1,887 (peak) for a two-week holiday that includes a seven-night stay
at the Marina Del Rey Marriott Hotel, Los Angeles, as well as the
seven-night cruise on the Westward, LA-Acapulco or Acapulco-LA. The cheapest
cabins cost Pounds 1,490-Pounds 1,568, while suites and penthouses range to
Pounds 2,401-Pounds 2,512. Fares are per person based on double occupancy.
The price includes economy scheduled transatlantic flights, the flight
between LA and Acapulco, port and airport taxes, all meals and entertainment
on board, all transfers and a one-day pass to Universal Studios, Hollywood.
NCL also says it can organise a week's car hire in LA (unlimited mileage)
from Pounds 110. Not included in the overall price are: holiday insurance,
hotel meals, gratuities, tours and shore excursions. The suggested
ship-board gratuities for the cabin steward, waiter, busboy and maitre d'
total Dollars 59.50 for a week's cruise.
If you are visiting LA anyway, the peak-season cruise-only fare for Category
8 cabins (north- or south-bound) is Dollars 1,770 plus port tax of Dollars
65, ranging to Dollars 2,895 plus port tax for the top-priced penthouse.
On my last night on board, I jotted down scores out of ten for various
aspects of my week's cruise on the Westward. They worked out like this:
ports of call, 8; weather (second week of February), 9; cabin, 7; cruise
staff, 8; ambience and entertainments, 7; food (which caters to American
tastes and quantities), 4; value for money, 7 1/2 . The way I score, that is
pretty good going.
Michael Thompson-Noel was a guest of Norwegian Cruise Line, and flew to Los
Angeles c/o American Airlines. In the UK, NCL is at Brook House, 229/243
Shepherd's Bush Rd, Hammersmith, London W6 7NL, reservations: 0800-181-560
or 071-408-0046; brochures: 071-493-6041.
