AN ANCIENT Chinese superstition that babies born in the lunar Year of the
Monkey, beginning today, will enjoy good luck is bad news for China's family
planners trying to hold the birth rate down.
Babies born in the Year of the Sheep, which has just ended, have always been
considered ill-fated, especially girls who are said to be born to a life of
bitterness and tragedy. The superstition is so powerfully held it
contributed to an increased incidence of abortion and a lower birth rate
last year.
Forty per cent of the births which should have occurred in 1991 occurred in
1990 - the more favourable Year of the Horse - or were put off until 1992,
the Legal Daily newspaper reported.
Even city maternity hospitals were 'idle', according to Beijing
gynaecologist and obstetrician Professor Yan Renying, who told the China
Population Newsletter she had seen nothing like it in 50 years of practice.
A low birth rate means a good job has been done, she said, but not if people
were waiting to have a lucky 'little monkey'.
If the figures reflect delayed births on the part of deeply superstitious
peasants and even urban parents seeking to maximise the life chances of the
one child they are permitted, the number of births could soar in this
auspicious Year of the Monkey.
The Chinese calendar, based on the phases of the moon, gives each year of a
12-year cycle an animal symbol. The Year of the Dragon is especially
favourable because of its association with emperors, and there are also
years of the rooster, dog, pig, rat, ox, tiger, hare and snake.
Monkeys are blessed; they have a great ability to make money, are wise,
sociable and witty; it would be hard to find a bigger success story than a
monkey in a monkey's year . . . or so the legend goes.
Choosing the most propitious time to have a baby, especially when couples
can have only one, is so widespread that the Beijing Evening News published
a long article at the beginning of the Year of the Sheep calling the
superstition a lot of feudal nonsense.
It said many successful and famous Chinese had been born in the Year of the
Sheep, and quoted mortality statistics for sheep years since the 1949
revolution - 1955, 1967, and 1979 - to show there had been no increase in
the number of deaths during those years.
Younger women who reject such 'feudal superstition' can find themselves
pressured by their mothers and mothers-in-law. 'They do not want us to have
babies in the Year of the Sheep because they say girls born then will see
their husbands die young,' said the official China Women's Journal, quoting
a young woman who was forced to have an abortion by her family.
Prof Yan, former director of Beijing's No 1 Hospital, says more babies born
this year will put heavy pressure on available hospital maternity beds and
create problems for 'little monkeys' enrolling in kindergarten or schools,
and later in finding jobs.
It is obvious from the newspaper reports and from ordinary Chinese that the
old beliefs die hard. The communists have failed to wipe them out, though
not for want of trying. Beijing people will tell you many believe nine out
of 10 sheep babies are born to endure a life of tragedy.
In the often quite primitive countryside the superstition flourishes. Fewer
than 50km from Beijing there are villagers who have never been to the
capital, never seen a foreigner, and are prey to every ancient fancy passed
on from one generation to another.
China's worried family planners remain fearful of the consequences of being
unable to convince the population that all babies born under the same symbol
are not necessarily destined for the same fate. Put your faith in science,
Prof Yan advises. Don't rush to have a little monkey: Think of the problems
it will create for the next generation.
