BRITAIN, the Irish Republic and Norway were the only countries among 12
bordering the north-east Atlantic to dump chemical waste off their shores in
1990, according to maps due to be circulated today to ministers from the 12
countries.
The maps, produced by the Oslo Commission, which regulates dumping in the
Atlantic, also show that potentially harmful waste has been dumped along
much of the European and Nordic coastlines.
Ministers from the 12 countries bordering the north-east Atlantic - the UK,
France, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Iceland, the Irish Republic, the
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain and Sweden - are meeting in Paris in an
attempt to sign a new treaty to combat pollution in the Atlantic. But the UK
is threatening to scupper the treaty unless it retains the right to dump
some low-level radioactive waste at sea.
The Oslo commission's annual report for 1992, due to be published later this
week, shows that in 1990 the UK dumped chemical waste off the coasts of East
Anglia, Hartlepool, Blyth and Newcastle. The report also shows that the
Irish Republic dumped chemical waste near Cork, and Norway dumped in its
'internal' waters, which are outside the scope of the Oslo treaty. All but
two of the 12 countries - Spain and the Irish Republic - submitted figures
showing that they had dumped waste dredged from river beds and estuaries
near their coasts in 1990.
Mr Klaus Topfer, the German environment minister, said this weekend: 'We
will do our best in Paris to convince people not to use the sea as a dumping
place.' He added that Germany was prepared to discuss the compromise of a
moratorium rather than a ban.
Environmental groups have warned that the dispute over radioactive dumping
should not distract attention from the dangers of chemical waste and the
waste from dredged rivers and estuaries.
According to Mr Tim Birch, marine pollution officer at Greenpeace, the
environmental pressure group, dredged waste 'is often more highly
contaminated than industrial discharges as it is made up of sediments from
years back which contain a lot of heavy metals such as mercury and cadmium.'
