RUNNING an office without paper is quite a target for an organisation which
by its very nature handles hundreds of documents every day. But, by early
1993, the pensions department at brewing and leisure group, Bass, will be
storing and handling all documents by computer.
The document image processing system, supplied by UK company Image Systems
Europe, is already in use. Meanwhile a team of five temporary staff is well
on the way to feeding in all remaining paper documents.
The pensions department in West Bromwich handles the files of 52,000 members
of the group pension scheme.
Previously all files were held as paper. Every event affecting an
individual's membership added more paper: joining the scheme, marriage,
retirement, death, all involve letters, forms and certificates.
Some of the older documents were recorded on microfilm, using an external
bureau, but even so staff desks were covered in mountains of files,
according to the secretary to the trustees, Mr Andrew Jolly.
'We were becoming inundated with paper files which were unmanageable,
insecure and too often hard to find,' he says. 'It could take days to find
something if it had been misfiled.'
Mr Jolly investigated document image processing with the group computing
department. Further ideas on how the system would work arose from talks with
potential suppliers.
The new system links 20 IBM personal computers, fitted with 19-inch,
high-resolution screens, over a Novell local network. There are two document
scanners, although one will probably be removed once all remaining documents
have been fed in.
Image Systems Europe was selected for its software for controlling the flow
of work. A document is scanned in and indexed, typically by name and
birthday or national insurance number. It then appears in the electronic
mailbox of the relevant staff member.
When a document has been worked on, it can be passed to another person for
further action, or a date can be entered on which the system will alert the
staff member that some action is expected.
Priorities can be set for each document, although staff can still choose
which jobs to deal with. The system provides an audit trail of file
movements, and managers can inspect individuals' electronic mailboxes to see
what they are doing at any time and question their priorities if necessary.
Mr Jolly will not reveal the costs of the system but points to considerable
tangible and intangible benefits. Storage space is being reduced: the 80
filing cabinets will all go by early 1993. Every letter, form and
certificate is now scanned into the system and then destroyed.
There is now total security: previously all information was on paper in one
place: a fire would have destroyed years of work. Today back-up copies of
the information are stored away from the office. In addition, access to
certain files can be restricted by system passwords.
Productivity is higher: the increasing workload can be handled by the same
number of staff. This productivity increase arises from several factors. Mr
Jolly points, in particular, to the better working conditions: there are no
more stacks of paper on people's desks. In addition, any document can be
retrieved from disc storage on to a screen in a few seconds - and any number
of staff at separate personal computers can look at a document at the same
time.
PRODUCTIVITY increases also come from the fact that the department used the
installation of the system to review the way the work was organised. Staff
now have access to word processing and spreadsheet software, to electronic
mail across the group and to the group mainframe computer in Chichester,
which holds the pension scheme members' database and calculates benefits.
This means, for example, that staff now write their own letters and do their
own calculations - 'staff have been given more responsibility and control
over their work,' Mr Jolly says. 'They have more variety and job
satisfaction.'
The link with the group mainframe means the system can extract benefits
information, names and addresses, and so on, and combine them with the
stored documents. This data can also be included in letters to pension
scheme members.
Electronic mail is used to send documents to operating companies for them to
act on.
As Mr Jolly says: 'Ultimately our administrators will be able to process
incoming documents, extract data from corporate files for benefit
calculations, notify an operating company, write to a scheme member or
pensioner and file the documents, all without touching any paper.'
Image Systems Europe, based in Sheffield and London, was formed in 1990 by a
management buy-out of British Steel's document image processing team. It has
grown to 30 staff and a projected turnover of Pounds 2m for 1992-93. The
30-plus customers include BP, Unilever, the Post Office, British Airways,
British Aerospace and several big local authorities. The company's software
for controlling work flow can run on personal computer and Unix networks.
