Clobber the economy in the early part of a parliament's term and then ride
back to power on the back of the rebound of production and optimism about
four years later. Such has been the classic formula for electoral success in
post-war Britain.
It has been successfully adopted by Conservative governments in the 1950s
and 1980s, but Labour administrations have never mastered the technique.
Perhaps that is partly why Labour has only held power for a third of the
period since 1945.
Now the Conservatives, too, have apparently lost their cyclical touch, and
have been struggling to achieve a winning position in the opinion polls. As
in 1964, when Mr Reginald Maudling's dash for growth blew up in their faces,
they have run right out of good luck and good timing.
Consider how the Conservatives behaved in their first term after regaining
power in 1979. Straightaway their most secret and unpopular plan, to raise
VAT from 8 to 15 per cent, was implemented. In March 1981, still less than
two years into the term, Sir Geoffrey Howe delivered his famously vicious
Budget, the one that attracted protests from 364 Keynesian economists. By
1983 the economy was recovering well enough for the Tories to win, though
admittedly it might have been very tight without the help of the 'Falklands
Factor' and the eccentric Labour leadership of Mr Michael Foot.
After the 1987 Conservative win, however, Mr Nigel Lawson broke all the
rules. Celebrating an economic miracle, he cut taxes in March 1988 and with
the money supply bounding ahead unchecked he encouraged a strong surge of
output in that year, continuing into 1989. It is true that in other respects
the Conservatives followed the traditional formula, by attempting to hustle
the unpopular poll tax legislation through early in the parliament. The
worst must come first. However, the poll tax proved such a disaster that it
is still overhanging the government in 1992 at the tail-end of its term.
It will be hard for Mr John Major to unload all the blame for the current
economic problems on to Mrs Margaret Thatcher and Mr Lawson, but no doubt he
will cautiously try. Mrs Thatcher has apparently promised to stay gagged,
but her former economic adviser, Sir Alan Walters, remains voluble.
Certainly the recession hit hard in 1991, the year in which Mr Major ideally
would have wanted to call an election. The timing was disastrous. And all
attempts to talk the economy up subsequently have failed, leaving the Tories
facing the most depressed economic backdrop for any election since 1974,
with its three-day week.
As recently as the autumn of 1990 Mr Major was denying that there was even
likely to be a recession. When the reality became evident in the early part
of last year, the government's emphasis switched to the likelihood of a
quick rebound from the middle of 1991.
Thanks to a surge in North Sea oil output, the third-quarter gross domestic
product statistics did indeed show the famous 'technical' recovery but there
have been more disappointments since. No genuine economic recovery will
become evident before the election; indeed, in important areas, such as the
housing market, the election has created damaging uncertainties and has
itself become an impediment to an upturn. House prices fell by 1.2 per cent
in February, according to Nationwide Building Society.
It is a grim picture, but not one entirely without redeeming features. A
depressed economy is at least good for inflation, which has dropped to about
4 per cent. Moreover, the government has been able to raise its borrowing
requirement very sharply without, in these circumstances, seriously
upsetting the bond market. Two years ago, the public sector was in budget
surplus, but the deficit has been forecast at Pounds 28bn for 1992-93, and
more than Pounds 30bn in 1993-94. Public pay settlements for teachers and
nurses have been relatively generous in real terms, and public spending in
general has been rising fast: the offer of Pounds 55m to back Manchester's
Olympic Games bid is the kind of hand-out calculated to win votes.
During the campaign, the government will need to build on these few
favourable factors and also emphasise the crucial differences between the
parties in the area of taxation. The willingness of the financial markets to
swallow high borrowing levels during the recession has given the
Conservatives scope to trim tax levels even though revenues have been weak.
A year or two ago, the Conservatives were claiming that Labour would borrow
too much, but we are unlikely to hear much about this during the campaign:
the pot can no longer call the kettle black.
Once again Labour, in its tax policies, has been trapped in minority
attitudes. Although in the past few years Mr Neil Kinnock has swept out much
indigestible left-wing dogma from Labour's manifesto, the plan to raise
income taxes to an effective top rate of 59 per cent has evidently proved a
miscalculation. Few will pay these rates, but many more fear that they
might.
Elections are cynical affairs. A party must soothe and even bribe many of
its natural enemies in order to gain a majority. Labour's natural
supporters, such as many old people dependent on state pensions, will vote
for it anyway. They can be rewarded after the election. In addition, Labour
has needed to attract middle-income voters but it has not so far displayed
the leadership and inspiration that might persuade these people to vote
against their narrow sectional interests.
Other economic differences are less important in election terms. Labour has
backed the participation of sterling in the exchange rate mechanism of the
European Monetary System, and has said it will not devalue from the central
DM 2.95 parity. Although it has called for cuts in interest rates, in
practice monetary policy will be largely out of its hands.
Of course, there may be a hidden agenda which includes devaluation, or
'realignment' within the ERM, but previous Labour governments have in
practice tended to struggle for years to avoid devaluation: the Attlee
regime took four years to be persuaded that devaluation was inevitable in
1949, and the Wilson regime laboured for three years before devaluing in
1967.
The Conservatives have avoided set-piece devaluations of this kind, but have
at times allowed sterling to float down quite aggressively, most recently
under Mr Lawson as chancellor in 1986, when the pound depreciated by 22 per
cent against the D-Mark.
Apart from taxation and social spending, the main economic differences
between the parties are probably in their degrees of interventionism:
traditionally Labour has tended to set up National Plans and National
Enterprise Boards and has employed a variety of devices of the corporate
state ranging up to nationalisation. Conservatives have relied much more on
a free market approach, which reached extremes under Mrs Thatcher in the
1980s.
It is a moot point whether industrial policies win votes. In any case,
Labour's scope for intervention is much less now that the UK is becoming
firmly integrated into the European Single Market. The old paraphernalia of
credit controls, exchange rate controls, subsidies and import surcharges are
mostly ruled out (though the French have not entirely realised this).
Even so, Labour could be vulnerable to charges that they would turn the
clock back to the 1960s, when union leaders dominated the TV news and were
regularly enjoying beer and sandwiches at Number 10 Downing Street before
emerging to celebrate a 'triumph for common sense'. There is talk of giving
back certain privileges to unions, and of bringing in minimum pay levels:
again, such proposals will win few new votes for Labour.
The hostility of the financial markets is a potential disadvantage for
Labour, but the European context of the 1990s may provide some protection.
There are other socialist regimes in the EC, and tricky coalitions too, but
these are not usually regarded with particular alarm.
City of London financial dealers may be mindful of the Labour threat to
their after-tax incomes, but the personal damage will not for long overcome
the more general economic and financial logic. All the same, a Labour or
coalition government must expect to be severely tried out by the foreign
exchange and gilt-edged markets in the immediate aftermath of the election.
This promises to be the closest race for a long time. In 1987, the
Conservatives were always some 10 points ahead in the opinion polls and
there was only one minor hiccup when a rogue Gallup poll on 'wobbly
Thursday' a week before the June 11 election suggested that there might not
be an overall majority. In just over a month between the announcement of the
polling date and the declaration of the result the FT-SE 100 Index rose some
8 per cent.
The disappointment was that after such a well-telegraphed result the market
had little more to offer. A 'wall of money' was expected to arrive from
Japan but it never did. After a modest further rise, the London equity
market hit a high point in July which was not significantly exceeded for
nearly four years.
In 1992 the situation could be very different, with great uncertainty during
the campaign and possibly afterwards too. The City of London for several
months has seemed to be blithely assuming the Conservatives would secure a
victory, albeit narrow. But after this week's Budget the stock market had a
nasty attack of nerves.
