IN SPITE of the world slowdown in aircraft orders, aerospace is proving
Quebec's most vigorously competitive industrial sector.
Quebec and Ontario each make up 45 per cent of Canada's aerospace industry,
which posted 1991 sales of Dollars 9.4bn, up 12 per cent from 1990.
The balance is spread in the Atlantic provinces and the west. But it is
Bombardier, the Montreal-based international transport equipment group, that
has seized leadership and control of the Canadian industry.
In six years, Bombardier has built itself a big niche in international
markets for about CDollars 320m cash and heavy commitments in new equipment,
partly government-funded.
Mr Laurent Beaudoin, chairman, made the first sortie in 1986, buying the
troubled Canadair from the federal government for CDollars 140m. This was
followed by the acquisitions of Short Brothers, of Belfast (CDollars 58m),
Learjet in Kansas (CDollars 86m) and finally 51 per cent of de Havilland
Canada, Toronto (CDollars 35m cash), in 1992.
Bombardier has meshed all four units into an interdependent group managed by
Canadair in Montreal. Montreal makes the Challenger business jets, the
50-passenger Regional Jet (RJ), defence systems, waterbombers and has big
airframe contracts with Airbus.
'We move quickly, keeping existing management where possible, reorganising
and modernising,' says Mr Beaudoin. 'The key is investment in people and
equipment and defining your markets. This lightning expansion hasn't slowed
our speed of manoeuvre. But we're not interested in British Aerospace's
business jet division.'
Aerospace made up 60 per cent of Bombardier's CDollars 3bn sales last year,
and more of its total CDollars 5.5bn order backlog. Bombardier now makes a
complete range of commercial, business and specialised aircraft in Montreal,
Belfast and Wichita, Kansas. The Montreal operations are approaching the
peak 11,800 payroll Canadair achieved 25 years ago when it turned out
modified Sabre fighters.
It delivered a total 100 aircraft last year and may do better in 1992 as RJ
deliveries begin to Lufthansa's feeder airline. It hopes to leapfrog
Gulfstream with a long-range Global Express business jet adapted from the
RJ. Quebec's total aerospace shipments were more than Dollars 4bn last year,
70 per cent for export.
Direct payroll totals nearly 30,000 after 1,000 recent layoffs at Pratt &amp;
Whitney Canada (PWC), the world's biggest small turbine maker. Research and
development runs to about Dollars 250m a year, partly government-funded;
investment in plant and equipment averages about Dollars 200m.
Because of slower engine orders, PWC has cut manpower at its Montreal
assembly plant to about 7,000, or well below Canadair's. Total 1991 sales
were about Dollars 1.5bn, including turboprop and fanjet engines, parts,
overhaul and maintenance and service operations. But rising revenues from
engine overhauls will cushion the temporary drop in demand for new engines.
CAE Electronics, a world leader in commercial flight simulators, is
recovering from an order downturn after the Gulf war. Annual revenues are
about Dollars 500m, and it is a heavy R&amp;D spender.
Bell Helicopter Textron, with sales of about Dollars 350m, has a new plant
near Mirabel Airport, north of Montreal, specialising in smaller machines.
It has received a Dollars 1bn Canadian military order, ensuring stability
for several years.
Rolls-Royce Canada, with 1991 sales of Dollars 253m, specialises in heavy
jet engine overhaul. It has just won a Dollars 100m contract to maintain
USAir's 88 Rolls-Royce-powered aircraft, and may expand into industrial
engine assembly.
Air Canada operates the country's biggest single engine overhaul shop, with
2,500 employees, in Montreal. Dowty Aerospace builds landing gear for Airbus
jets at a new Dollars 90m plant at Mirabel, and Heroux specialises in
landing gear overhaul and hydraulic systems.
Canadian Marconi is a leader in avionics, Howmet Cercast in castings, FRE
Composite in new materials, and Hochelaga Aerospatiale in machining. Spar
Aerospace conducts most of its satellite communications and remote sensing
research and assembly in Montreal.
Oerlikon, Paramax Electronics and Bendix Avelex are diversifying after a
drop in defence business. Innotech provides custom interiors and refits
business and specialised aircraft. Overall Quebec's materials, component and
services support network is more developed than Ontario's. NMF Canada, part
of Britain's Aviation Tool, is among the latest arrivals in Quebec. The
first customer for its new advanced metal-finishing plant is Canadair - for
finishing RJ wings.
