PRIVATE opinion polls over the past week show a small margin for a Yes vote
in the French referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
Five surveys over the past few days show between 52 per cent and 56 per cent
support for the treaty, a right-wing political party disclosed yesterday.
The sources are confidential because publication of opinion surveys in the
week before a national vote is forbidden.
This last-minute indication of support for European union came as
anti-treaty campaigners accused Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, of
holding the franc 'hostage'. The three leaders of the anti-Maastricht
campaign, Mr Philippe Seguin, Mr Charles Pasqua and Mr Philippe de Villiers,
said Mr Beregovoy had acted against national interests by warning that a
victory for the No camp would harm the franc.
Mr Beregovoy replied that the anti-Maastricht campaigners had 'called into
question our currency by irresponsible comments'.
The past week has proved a bonanza for the polling organisations, but has
also led to widespread criticism of the ban on publication of polls. Mr
Michel Brule, a director of BVA, which has conducted polls every day for
private clients since last weekend, argues that the ban restricts
information to the privileged few, able to pay up to FFr50,000 (Pounds
5,500) for a survey.
Mr Jean Saint-Geours, president of the Commission des Operations de Bourse
(COB), the stock market watchdog, is also critical of the ban, but has
nevertheless pledged to ensure that it is strictly observed. The COB has
launched an inquiry into all trading from September 12, when the publication
ban came into effect, until its expiry at midnight tomorrow.
As a result, securities houses are being ultra-cautious about how they
handle confidential polls. One US firm has allowed only its top two European
directors to see the results of its privately commissioned polls. They are
allowed to take account of the findings but have been ordered not to
communicate the results.
However, there are reports of at least one poll, for an unidentified
opposition party, indicating a No majority.
