THE LIBERAL Democrats have stopped UK elections descending into US-style
negative attacks and tax-based attempts to bribe voters, Mr Paddy Ashdown
claimed last night at his final rally of the campaign.
Labour and the Conservatives had been forced to change tactics and move to a
more positive agenda in response to the Liberal Democrat campaign, Mr
Ashdown told an enthusiastic audience of party supporters in Taunton.
In a speech embracing his party's themes - particularly education - Mr
Ashdown again pitched for a coalition government if today's poll results in
a hung parliament.
Touring his Yeovil constituency, the Liberal Democrat leader warned that
either an early second general election or a minority government would be
damaging to Britain.
Liberal Democrats believe that Mr John Major's hint on the BBC's Election
Call programme that he might not vote down a minority Labour government's
Queen's Speech will play to their advantage.
'If they (the Tories) are going, to quote Mr Major, to act as the
doorkeepers to a Labour government, that's up to them,' Mr Ashdown said,
echoing an attack on him by the prime minister earlier in the campaign.
Party strategists will slow events if today's poll results in a a hung
parliament. Mr Ashdown told journalists: 'There will be no rushing around.
It is a business that must be taken carefully, the formation of a
government.'
He intended to have a quiet Friday 'and a couple of beers or three.'
At the Taunton rally, he said: 'Both of the other two parties were
determined in this election to concentrate on their negative attacks.
Britain was in great danger of descending into a form of politics in which
the party which bribed you the most was always going to win. It was the
Liberal Democrats who had the courage to stand up and be counted.'
He told supporters: 'The more votes Liberal Democrats win, the more seats we
win, and the more power we will have to ensure good government for our
country.' He predicted Liberal Democrat gains across south-west England:
'There are beacons being lit all across the west country - Liberal Democrat
breakthroughs every one.'
He told his audience that the election, 'is about your children, your
community, your country.'
