NARCOTICS have replaced communism as the new enemy of the US in Latin
America. But neither President George Bush, nor the heads of state of the
Latin American countries whom he meets at a drugs summit tomorrow in San
Antonio, Texas, can claim much success in the war.
It has been two years since the last such summit, in Cartagena, Colombia. In
addition to the presidents of Colombia, Peru and Bolivia who then met
President Bush, their counterparts in Mexico and Ecuador will attend the
two-day meeting.
There has been the occasional victory since Cartagena when the US stepped up
its promised aid and its military presence in the drug-producing states.
Drug seizures have risen significantly and some of the leading drugs
traffickers, such as the bosses of the Medelln cocaine cartel, are behind
bars.
However, the flow has not been stemmed and, if anything, has increased. The
drugs traffickers have found new export routes, production has shifted from
one place to another, new markets have been found as cocaine consumption has
risen in Europe, and the drugs barons have diversified into other illicit
products such as heroin.
Fighting an election at home, Mr Bush will seek to create an impression that
he is being tough on the drugs problem. However, in some Latin countries,
there is considerable scepticism about the likely outcome of the talks,
which one US official has called a step towards an 'international anti-drugs
cartel'.
The US has been pressing for measures that will improve the ability of the
authorities to crack down on the production, processing and transport of
narcotics. Such measures, allowing, for example, increased cross-border 'hot
pursuit' of traffickers, are being resisted by Andean countries seeing
threats to their own sovereignty.
Mexico is likely to support Andean resistance against an overbearing US
military role in the region. Mr Ignacio Morales Lechuga, Mexico's
attorney-general, said last week that Mexico would not participate in a
multinational anti-drug force. Mexican officials have said they will oppose
any co-operation that infringes their national sovereignty, and will support
other countries that take a similar position.
Nevertheless, the Mexicans will push hard for creation of a regional
intelligence information system, that would help in the capture of drugs.
About half all US cocaine imports pass through Mexico. Mexico also produces
about a third of the heroin and 70 per cent of the marijuana entering the
US.
For their part, against increasing US scepticism, the Andean countries want
more emphasis on alternative development, such as finding crop substitutes
for the coca bush.
A UN official based in Latin America commented: 'We are letting countries
like Bolivia think they can have their cake and eat it. It is getting
Dollars 700m a year in drug- related assistance while cocaine production is
increasing.'
Some drugs experts point out that the incentives for countries such as
Bolivia to end drugs production are slight: if they succeed, aid flows will
cease and the prospects increase for unrest among farmers deprived of a
living and a military deprived of the equipment financed by drugs aid.
According to a report in the Mexican government newspaper El Nacional, some
90 per cent of the US proposals for the summit focus on repressive tools -
such as military co-operation, police surveillance and control of chemicals
used in refining of drugs. Only 10 per cent suggest alternative programmes,
such as crop substitution, economic aid and reducing US demand.
Mr Bernard Aronson, responsible for Latin American affairs at the US State
Department, said last week that alternative development was only realistic
if interdiction were successful and lead to a reduction in demand and a fall
in prices. He also said alternative development could not be applied in an
isolated manner in producing countries.
Coca growers in Peru, which produces 60 per cent of world coca, have
protested that, since signing an accord last May with the US, nothing has
been done to help substitute crops.
No inroads on coca production in Peru have been made. Coca acreage is
increasing: a well-placed source in Lima estimates it is between 240,000 and
280,000 hectares. Official US figures are unreliable because they are
'politically manipulated,' he says. This means the Americans are turning a
blind eye to some 70,000 newly-discovered hectares in the Maranon and
Quillabamba valleys.
Efforts to crack down elsewhere have transformed Bolivia in the last five
years from a humble producer of leaf to the world's second largest cocaine
producer and turned Brazil (which produces only cannabis but smuggles
everything) into a major route to Europe.
The near impossible task of policing such areas is not helped by police
involvement in the narcotics trade. One US Drug Enforcement Agency official
said 'the biggest problem in Brazil is the police.' In Peru, Mr Hernando de
Soto who resigned last month as a drugs adviser to President Alberto
Fujimori, said: 'Drugs are regularly dispatched from places under the
state's control'.
In Colombia, the promise that they would not be extradited secured the
surrender of the leaders of the big Medelln cocaine cartel. But there have
been few signs that this has reduced cocaine traffic. Meanwhile, large areas
of the mountains are cultivating a new menace: poppies yielding heroin,
whose street price in the US is 10 times that of cocaine.
In a gesture apparently aimed at the summit, the Colombian government has
announced it will begin spraying the poppies with the herbicide, glysophate.
Latin American governments have regarded consumption as somebody else's
problem and have said the US must do more to try to curb demand. However
narcotics in Latin America is increasingly becoming an internal problem with
cocaine-derived crack replacing glue sniffing as the latest addiction among
children in poor areas across the continent.
(Reporting by Sally Bowen in Lima, Stephen Fidler in London, Damian Fraser
in Mexico City and Christina Lamb in Rio de Janeiro)
