During the time when centralised economic planning was fashionable in the
west, the more perceptive critics of the idea did not just throw the
economic textbooks at the interventionists.
They analysed the deeper flaws in the whole project for constructing a
rational society from the drawing board, which has beguiled humanity from
the time of the French Revolution: they gave the resulting fallacy big names
like 'constructivism' or 'rationalism'.
They pointed to the importance of dispersed unformulated knowledge and the
deep-seated influence of custom, habit and tradition. The moral drawn was
that successful reform should build on existing practices.
There is a danger that western advisers and well-wishers of the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS), which formerly made up the Soviet Union, will
make the same mistakes of constructivism and rationalism that their
predecessors made when moving in the opposite direction.
These remarks arise from Mr Boris Yeltsin's extremely brave experiment in
freeing prices, which deserves a much better press than it has had in the
west. Some of the wrong-headed criticisms made by western commentators echo
those made after Ludwig Erhard's lifting of German controls in 1948, when
there were, indeed, months of hardship, poverty and unstable prices before
the market-based system settled down.
There is, nevertheless, a crucial difference. Erhard's price liberalisation
came on the heels of a successful currency reform, which ensured that price
liberalisation would not degenerate into a hyper-inflation. There is no time
to wait for its equivalent in the Russian world.
The danger is that western reformers will pin all their hopes on a
successful currency reform in Russia and the other republics and not see
that there are already currencies in circulation which the Soviet population
trusts.
For even a distant observer can sense that the one incentive that will
motivate the Soviet peasant, trader or factory manager to bring products to
market is the offer of 'dollars'. The term covers almost any hard currency -
which all citizens recognise and which can draw tropical fruit out of the
Siberian tundra. In the remotest parts of Central Asia traders have always
known the going dollar price for a pair of jeans or a western radio. People
know how to deal with 'dollars', as they have existed side-by-side with
roubles throughout the Soviet period, when there were hard currency shops to
which the privileged had access.
Indeed hard currencies have penetrated on a black market basis into the
former Soviet bloc to such an extent that the Bundesbank has been criticised
for not taking enough account of these external holdings in measuring the
German money supply.
My suggestion is certainly not meant as a blanket proposal for all the
former communist countries. Poland, for instance, has had a remarkably
successful currency reform and fiscal retrenchment along approved IMF lines.
Other central European countries are moving in a similar direction; and the
Baltic states may launch viable independent currencies of their own. But the
distrust of the rouble and the disarray of the budgetary system in CIS
countries is so great that alternative paths need to be explored.
This is leading up to a very simple proposal. It is that part of any aid
given to the CIS should consist of hard currency which the Russian and other
governments should neither keep as a reserve nor use directly for western
imports, but put into circulation - most conveniently by using it for their
own purchases.
A modest amount will go a long way. For it is likely that a credit pyramid
will develop on the hard currency cash base and that deposits said to be
dollar-denominated will proliferate. The notes themselves will circulate
with a rapidity that will give new meaning to the words 'velocity of
circulation'.
There is nothing in my proposal which precludes Russia, or any other
republic, from eventually introducing a hard currency of its own. Indeed,
one way of defining any such new currency would be to fix its parity against
dollars or D-Marks and measure its success by the extent to which the
official exchange rate can be maintained in the free market.
There are endless possible variations. A new post-Soviet currency could be
defined in terms either of a currency basket or of the Ecu, D-Mark or
dollar. The authorities could offer convertibility at a fixed price; or they
might simply pursue sufficiently tight monetary policies to keep up its
value. If, on the other hand, the main CIS countries continued to use
western currencies for domestic circulation there would be important
implications for western monetary co-ordination. But to prescribe for these
matters now is to run before we can walk. Events themselves will give the
right hints.
My proposal is no substitute for providing urgently-needed aid; but it could
be one component. The aid package of Dollars 20bn suggested by Professor
Jeffrey Sachs is a tiny proportion of the western defence budget. It is less
than some of the packages of tax cuts now being discussed in the US alone.
Support for a vulnerable democratic system covering a sixth of the earth's
surface is surely a more satisfactory way of priming the world economy than
encouraging western governments or citizens to pile up yet more domestic
debts. And when it comes to giving help, there is much to be said for giving
it in the form that the recipient most wants.
