With exhibitions, as with so many things, it is always as well to read the
small print. Double Take is the name of the South Bank Centre's major spring
exhibition at the Hayward Gallery, London, (until April 20). Collective
Memory &amp; Current Art runs the sub-title. 'Collective Memory is a phrase', so
its three curators tell us in their joint introduction to the catalogue,
'that can mean all or nothing to different people.' Yes; well; hmmm.
They go on: ' . . . The tension between our public and private selves has
become acute. The artists . . . share an equal distrust of the purely
personal and the securely social. They suggest how the infinite raw material
that contributes to forming our experience of the world . . . remains inert
until brought into play in the present. The doubletake . . . implies neither
a style nor content but rather an approach . . . entailing recognition and
reinvestment of significance where it might otherwise be overlooked or taken
for granted.'
What this turns out to mean is: 'Here is a job lot of soi-disant artists
from here and there, all doing their own fashionable thing, and though we
cannot make head or tail of any of it, perhaps you can?'
It is in fact a useful if depressing statement, by inversion and omission,
of what, to the orthodoxies of current curatorial interest and practice, Art
is, or might be. Is there any mention of the unique force and presence of
the fashioned object or contrived surface, that is the work of art? No. What
of the quality of what is done, in the way it is made? Nothing. And what of
the personal experience of the world, that is all we have, but which the
artist strives to render general? Not a thing, for that, as we have just
read, is now distrusted and disavowed. Nothing is to be made any more, and
nothing truly felt.
And instead? 'New art has a history of getting on people's nerves', runs the
guide. 'The artists challenge us by pushing our understanding of the world
around us beyond familiar limits. They manipulate the images, codes and
conventions of the world itself in order to touch our emotions and
intellect, expressing our fears and desires in new ways that can be amusing,
provocative, evocative, disquieting, spellbinding and beautiful. If art does
not have such an effect somewhere along the line, what does it do?'
It is a good last question in spite of itself, though there is little
comfort to be had of the answer inferred before it. The favoured artist is
no more than an entertainer, striking attitudes, making jokes, playing
tricks. The concept is the thing, to which all is response, with the
material given and the performance conventional.
It is the art of the dandy and the mountebank, ironical, detached,
uninvolved, above all, safe. For there is no danger of personal exposure,
other than in the most literal sense in which Jeff Koons chooses to perform
with his wife, an ex-porn film actress - a hard act to follow, but an act
for all that. There is no emotional risk, no vulnerability, no engagement.
Do we see the point: but there is no point. There is no point: then we have
missed the point. Heads they win, tails we lose. Doubletake indeed.
It has to be said that the exhibition has been beautifully laid out and
installed within an internal structure devised by the Italian architect,
Aldo Rossi. And the three curators, Lynne Cook, now of New York, Bice
Curiger from Switzerland, and Greg Hilty from the Hayward itself, have made
a most salutary international choice. As with the recession, our problems
are clearly not reserved to us alone. And so, what are these brave new
things, and who the artists, all 23 of them, who make us look afresh, and
look again?
There is Philip Taaffe (US/Italy) who reworks in paint and collage
decorative motifs from Islamic tiles, for example, or full-scale images of
modern art, notably the works of Bridget Riley. Glenn Ligon (US) shows a
suite of paintings, each worked with lugubrious ineptitude and carrying
ponderously stencilled and mutually contradictory interpretations of dreams.
Andreas Gursky (Germany) takes immaculate colour photographs of general
working interiors or impersonal landscapes - an electronics production line,
a stock exchange, a motorway junction. Katharina Fritsch (Germany) offers a
group of industrially manufactured golden frames, large and plain, with
surfaces no less plain within, red, blue, yellow, green . . .
Narelle Jubelin (Australia) works tiny landscapes, long and thin, in
petit-point and puts them into old frames. Simon Patterson (UK) has revised
the familiar map, or journey planner as we must now learn to call it, of the
London Underground, each line now a category of heros - footballers,
artists, philosophers.
Tim Rollins-&amp;-KOS (US) stick comic-book pages on to large canvasses,
carefully, one by one. Robert Gober's (US) cast legs burst akimbo through
the wall. And Rachel Whiteread (UK) continues with her casts of domestic
objects, mattresses, morgue slabs and the like, leant and folded against the
wall. '(Her) use of rubber to cast objects . . . allows her a greater
flexibility than her earlier use of plaster,' says the guide. I should
imagine it would.
And outside in the great world itself, Stephan Balkenhol (Germany) has a man
on a raft floating on the Thames, and a huge wooden head on London's
Blackfriars Bridge. Jenny Holzer (US) animates the Festival Hall with her
electronic slogans. Boyd Webb (NZ/UK) has a poster on a hoarding at Waterloo
that sums up the whole enterprise with an unforeseen acuity, an elegiac
image of a a half-deflated geographer's globe floating gently away. O brave
new world, that has such people in't.
