IN a world in which 92m original paper documents are produced every year and
corporate files double every 3 1/2 years, document image processing (DIP)
would appear to be the answer to every office manager's dream of reducing
the mountain of paper in circulation.
For it is possible to store between 20,000 and 30,000 documents on one
optical disk, and recall any of them to a VDU screen within seconds.
The potential of systems leads market research company BIS Strategic
Decisions to forecast a compound annual growth rate of 62 per cent for DIP
across Europe by 1995.
Leading companies in the market are bullish about the future, even though
the competition gets stronger by the day.
Contenders now include with Agfa, Bell &amp; Howell, Canon, DEC, IBM, FileNet,
IDL, Kodak, NCR, Olivetti, Philips, Plexus Computers, ROCC Computers,
Tandem, Unisys, Wang and Xionics.
The market could soon get a big boost as a result of the little-publicised
European Data Protection Draft Directive that proposes to bring
non-electronic media within the scope of the law.
A DIP is the obvious solution to maintaining security for all documentation,
since access by unauthorised personnel could be more easily prevented via
the use of standard computer security procedures.
All paper documents that have to be kept for legal reasons could then be put
under padlock and key.
However, the advent of optical disk-based DIP itself does not make the
paper-free, or even the paper-less, information secure if implemented in
isolation.
In the real world, DIP is merely a component part of the corporate-wide
document and information processing and management requirements.
There are several recent developments now capable of supporting such a
strategy.
Mr Mike Mansell, head of Kodak Office Imaging points out: 'During the 1990s,
factory productivity increased by 75 per cent while productivity in the
office increased by only 3 per cent. Why? Because office technology
concentrated on automating tasks rather than whole processes.
'The office manager, systems manager and IT manager may all automate
different aspects of the office process in isolation, only to find they
don't fit together.'
Kodak's answer is the ImageLink strategy which aims to merge micrographics
with digital imaging technologies; integrate imaging systems with
information systems; and, ultimately, utilise imaging to improve
productivity.
Systems currently available allow a document image to be retrieved to a VDU
screen from optical disk or microfilm, distributed to other terminals or
sent electronically to be faxed, printed or copied, then re-filed, all at
the touch of a button.
PPP Private Patient's Plan, however, is anticipating getting rid of
microfiche in favour of optical technology supplied by FileNet.
The solution being implemented is an industry standard PC-based Workflo
Business System that allows an organisation to handle very high volume paper
applications that are transaction-oriented and business critical; to manage
and control the flow of information through the business process across
multiple work groups and departments; and to integrate image information
with other PC tools such as spreadsheets and word processing applications.
The savings that can accrue from introducing new technology are significant.
Using Interleaf technology, Saab Aircraft has saved Pounds 1m a year and cut
turnround time on producing documentation by 50 per cent.
Moss Systems expects to save more than Pounds 120,000 in printing costs by
implementing an Interleaf document management solution.
In the general business document environment, the International Standards
Organisation's (ISO) Office Document Architecture (ODA) support is important
for document interchange across different systems.
In the technical document field, SMGL (Standard Generalised Mark-up
Language) is fast becoming the de facto standard for interchange of
technical documents. For this reason, Interleaf has added this option to
Interleaf 5.
Mr Mike Willcocks, managing director of Interleaf UK, says: 'SMGL is
important in that it will allow business to freely share information held by
different document publishing systems across a variety of platforms and
applications from different manufacturers.
'In effect, information becomes neutral and that is critical requirement to
the future success of EDM systems.'
The management of Expo '92 were luckier than most in that they could start
from scratch to build an enterprise-wide document strategy, at the heart of
which is the Rank Xerox EDM software solution, GlobalView, installed on a
network server on the 20Km Ethernet LAN, the longest LAN in the world
outside the Pentagon.
It is enabling some 600 users to produce documents on any word processing or
desktop publishing workstation and electronically store, print, fax, copy or
distribute them via electronic mail, with instantaneous person-to-person
document delivery ensuring ultra efficiency and high productivity.
By the time Expo had opened, staff had produced and distributed some 260m
impressions; a figure expected to have doubled by the time Expo closes on 20
October 1992.
Electronic document management (EDM) incorporates what is often called
'workflow' management; a combination of techniques and technology to manage
the entire document process at every stage in a document's life cycle, be it
in paper, image or editable electronic form; created in-house or received
from an external source; intended for internal consumption by individuals or
entire departments or external consumption by customers or business
associates; and be it active or archival.
Targetting this market is European Information Technology (EIT) with a
combination of three products that provide an integrated approach to
'multimedia workflow management' which supports every activity except video;
store, edit, despatch verbal, textual and graphical information within and
between offices.
EIT Scan-Link is an entry-level DIP system providing users with a complete
electronic archiving and retrieval system for paper-based documents.
Office-Link is a store and forward message switch which connects network
users to telex, fax, electronic mail, LANs, WANs and X25 networks.
And VoiceLink is a voice mail system which connects the PBX to a PC LAN. All
can work in a Windows environment and can be integrated with management
applications tools such as Lotus Notes.
The key to the success of any system is the ability not only to store
documents rapidly and easily but to be able to retrieve them just as easily
and quickly.
For example, how long would it take you to count the number of times the
words 'at', 'the' and 'be' appeared in 55,000 documents? Days? Weeks?
Months?
The electronic Filing Cabinet (EFC) from Metrologie International would take
just 17 seconds.
The secret is 'fuzzy search,' a content-based retrieval method and an
advanced neural network artificial intelligence (AI) and adaptive pattern
recognition technology from Excalibur Technologies which enables document
contents to be automatically indexed as it is entered.
Utilising open systems network protocols, any image or file can be delivered
to any other system on the network, with document security provided using
DEC's Ultrix file privileges and procedures for protected read and write
access to all files.
With prices starting at Pounds 29,950, such systems are not even out of the
reach of smaller companies.
Is the investment worth it?
Mr Geoff Bedser, senior consultant at CMG who specialises in DIP feasibility
studies and systems evaluations, says that the average payback is between 18
months and three years providing the right system is selected and properly
implemented in the first place.
But at BP Chemicals, Mr Alan Randle, manager IT systems, estimates that the
payback on the Trimco DIP will be much more rapid.
'When we compared the costs of storage and handling and the delay in copying
and transporting paper records with the ease of holding them on optical
disks and transmitting them electronically, we found we could achieve a
six-month payback.'
One of the key indicators to the future of the market must be the
announcement that SA SoftCore NA, the first company in Europe to receive
funding from Advent International under Apple Computer's European Venture
Capital Programme, has set up a UK subsidiary.
The first product to be launched by SoftCore is ArchIS File, an Apple
Macintosh-based system priced at Pounds 10,000, which is less than a quarter
the price of the original proprietary system.
It includes scanner, optical disk drive and all the necessary software to
import, store, retrieve and output any type of document such as text,
computer files, images (colour or black and white), slides, X-rays and
digitised video.
