ONE BILLION people in the world do not have access to safe drinking water;
1.7bn lack basic sanitation. There may be enough fresh water in the world to
meet demand but it tends to be in the wrong place, at the wrong time or of
the wrong quality.
Fresh water is a limited resource. Less than 1 per cent of the world's
supply is actually available for human use, the rest being locked away in
glaciers and polar ice caps. Efficient water management is considered the
best way to protect both the environment and people's livelihoods.
Water management is a multi-objective long-term approach to utilising the
natural resource. It means considering the social and ecological impacts of
water projects; involving local communities at one level, international
cooperation at another. It means addressing such issues as present and
future consumption patterns, waste and pollution, land use and global
warming.
Most of the world's fresh water - in rivers, lakes and swamps - is used in
agricultural irrigation, but up to 80 per cent of it never reaches crops.
Industry uses much less than agriculture, but returns it to its source often
polluted and unfit for consumption.
While domestic use accounts for only 6 per cent of total fresh water
consumption, lack of adequate sanitary facilities contribute to serious
environmental pollution. Most human waste is simply dumped in the nearest
body of flowing water, causing water-borne diseases that kill 25,000 people
a day in developing countries.
Coastal areas are most at risk from the 20bn tonnes of waste which ends up
every year in the sea. Two-thirds of the world's population live within 80
kilometres of the coastline, contributing to and suffering from its
environmental degradation. Marine habitats are destroyed, fishery industries
threatened, recreation, tourism and general economic development
jeopardised.
Man's past and present activities also endanger water resources in less
direct fashion. Deforestation and bad land use practices disturb the
hydrological cycle, making the soil less able to absorb precipitation and
release it over time.
The result is flash flooding and overflooding in delta areas of major rivers
like the Ganges and Mekong, with devastating effects on local populations.
Seasonal droughts follow.
Coastal areas suffer increasingly serious damage from tropical cyclones, as
coral reefs and mangrove swamps are lost to industry. Global warming further
increases the risks of coastal cyclone flooding, while endangering entire
island territories. Rising sea levels in the future could mean unique island
flora and fauna disappear for ever, and with them indigenous people's
traditional homelands.
Perhaps the greatest damage done by man to fresh water resources is the
building of billion dollar dam projects, like those in Egypt and India. More
than 200 large dams are being built annually, and it is estimated that by
the end of the decade 60 per cent of all the world's rivers will be dammed.
Such projects cannot be justified on economic grounds and certainly not on
environmental grounds, says Phil Williams, honorary president of the
International Rivers Network in California. 'We regard the most acute threat
to the river system to be the construction of the these huge water
projects.'
He cites the 'disastrous' effects of the building of Egypt's Aswan Dam on
the Nile River. Its reservoir is becoming clogged with silt, reducing its
useful life span; the river channel is changing; fertility in the sub-plain
soils has declined, while salinisation has increased; there is salt water
intrusion in the estuary, a major area of food production; the shore line is
eroding; fisheries have been destroyed.
IRN would instead like to see local energy and irrigation needs met properly
through small scale electricity generation and capital lending projects for
individual farmers. Energy efficiency programmes and updated technologies
would alone reduce demand many-fold, it says.
Such multi-objective programmes will have to be applied to water management
around the world, say environmental and aid agencies. They have to begin at
local levels, addressing community needs and priorities, using suitable
technologies that are low cost, readily maintained and replaceable.
WaterAid, the UK water charity, works in just this fashion in nine countries
in Africa and Asia. David Collett, director, says: 'Our message to world
leaders is. . .do not allow the environment and development to become
divorced from one another. And do not fall into the trap that the world's
problems can only be solved by international action. We must think globally
to preserve and improve this planet's environment. But action must come at
the local level as well.'
Similar approaches - incorporating cooperation between developed and
developing countries - are recommended for achieving the sustainable
development of agriculture and marine resources. Where seasonal flooding,
cyclones or drought seem inevitable, organisations like Oxfam favour
programmes aimed at helping people cope with such disturbances long-term.
The aim of development agencies is that by the year 2000 each person has
daily access to at least 40 litres of safe water, and that waste is
collected, recycled and/or disposed of in an environmentally sound fashion.
In developed countries, not immune from drought, water tariffs could be
introduced to reflect the marginal costs of raising water infrastructure
standards.
The high seas are seen as a potential model for sustainable resources
management. Marine pollution caused by shipping, waste disposal and
incineration at sea is a grave problem, but the vastness of the oceans has
protected them so far from being seriously polluted.
Environmentalists are looking for a global strategy for managing the high
seas - with legally binding agreements - before it is too late.
