PEPSICO is to help to sell up to Dollars 1bn (Pounds 600m) worth of
Ukrainian-built ships on international markets. The deal is expected to lead
to rapid expansion of the US company's soft drink and fast-food restaurant
operations in the former Soviet republic.
The eight-year agreement is one of the biggest western business ventures
involving the former Soviet Union and the largest for the export of
manufactured products yet concluded with Ukraine.
PepsiCo expects to invest almost Dollars 150m to treble its soft drinks
production in the Ukraine, currently about 60m litres a year, and to open as
many as 100 Pizza Hut restaurants there. The first restaurant will open next
year.
The company plans to increase its franchised bottling plants in Ukraine from
seven to 12 in the next two years and will set up local distribution, sales
and marketing networks.
PepsiCo would not disclose its initial investment in the project but said
its planned expansion in Ukraine would be financed out of hard currency
proceeds from ship exports. The Ukrainian treasury will share in profits
from the exports.
A joint venture, Ukrainian Development Corporation, has been formed to
market internationally all the commercial vessels built by the Zaliv
shipyard at Kerch, on the Black Sea. Zaliv aims to double its production
capacity to four merchant ships annually by the year 2000.
The vessels will be sold or leased by Fram Shipping, a privately owned
Bermuda company which is a partner in the joint venture, along with PepsiCo,
Zaliv and Ukrpivo, the Ukrainian state beverage organisation.
Three vessels are already under construction, the first of which will be
completed next spring. The joint venture is committed to taking delivery of
the shipyard's output for the next eight years.
PepsiCo said it was confident Fram could sell or lease all the vessels,
noting that the shipping company had found international customers for
Ukrainian-made ships worth Dollars 300m in the past two years.
The joint venture will take part in the modernisation of the Zaliv shipyard
and will assist in converting some of it to new manufacturing ventures,
including planned production of prefabricated Pizza Hut units.
Ships are one of the few products which Ukraine can hope to sell
internationally. The republic contains many of the former Soviet Union's
shipyards, and most of the capacity is still dedicated to military vessels.
Observer, Page 21
