IT IS unfortunate that the economic history of the late German Democratic
Republic is something of a minority interest. As a result the east German
origin of many of our current discontents is not fully appreciated. Some
newspapers went as far as carrying Chancellor Kohl's remarks about debts
last Monday at his party conference in Dusseldorf but none reeled in
astonishment at the disclosure that east German debt would reach DM400bn -
or Dollars 265bn.
How 17m industrious Prussians and Saxons can create liabilities of this
magnitude is one of the great untold stories of our time. By comparison,
Latin Americans of the 1970s and Anglo-Saxons of the 1980s seem mere pygmies
of the debt creation industry. One of the causes is to be found in the
casual approach of the West towards East Germany and the astonishing manner
in which nonsense was accepted as truth.
It started in 1976 when the World Bank misguidedly attempted to create
comparable national income figures for every country in the world. Through a
series of heroic assumptions about production and purchasing power, East
Germany was given a figure for income per head which put it above Britain.
Realising the absurdity of this result, the Bank never indulged in the same
exercise again. But the damage had been done. Thus in 1977, a book appeared,
Socialism with a German Face, by Jonathan Steele of The Guardian. It was
partly inspired by the World Bank's statistical error and failed to reflect
fully the visual and olfactory evidence of the bankrupt slum that was East
Germany.
Steele concluded: 'The emergence of the GDR as a viable state against all
odds ought to be an intellectual warning that from the most inauspicious
beginnings worthwhile results can come. Socialism in the GDR is as much a
part of the socialist tradition as any of its other national manifestations
elsewhere in the world.' Which is hard luck on socialism.
So there was a certain predisposition to believe that the GDR had pulled off
a sort of mirror image of the the western Wirtscahftswunder. Having gained
this reputation, East Germany could not only borrow abroad but could also
falsify its statistics unchallenged even though they were rubbish. Had they
been true, the GDR would have appeared as some kind of spruced-up
Switzerland by the time it collapsed in 1989.
Shortly after that, I spent a fascinating couple of hours with Professor
Hilmar Kruger of the faculty of the business management of Humboldt
University in (East) Berlin. He told me how productivity figures had been
rigged in the super new robot-run plants in the GDR. In reality these were
expensive investments that never paid off. But the statistics showed huge
profits. This was achieved by counting, into the production of the robots,
the assumed output of the employees who were displaced and found work
elsewhere.
Once false revenues had been magically created they were then snatched from
the enterprise by a measure called 'the centralisation of profit.' That
meant all industrial profits were remitted to the government which in turn
used them to balance what was a fantastically unbalanced budget.
This of course left enterprises without funds, so that shortage was made up
by loans from the Staatsbank der DDR, the East German central bank. As a
result, every East German enterprise bore a crippling level of debt -
DM130bn at unification.
When the Treuhandanstalt, or privatisation agency, came to sell off the
enterprises that debt could not be written off and was assumed by the
Treuhand. Unpaid interest piles up and it will almost double to DM250bn by
the end of 1994.
Many of the problems could have been dealt with had East Germany been better
understood in 1990. But instead a conspiracy of silence had wrought its
fearful work.
The West German government refused to criticise. Bankers who knew what was
going on kept their mouths shut for fear of rocking the Ostpolitik boat. The
West German public took more interest in the economy of Nicaragua than that
of East Germany. And today we are all paying the penalty.
But should we? The old East German debts were owed to the Staatsbank der
DDR. Therefore they were the Staatsbank's assets. Now, guess who took over
those assets at the time of unification. That's right - Treuhand. In other
words Treuhand owes the money to itself. I am sure there is an explanation
as to why taxes have to be raised in Germany to pay off the debt, but I know
I won't understand it. Nor do I understand why German, and, pari passu,
European, monetary and fiscal policy has to be torn apart by so-called debts
that result from East German fiscal juggling and statistical fraud.
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of the BBC World Service.
