Sir, I share your hope ('A Strategy on Asylum' (April 27) that there will be
some changes in the new Asylum Bill to be introduced in the forthcoming
session.
As you note, there seems to have been some decline in the number of asylum
seekers in the UK, but almost all of them congregate in London. There are
now some 30,000 asylum seekers living in London, many of whom go into bed
and breakfast accommodation at a cost of Pounds 15,000 a year, which means
that the total cost to London charge payers is about Pounds 36m per year  -
or 30 per cent of the total cost of expenditure on London's homeless
families.
This is a national problem and there should be national support for the
London boroughs that have to deal with it. During the debates on the last
Asylum Bill, the government blocked the arguments of London members. I hope
that ministers will change their minds this time.
We should also amend the arrangements for unaccompanied children who arrive
in this country seeking refugee status. Some London boroughs have acquired
considerable expertise in looking after these unfortunate children. Other
boroughs are less skilled. We do not want to encourage parents in troubled
parts of the world to try to smuggle their children into this country but
our arrangements lag behind those in place in both France and Germany. Once
again, ministers should think again.
You suggest that the long-term method of dealing with potential Third World
migrants into this country is 'a more generous economic policy' towards
trade with the Third World. This may well be true, but it will be a very
long time before the beneficial results are evident. In the immediate
future, we ought to increase two or three-fold the amount of money which we
allocate to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the other
agencies that deal with refugees on the spot. Over the past decade, the UK
has a good record in helping UNHCR; we must redouble our efforts and
encourage our partners in the EC to improve their record.
Philip Goodhart,
25 Abbotsbury Road,
Kensington, London W14 8EJ
