BRITISH GAS yesterday blamed warm weather and growing competition in the gas
market for a disappointing second-quarter fall to a pre-tax loss of Pounds
82m on a current cost basis.
The loss compares with a Pounds 183m profit a year ago. The company warned
this would reduce full-year profits unless the weather was significantly
colder in the second half.
The figures were in the mid-range of analysts' forecasts, but the shares
fell 5 1/2 p to 237 1/2 p.
First-half profits fell to Pounds 778m from Pounds 1.16bn last year. Mr
Philip Rogerson, managing director of group finance, said the fall was 70
per cent due to exceptionally warm weather which depressed demand, and 30
per cent to increasing competition and the recession.
In UK gas supply, operating profits fell Pounds 200m in the second quarter,
reflecting a 12 per cent fall in sales volume. Purchase costs increased 4
per cent, while non-gas costs rose 4.5 per cent - which disappointed
analysts looking for signs of cost savings.
Mr Rogerson said independent shippers increased their share of the firm
contract market to 30 per cent, and British Gas lost business in the
interruptible market by customers switching to oil.
Operating profits for exploration and production fell to Pounds 2m from
Pounds 51m, due to decreased sales and production, and depressed sterling
oil prices. However, profits from overseas gas supply rose from Pounds 19m
to Pounds 23m.
'This is genuinely a very poor set of figures,' said Mr Steve Turner,
analyst at Smith New Court. 'We underestimated the effects of the weather,
but it is clear that margins are very badly squeezed and little progress has
been made on cutting costs.'
Mr Turner is downgrading his forecast for full-year net income to Pounds 1bn
from Pounds 1.1bn.
Earnings per share for the half-year were 11.7p, against 17.4p last time.
Although a change of year-end makes direct comparisons difficult, a 6.4p
half-year dividend, compared with a pro forma 6p a year ago, was apparently
better news for the City. Based on a 45:55 split between interim and final
dividends - which British Gas has hinted at - the pay-out would total 14.2p,
compared with a pro forma 13.4p last year.
However, while Mr Rogerson said British Gas had not changed its policy of
increasing the dividend in real terms, analysts said he indicated the
company was changing its thinking on dividend cover - which could imply a
lower total payout.
Lex, Page 14
