those members of the Lloyd's insurance market who have jobs there - fared
significantly better than outside Names in 1989, according to figures
circulating at the market. The figures have been derived by Names, the
individuals whose assets provide capital for Lloyd's, from sources including
estimates from Chatset, an independent analyst.
Figures based on preliminary syndicate results suggest that, when Lloyd's
reports its 1989 results in June this year, Names will pay more than Pounds
1.35bn to meet losses run up by syndicates in which they are grouped. But
outsiders who supplied more than 87 per cent of the market's capital look
likely to bear more than that proportion of the losses.
The expected gap for 1989 between working and outside Names is much greater
than that disclosed by Lloyd's last month for the 1988 year when working
members provided just over 11 per cent of the capital of the top 20
syndicates and almost 11 per cent of the 20 worst performers. In 1986 and
1987, working members fared worse than market outsiders - supplying
respectively 14.0 per cent and 13.2 per cent of the capital of the
worst-performing syndicates and 9.4 per cent and 10.6 per cent of the
best-performing. The 1989 estimates were compared with details of the
participation of working and outside Names, collated by syndicate, which
were published last month by Lloyd's.
The estimates derived from Chatset figures and other sources indicate that
working members will receive 16.7 per cent of the profits generated by the
top 20 syndicates, but will pay out only 5.7 per cent of the losses suffered
by the 20 worst-performing syndicates.
Working Names accounted for between 32.7 per cent and 53.9 per cent of the
capacity of the four small syndicates which will produce the market's best
results. Outsiders dominated loss-making catastrophe reinsurance in which
syndicates and London insurance companies insured each others' exposures to
large loss.
The market's seven worst-affected syndicates - managed by the Gooda Walker,
Feltrim, Rose Thomson Young and Devonshire agencies - ran up losses of
almost 600m, nearly half the total loss. None drew more than 7 per cent of
their capital from working Names. That news is certain to anger many Names.
The Commercial Court will this week hear motions from more than 820 Names
seeking injunctions to prevent the draw-down of their funds.
Lloyd's in World Insurance, separate section
