NEARLY 200 Canadian and US mining companies are now operating in Latin
America. They have been encouraged to look south by a convergence of two
trends:
The North American mining industry perceives itself to be beleaguered by
increasing government restrictions, regulation and taxation while being
constantly sniped at by a well-funded environmental lobby which is sapping
public support for exploration and mining.
Meanwhile, Latin American countries in recent years have become committed to
financial and trade liberalisation, deregulation, tax reform, increased
direct foreign investment, debt reduction and monetary and fiscal
adjustment. This change in direction has been achieved at a time when
democracy is spreading through the region.
Latin American countries are competing strongly for foreign investment
dollars and technical expertise, are offering the mining industry preferred
tax treatment, security of mineral tenure, government joint ventures and
prompt government response to, and assistance with, development plans and
proposals. Profits, when they are made by the foreign mining investor, can
be repatriated and even capital can be returned - an important consideration
because no mine lasts for ever.
Environmental and safety standards applied in Latin America are comparable
with those in the US and Canada but the permitting process now is very much
quicker. For example, Cambior, a Canadian company, is bringing a big
(250,000 ounces a year) gold mine into production in Guyana in only two
years. Miners claim this would not have been possible in North America.
Then there is the associated cost - between 6 and 10 per cent of the cost of
a new gold mine in North America today goes on environmental review and
permitting. Moreover, companies can often acquire assets in Latin America at
prices equivalent to one-third of those in the US or Canada.
Latin America has a long mining tradition so skilled labour is available but
pay is much lower than in Canada or the US. An experienced miner in the
region earns about Dollars 1 an hour. Add on social benefits of 50 cents and
the total cost to a company is Dollars 1.50 an hour which is roughly one
tenth of the cost of a miner in a comparable job in Canada or the US.
Of course, there are also some drawbacks to mining in Latin America. The
greatest is the political risk.
With few exceptions, the nations of Latin America have a history of
revolution, political overthrow, dictatorship, military rule,
nationalisation of foreign investment, frequent rampant inflation, currency
destruction and extreme poverty for most of their people.
However, a number of Latin American nations have adopted 'Brady Plan'
economics and are working with commercial bank lenders to re-arrange their
outstanding non-performing debt. Serious attempts are being made to balance
budgets. Inflation rates are below 30 per cent and still falling. Tight
money policies are in vogue, tariffs are being reduced, economic
deregulation is current, free trade agreements between neighbouring states
and regional economic integration are making some progress.
Now the debt crisis seems to have passed, Latin America is again attracting
international finance. Last year the international community invested
Dollars 12bn in Latin America, much more than went into eastern Europe
(Dollars 2.3bn) and about half the investment in North America (Dollars
22.2bn).
Nevertheless, the free-market reforms sweeping Latin America remain tenuous,
partly because few of its nations have established sound institutions on
which democracy and a capitalist economy can be firmly built.
Since the begining of this year Venezuela has been shaken by an army
uprising; Peru's President Alberto Fujimori seized dictatorial power;
Bolivia's president Jaime Paz Zamora threatened to close congress; and
President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil faces possible impeachment.
Peru also temporarily pulled out of the Andean Pact, the regional trading
agreement. This might seriously affect its mining industry as metal exports
to other Pact countries will now attract duty.
This sequence of political events must have given those mining companies
already committed to Latin America cause for concern. But what of those
wondering whether to take the plunge?
To attract mining companies, a country or region must have the right type of
geology and a favourable 'enabling' environment - that is infrastructure,
legal systems, official policies and institutional development.
There is no doubt about Latin America's geological potential. Already it
provides about one third of the western world's copper, one third of the
tin, about one quarter of the bauxite (the (raw material for aluminium) and
more than 10 per cent of the gold.
Mining companies at present are searching primarily (in order of preference)
for copper, gold and zinc in Chile; for silver and copper in Mexico; tin,
gold, copper and zinc in Bolivia; copper, zinc and gold in Peru; copper in
Argentina; copper and gold in Panama; nickel and gold in Venezuela and gold
in Costa Rica.
One bonus for the incoming mining companies is that much of Latin America
has not been properly surveyed for mineral wealth so the potential for
bagging an elephant (miner's jargon for finding a really huge mineral
deposit) is much greater than in North America. The most favourable mineral
potential seems to be in an area along the Andes mountains, extending from
northern Peru to the southern tip of South America. There is also the
so-called 'Venezuelan Arch' which extends across Venezuela, Guyana and
Surinam and has considerable base metal and gold potential. And Brazil is
known to have vast reserves of minerals.
As for the 'enabling' environment, governments have been doing their best to
change the rules and regulations to help encourage inward mining investment,
frequently following (with some modifications) a pattern pioneered by Chile.
This allows repatriation of capital and profits with limited restrictions
while total taxes on profits are generally 30 per cent or less. (The
marginal corporation tax rate in Canada is 49 per cent).
Brazil is the outstanding exception because of a clause in its 1988
constitution that prohibits foreign companies from holding majority
interests in mining operations. Since that was enacted, investment by
international mining companies in Brazil has slumped from Dollars 37.5m a
year to Dollars 2.2m.
In some countries road and rail networks are poor, finding enough water can
often be a problem and electricity supplies can be unreliable, particularly
during the present drought which is badly affecting hydro-electricity supply
in the north of the region.
Guerrilla activity is also a fact of life and death in Latin America and
guerrillas with political motives frequently take violent action against
mines to make their point. Security costs can be high.
Individual wildcat miners, or garimpeiros, can also be a threat. They will
often swarm in when a rich deposit is found and can remove a remarkable
tonnage of ore in a very short space of time. They pay no attention to
ownership rights but governments are often reluctant to take action against
garimpeiros, particularly if they are in a remote area.
Nevertheless, in spite of the political and other risks, analysts expect a
steady stream of mining newcomers to arrive in Latin America for some years
to come. North American companies in particular are being driven south by
spiralling environmental and operational costs, high taxes and lack of
exploration incentives at home. Most important of all, good and large-scale
ore bodies have become very difficult to find in Canada and the US.
