THE carnival in Capo d'Orlando, a prosperous resort below the mountains of
the rugged north-eastern coast of Sicily, has been a special occasion this
year. The townspeople have been celebrating a great victory over the local
Mafia. Capo d'Orlando is the first community in Sicily to organise a common
front against Mafia extortion and denounce those seeking protection money.
And after a historic trial last November, 15 mafiosi are behind bars.
'We refused to be intimidated,' says Mr Francesco Chirieleison, who runs a
large jewellery shop off the main square. He was one of 27 businessmen who
united to denounce the Mafia in December 1990. 'If you pay up, you are
finished; and we have shown what happens when you are unafraid to break
omerta (the traditional Sicilian law of silence). The state has responded
because there was no omerta.'
Although Italy is caught up in a campaign for general elections on April 5,
in Capo d'Orlando the fight against the Mafia dominates all issues. 'The
fight is far from over,' says Mr Nino Messina, the long-serving Christian
Democrat mayor.
Two carabinieri in bullet-proof jackets control cars entering the town. Mr
Tano Grassi, a leading member of the Capo d'Orlando anti-Mafia association,
is standing as a candidate for the Party of the Democratic Left (PDS),
formed from the former Communist Party which has always campaigned bravely
against the Mafia. He has a fulltime police protection.
Along the coast at Santa Agata di Militello, 20kms away, two shops were
fire-bombed last week in separate incidents in an attempt to intimidate
traders who have taken heart from Capo d'Orlando and formed an anti-Mafia
front leading to the arrest of four racketeers. At Tortorici, a small town
in the mountains behind Capo d'Orlando where traders have taken a similar
stance, the Mafia reacted by burning down a new police station.
Mr Chirieleison says the anti-Mafia association does not recognise political
parties. 'If you get the political parties involved, they will want your
vote and it will only be manipulated,' he says. 'The politicians have helped
create the Mafia because they've allowed the state to be weak; and the Mafia
thrives where the state is absent.'
The politicians, however, have rushed to recognise Capo d'Orlando. The town
has received more politicians and officials in the past three months than in
the entire post-war period. In the wake of the assassination last September
of Mr Libero Grassi, a Palermo businessman who publicly refused to pay Mafia
protection money, this community has been lionised as a symbol of resistance
to the ever-growing power of organised crime.
But the police in particular recognise that stopping extortion in Capo
d'Orlando is a modest step. Throughout the island the law of silence
prevails.
There are no witnesses to Mafia killings. In the big cities like Catania and
Palermo nine out of ten businesses pay protection money while the 180-odd
Mafia clans are reckoned to control at least 60 per cent of all public
contracts.
'We need more jobs, especially in the interior, to create a new culture of
honest work,' says Mr Messina. The mafiosi who began trying to impose their
law on Capo d'Orlando three years ago come from the impoverished isolated
mountain communities.
'The elections won't change things much. Besides we've had so many of them
and I can't see the vote pattern altering much,' adds Mr Messina.
Eastern Sicily consistently records one of the highest Christian Democrat
votes throughout Italy, and Sicily is solidly behind the party. In the last
general elections of 1987, Capo d'Orlando recorded a 44 per cent vote for
the Christian Democrats, 10 percentage points above the national average.
'The Christian Democrats get the vote because the voters see them as the
party of power and hope they might call in some favour, and traditionally
the Church has been behind them - even if this is the party which has been
most compliant towards the Mafia,' says a PDS activist.
The PDS has no illusions about faring badly in Sicily. It reckons it has
lost votes as a result of the collapse of the Communist party; but also its
support has been eroded by the appearance of a protest party, La Rete,
headed by Mr Leoluca Orlando, the former Christian Democrat mayor of
Palermo.
To the caustic comments of many a Sicilian, Mr Umberto Bossi, the leader of
the north Italian populist movement, the Lombard League, has decided to flex
his political muscle by declaring himself a candidate for Catania on an
anti-Mafia ticket. Significantly the anti-Mafia platform has been implicitly
taken on board by the Christian Democrats in their poster campaign in Sicily
with the slogan 'The right to exist'.
But the propaganda campaign is limited to the big cities in seeming
recognition that Sicilian voters are either indifferent or committed and the
money is best spent elsewhere in Italy.
