FINESSE, not a heavy right foot, is the hallmark of the really good driver.
These are not my words - although I agree with every one of them - but those
of the former world Formula I champion, Jackie Stewart, in the latest
edition of his Principles of Performance Driving (Hazleton Publishing,
Pounds 16.99).
It is a book with a message for all people who think: 'Look at us. . . we
are enthusiastic drivers', as they shoot away from the lights with squealing
tyres, or change down unnecessarily through the gearbox at high revolutions
on the approach to a stop sign or roundabout.
All they are doing, writes Stewart, is notifying others of their impending
arrival. 'The public hear you coming and are just waiting for the accident
or incident. If there is one, even if it is not your fault, they will think
you are to blame because your manner of driving suggests recklessness.'
Stewart makes the point that although race driving and road driving are
totally different, both require finesse and personal sensitivity. On the
circuit, the idea is to use thesequalities to get the maximum performance
out of the car. But, on the road, they should produce a docile ride for
passengers while treating other motorists with consideration.
The book, packed with expert and sensible advice about driving and
roadcraft, is really an autobiography and personal testament combined. I
found it an enjoyable read. So will anyone who can see driving as a craft,
not as a chore or an opportunity to show off.
Road deaths in Britain are surprisingly low - although, of course, still far
too high - at about 5,000 a year. Surprisingly, because there were twice as
many fatalities when only a fraction of today's 27m vehicles used UK roads.
There are many reasons for the decline. Modern cars are so much tougher that
motorists now walk away from accidents that would have killed or maimed them
in the pre-seat belt days of 30 years ago. Motorways and by-passes keep
unwanted through traffic out of towns and villages.
On the down side, standards of driving have deteriorated. Modern cars are so
undemanding that no real skill is needed to drive them. Modern technology -
such as anti-lock brakes and incredibly grippy low-profile tyres - allow the
foolish and wilful to get away with appalling behaviour on the road.
Some manufacturers have done nothing to promote responsible use of their
products. The Automobile Association complained last week that 25 per cent
of all motor advertisements have ignored a resolution passed by European
ministers of transport calling on car-makers to steer clear of promoting
speed, power and acceleration.
A survey had shown AA members ranked performance only 27th in a list of 40
features considered important when choosing a car. Yet, many advertisements
still concentrated on high performance or depicted motoring as a sport.
The AA believes irresponsible advertising has given many younger drivers the
wrong ideas about motoring. It probably has. You can see the effect in the
collapse of prices for second-hand hot hatchbacks, which have been promoted
mainly on their performance potential.
The insurance companies have inflated premiums hugely, especially for those
under 30, in a bid to balance their books. Hot hatchbacks are involved in
more than their fair share of very expensive accidents and are prime targets
for thieves.
The motor trade's bible, Glass's guide to car values, says a one-year-old
Ford Fiesta XR2i was worth 66 per cent of its original price in December
1991. Now, a year-old model is worth only 53 per cent. The story is the same
for all other GTi hatchbacks.
Glass's notes that many young drivers are turning to recreational 4x4s as a
sporty alternative, and adds, darkly: 'It is interesting to consider how
much this sector could be affected if these drivers produce what the
insurance companies consider to be another high percentage of claims.'
