THE Euro-French franc bond market is the only European bond market other
than the D-Mark sector which is open for large financings.
A number of European sovereign borrowers seeking funds to cover losses in
the foreign exchange market in September, are looking to the French market,
lifted by the franc's status as one of Europe's strongest currencies.
There is talk that the UK may raise more than FFr10bn in the market next
week, following other recent large issues, including a FFr6bn deal from
Sweden.
New issue volume has grown from 15 issues totalling FFr9bn in 1987 to 92
worth FFr105bn so far this year, according to figures from Euromoney.
Nevertheless, the sector still lies behind the US dollar, the yen, the
D-Mark and the Ecu, so far this year.
The market is dominated by five French banks, Credit Commercial de France,
Credit Lyonnais, Societe Generale, Banque Paribas and Banque Nationale de
Paris.
The market has become increasingly liquid, as the average size of new issues
has grown. In addition, the setting up of a market-making system  - known as
specialistes en valeurs publiques (SVTs) - for French government-owned
borrowers issuing large international bonds, has lifted investor confidence
in the sector.
The franc is emerging not only as a much-needed alternative to the D-Mark,
but also as a substitute for the Ecu sector which collapsed under an
overhang of paper after Denmark rejected the Maastricht treaty in June.
The accepted wisdom is that France has won its battle for a 'franc fort'
within the European exchange rate mechanism. While the franc is not a fully
signed up member of the D-Mark zone, there are strong links between the two,
and investors are flocking to buy the currency, which offers interest rates
between 85 and 100 basis points higher.
The franc is the only viable alternative currency to the D-Mark, according
to Mr Stephen West of Banque Paribas, which arranged Sweden's recent FFr6bn
five-year offering.
'People don't want currency risk: they're refocusing money into core
markets, and buying less of the peripheral currencies. People realise that
the French franc market is a professional one,' he said.
He argues that the market is more liquid than its D-Mark rival, given the
wider range of securities available and its more sophisticated structure.
However, the development of the market has been less than smooth. It was
forced to close during the summer, due to a severe bout of indigestion after
an avalanche of paper failed to be placed - one week in early July saw 10
issues totalling FFr17bn.
In the past two weeks the trend has been for large issues by borrowers with
heavy funding requirements. The next is expected to be for the UK, possibly
as early as this week. Talk is of at least a FFr10bn five-year issue with a
yield spread of between five and 10 basis points over five-year French
government paper. It would be the largest deal in the sector by a
substantial margin over Sweden's FFr6bn transaction. One French banker
suggested an issue up to FFr15bn over 10 years could be feasible.
The borrowing would form part of the second half of the UK's Ecu10bn funding
programme announced in September, which consisted of an Ecu5bn syndicated
facility and an Ecu5bn note programme. Under the programme, the UK completed
a DM5.5bn five-year Eurobond.
Although there is strong international demand for the franc for the time
being, there could be a quick shift to oversupply if too many large deals
emerge.
