IN THE arid bush of Bophuthatswana the ruins of an ancient civilisation have
been discovered, a place of stately pleasure-domes and gardens bright with
sinuous rills . . . enough to please a modern-day Kubla Khan.
Well, that is the myth, anyway. But the visionary in question is not
Coleridge. It is Sol Kerzner, a South African entrepreneur who made a
fortune providing South Africans with inter-racial sex and gambling at Sun
City. Now Kerzner is spending R730m (Pounds 146.8m) to build an 'ancient
ruin' in the African bush, a supposed lakeside palace supposedly overtaken
by jungle. He has named it the Lost City. You have to visit Bophuthatswana,
itself a ludicrous creation of apartheid, to appreciate the delightful
preposterousness of the idea.
'Bop' (as it is known) is a nominally-independent black homeland made up of
bits of bush scattered across the northern Transvaal. It has no natural
lakes or jungles, let alone ancient ruins. There are almost no such ruins
anywhere in sub-Saharan Africa: nothing survives Africa's harsh climate. Bop
is a landscape of red rocks and stunted bushveld, baked dry by a brutal sun.
'We created a story in which a tribe migrated from the north and settled in
this hidden valley to escape from civilisation,' explains Gerald Allison,
the project's American architect. 'In our myth we gave these people a palace
surrounded by lakes and a lakeside city . . . Over time the jungle took over
the city. Only recently was it rediscovered, and now excavations are
revealing its true extent and beauty.'
With completion set for next December, architects and artists are working
hard to create the promised ruin. 'Everything has to look like it's been
there for 500 years and survived an earthquake,' says site guide Leslie
Moore, describing the process by which glass-reinforced concrete is made to
look like ancient Pilanesberg stone from the surrounding hills.
The 'palace' - a luxury hotel with 350 rooms - is being built on a scale
which no known African civilisation could have rivalled. Guests will enter
an enormous foyer, with a domed ceiling six storeys high. Towers and domes
will adorn the exterior. Every bedroom will be decorated individually. There
will be carved monkeys peering around table legs, heavy wooden armoires,
toiletries wrapped in tree bark. At a proposed R600 (Pounds 120.70) per
night for a double room, the price will compare well with other South
African luxury hotels, and it will seem cheap to foreigners.
Prices can be kept relatively low because of Sun City's casino, which will
also serve the adjacent Lost City. Some R180m is to be spent doubling the
casino's size; already its facade has been rebuilt, with giant elephants and
monkeys carved in what looks like natural rock (but isn't).
The success of the Lost City myth will depend, though, on the jungle, lakes
and waterways which will surround the palace.
Trees are being uprooted throughout southern Africa and transported to the
site. There will be a 26 hectare man-made forest - including anomalies such
as a tropical rain forest with 30,000 orchids dangling from its branches.
Indeed, there will be 22 different types of forest, with a large variety of
plants never before cultivated by man. Visitors will traverse the jungle
with the help of swinging bridges which would make Harrison Ford nauseous.
The palace gardens will sport a heated 'ancient' bath, a 600 square metre
relic of past splendour. Its surrounding stonework has tumbled into the bath
itself, and may be admired from viewing windows below water level.
There will be a sandy beach, complete with 2 metre-high waves (Bop is
thousands of miles from any seaboard), and water slides to terrify the
timid. The height of these slides is equivalent to that of a five-storey
building. Two run underground; their designer explains that this will make
them feel even quicker. Another slide is designed for crude terror: swimmers
will fall down an almost vertical drop for five seconds; time enough,
surely, to despatch the faint-hearted.
Kerzner, chairman of Sun International Bophuthatswana (Sunbop), the company
which is building the Lost City, says he believes the new development will
bring in 1.5m more visitors every year - double the number currently
visiting Sun City. To be sure, inter-racial sex and gambling are nothing to
build a future on: sex is no longer segregated by law, and gambling is
likely to be legalised throughout South Africa, not merely in the homelands.
But fantasy will always sell. The new South Africa, with its high crime rate
and political convulsions, needs fantasy now more than ever before.
