In the 1970's, the Swedish navy set scientists at Lund University a
difficult task: how to prevent loss of concentration and irritability among
cigarette-addicted submariners who, in the course of duty, were banned from
smoking.
Their response was to produce a different way to deliver the essential
addictive ingredient of a cigarette - nicotine.
Moral absolutists might argue that the delivery of nicotine by any means
should be outlawed. A more practical solution is to switch nicotine
consumption from a form recognised to be harmful - smoking - to another
believed to be harmless.
Lund university scientists came up with a nicotine-impregnated chewing gum.
Nicorette, as the product was christened, was launched in the UK in 1980 and
sold under licence by Lundbeck.
But in the UK, at least, Nicorette's distributors found themselves facing a
severe marketing setback; the product could only be sold on prescription
from a general practitioner.
Unlike conventional family doctor prescription drugs, Nicorette did not
carry the benefit of a lower, national health service charge.
Nicorette's aim is to bolster the will-power of the smoker who wishes to
give up, but finds it difficult to do so 'cold turkey'.
Chewing the gum releases into the bloodstream small amounts of nicotine
which satisfy the craving without being harmful.
So far no nasty side effects have been discovered.
Doctor Chris Steele, a GP who uses Nicorette as part of his anti-smoking
clinics, says that in clinical trials around the world Nicorette has doubled
the success rate of smokers who wish to give up the habit.
According to Jeff Birkett of Lundbeck, 'at any one time in the UK, 6 per
cent of the 14m smokers are trying to give up the habit'. And 75 per cent
will have tried to stop smoking at one time or another.
The marketing headache was finally removed in May 1991, following two years
of exhaustive investigation by the Department of Health and other official
scientific bodies. Lundbeck succeeded in having Nicorette's status changed
from a 'prescription-only medicine' (POM) to a 'pharmacy product', which
could be sold freely by pharmacies.
Lundbeck and Kabi Pharmacia, soon to be responsible for UK marketing, have
now initiated an advertising drive for Nicorette, capitalising on its
new-found freedom. Kabi plans to spend Pounds 3m on UK advertising this
year, according to David Hewitt, Kabi's senior product manager.
The first television commercial started running early in January. It takes a
humorous look at the fears of would-be non-smokers, done by the cartoonist
Gray Joliffe, through the Windsor-based ad agency Miltons. It will be
promoting the gum heavily in the run-up to the UK's annual anti-smoking day
in March.
Nicorette's commanding lead in the stop-smoking product market is soon to be
challenged by such devices as a nicotine-impregnated patch worn against the
skin. The irony is that an addiction-propping gum should finally be getting
the freedom to advertise heavily when the EC looks increasingly set to ban
advertising of its biggest rival - the fag, the cancer-stick, the weed - the
cigarette.
