The world economy is steeped in gloom and yet investors on Wall Street, in
Frankfurt and in Paris are making hay.
Over the past few months, the world's leading economies have converged
towards low inflation and low or no growth. At the same time, financial
markets, most notably the globe's leading equity markets, are moving
increasingly out of synchronisation with economic developments and each
other.
In a world of free-flowing capital markets, investors have, therefore, to
decide whether this divergence between fundamental economic performance and
financial market trends is an opportunity or a threat. If, as seems likely,
the industrialised world is moving into a decade of slow growth after the
debt-financed excesses of the late 1980s, individuals and institutions alike
have to weigh carefully the choice among equities, bonds and cash.
As the panel of pundits below makes clear, recent stock market trends point
to a strong groundswell of optimism in centres as diverse as New York,
Frankfurt and Paris. Even in Tokyo, where the mood among investors has been
one of almost unrelieved gloom as the economy weakens, there is a widely
held view that share prices are due for recovery in the spring.
However, there are some warning voices, including that of Mr Roland
Leuschel, chief investment strategist of Banque Bruxelles Lambert in
Brussels. Mr Leuschel, who was one of the first to forecast recession in the
US and Britain and the current slowdown in Japan and Germany, says: 'We have
never been so near to a world economic crisis as now.' He believes that Mr
Alan Greenspan, the US Federal Reserve chairman, is 'walking on a razor's
edge'. US share prices could come crashing down if the economy does not pick
up. Alternatively, the Fed's present low interest rate policy could fuel
inflation, weakening the bond market, and eventually undermining equities.
Certainly, there has been no shortage of grim economic news over the past
week. Britain's recession is officially recognised as the longest since the
Second World War. In Germany, gross national product has fallen for three
successive quarters. Japan's Economic Planning Agency now considers the
economy in recession although the bad news in Tokyo amounts to no more than
a hiccup in US or European terms. Although Mr Greenspan predicted this week
that there would be an early US recovery, the voters in Tuesday's New
Hampshire primary left Washington and the world in no doubt about their
disenchantment with the US recession.
And yet just as the citizens of the New England state were giving President
George Bush a bloody nose, the equity markets in New York, a few hours'
drive to the south, were gathering strength for another upwards move. On
Thursday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average topped its previous historical
peak to close at a record 3,280.64, up more than 50 points on the day.
Other equity markets have also ignored bad news. German shares have gained
nearly 9 per cent in the past six weeks. Yesterday they registered their
highest closing level for 18 months when the 30-share DAX index reached
1,717.63 points. Shares in France have also surged ahead to levels last seen
before the Gulf crisis began in August 1990. The CAC 40 index closed at
1,962.37 yesterday, 12 per cent higher than its level at the start of this
year. In the Netherlands, too, shares have been rising to their highest
levels for two years.
Britain is something of a special case. In recent weeks, the FT-SE 100 index
has fluctuated between 2,500 and 2,560 points, well below last September's
high of 2,679.6. Analysts see little hope of a clear trend until after the
election, generally expected on April 9. Hopes of an eventual economic
recovery are having to do battle with pre-election uncertainty,
disappointment about continued high interest rates and declining earnings.
Of the main markets only Tokyo has signally failed to catch the party mood.
There the Nikkei index is trading close to its lowest levels since the
collapse of the bull market of the 1980s. There are few sellers at these
depressed prices, even fewer buyers.
A review of leading markets suggests that investors' fortunes over the rest
of this year will largely depend on whether Wall Street is properly valued
or heading for a fall, and on whether Tokyo can pull out of its slough of
despond.
The remarkable surge which took the Dow Jones Industrial Average from less
than 2,900 in mid-December to more than 3,250 by mid-January has plateaued
somewhat over the past month.
Pessimists reckon the market could suffer a substantial correction, but the
optimists, in the majority on Wall Street, believe prices are far more
likely to advance during the rest of 1992 - the only question being by how
much.
The key factor spurring the turn-of-year rally was the Federal Reserve's
action on December 20 in cutting the discount rate by a full point to 3.5
per cent, and pushing the Fed funds rate down from 4.5 per cent to 4 per
cent.
This convinced the equity markets that the Fed would pull whatever monetary
strings necessary to get the economy moving. It also prompted investors to
move funds out of fixed income securities, money market funds and bank CDs,
with their increasingly unattractive returns, and into equities, which held
out the possibility of greater capital accumulation, albeit with a greater
element of risk.
The latest batch of economic indicators is cautiously encouraging: sales of
US cars rose sharply in early February, housing starts jumped 5.5. per cent
in January, and the annual rate of consumer price inflation fell to 2.6 per
cent in January. But even the most optimistic economists acknowledge that
any recovery will be much less powerful than in the past, given the heavy
debt burden hanging over corporate America and consumers.
The big question is whether the US market has become disjointed from
economic reality. The answer is 'probably not', if you accept the consensus
view that:
the economy is now entering a slow, but probably sustainable, recovery;
the US can sustain this growth even if continental Europe and Japan falter
and;
the dollar is likely to strengthen, encouraging foreigners who anticipate
this to invest more aggressively in American assets.
Equities pessimists have made much of the fact that US equity prices for the
Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Index now stand at around 24 times past earnings, high
by historic averages.
However, optimists point out that this is indeed history and the market
should be focusing much more on prospective corporate earnings for 1992,
which are expected to show solid growth and which should be adjusted to
eliminate one-time write-offs. On this basis many analysts expect the
price/earnings ratio to drop to about 16. According to strategists at
Goldman Sachs this is roughly in line with past levels at times of low
inflation. According to optimists, there could also be scope for a further
substantial rise in the Dow over the next nine months if profits keep
recovering into 1993.
If there is any fault-line in world financial markets, it is between Japan
and the other main equity centres.
The reasons for Tokyo's deep gloom are not hard to find. The economy is
getting weaker by the day, with bad economic news and some shocking
corporate announcements competing for space in newspapers.
Private sector economists expect the economy will slow from a growth rate of
about 3.5 per cent in the year to March 1992 to 2.5 to 3 per cent over the
next 12 months: not a recession, but enough to bite deep into profits.
Nomura Research Institute expects pre-tax profits of 400 top companies to
fall 12 per cent in the current year and a further 2 per cent next year -
the first declines since 1986.
Individual sectors will suffer more. Financial companies are being burdened
by the mountain of bad debt left behind by the plunge in stock and property
prices. Capital equipment makers are seeing sales and margins collapse in
the face of the first expected downturn in capital spending in 15 years.
Many investors recognise that the slowdown should eventually sow the seeds
of a recovery as the authorities cut interest rates further to stimulate
growth. But the timing of a stock market resurgence is uncertain.
Japanese individuals are unlikely to rush into the market. They are avoiding
stockbrokers like the plague, blaming them for both the bear market and for
their involvement in last year's securities industry scandals. Foreigners
are also not expected to commit big new money until Japanese investors start
buying. 'They're saying to the domestic fund managers, 'Now it's your turn,'
' says Mr Stephen Barber, president of Invesco MIM Investment Trust, a
subsidiary of the UK fund management group.
A widely held view is that prices will recover hesitantly in the spring,
perhaps taking the Nikkei index from its current level of 21,291 to 25,000
by mid-year. However, even some bulls acknowledge the Nikkei could fall
below the psychologically important level of 21,000.
Confidence in the markets could then evaporate, not least because leading
Japanese banks, which depend on their stock portfolios to bolster their
capital reserves, would no longer meet minimum standards of capital adequacy
which the Bank for International Settlements is to introduce next year.
Germany, the other former growth locomotive in the world economy, is also
running out of steam. But hopes of higher profits are underpinning the rise
in Frankfurt equities. Forecasts for the current year suggest the DAX index
could push up to between 1,800 and 2,000, reflecting expectations of a 1993
earnings recovery for the main German blue chip financial and industrial
shares, after a sluggish, if not stagnant, year in 1992.
The rise has also been boosted by expectations that the Bundesbank will cut
its present high interest rates later in the year, as inflation falls back
to 3 per cent, and the present tense wage round is past.
The Bundesbank's tough monetary policy may be seen as strict outside
Germany. But in Frankfurt markets, it is considered reassuringly firm: a
reminder that the central bank is absolutely committed to monetary
stability, low inflation, and a strong D-Mark.
In France, the economy has also slowed while the political outlook has
become increasingly uncertain as the popularity of the Socialist government
has slumped.
However, France's stock markets have benefited from the trickle of good news
from the US and from a string of reassuring announcements from French
companies that suggest 1992 is certain to be better than the lacklustre
market in 1991.
The Paris market has also been boosted by the recent surge of corporate
activity in France, notably the FFr13.42bn battle over the ownership of
Perrier mineral water between Nestle of Switzerland and the Agnellis of
Italy. This has helped to allay France's fears of Paris being marginalised
in the international arena.
But although equity markets outside Japan appear buoyant, there is plenty of
scope for upset in the global economy.
In the US, there is room for doubt about interest rate trends. Short-term
interest rates may now be near, or at, their cyclical low and any tightening
of monetary policy could cause financial markets to dip. Political fall-out
from this year's presidential election could also hit share prices. Wall
Street would not welcome the prospect of a Democratic president and would be
concerned at any pre-election economic package which boosted the budget
deficit.
In Germany, some correction in the upward move of share prices is likely.
First-quarter sales and earnings figures are expected to be bad. Tough wage
negotiations loom on all fronts. The government's budget deficit problems
look ever more intractable.
The broader international arena is also full of tensions and rivalries. The
US and Japan have already fallen out over trade. The erstwhile communist
states of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are caught in a
desperate struggle to survive in the capitalist world, and could yet be the
source of a major economic or political shock to industrialised west. The
Uruguay Round of trade liberalisation talks are threatened with collapse.
That would undermine the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (Gatt), an
important guarantor of prosperity in the postwar world.
Although most equity investors have fared well so far this year, the Chinese
curse of 'May you live in interesting times' was never truer.
Contributors: Peter Norman, Martin Dickson, Patrick Harverson, Stefan
Wagstyl, Quentin Peel and Alice Rawsthorn.
