ARGENTINA'S reputation as an economic disaster zone has received a serious
blow over the past year.
The country has just enjoyed a year of slow inflation and high growth, with
every prospect for another year or two of the same. Argentina may be on the
road to a fundamental economic recovery.
If it is, it will be thanks to two men: President Carlos Menem and his
economy minister, Mr Domingo Cavallo.
They have opened Argentina's economy up to market forces, international and
domestic, and curbed its disastrously inefficient government.
The resultant stability has been popular: it is credited with winning Mr
Menem a vote of confidence in last year's mid-term elections. It has also
reversed a decade of capital outflows from Argentina, triggering an influx
of money. This has doubled the government's hard currency reserves in a year
to Dollars 8.3bn at the end of March.
It has won the support of the International Monetary Fund for an Dollars 3bn
extended fund facility, given only to countries that have a 'track record'.
This has brought agreement in principle with foreign bank creditors which
will lower the burden of Argentina's Dollars 62bn foreign debt.
Mr Menem is an unlikely free market crusader: a Peronist from the provinces
whose lifestyle and friends many Argentines find unsavoury. But he knows
what he wants and how to get it; and what he wants now is an Argentina freed
from the shackles of overregulation, state control and protectionism.
Mr Cavallo is a Harvard-trained economist who provides the intellectual
firepower for reform and who has put the economic programme back on track
since he took over in January last year.
The change in the economic outlook has also brought a more outward-looking
foreign policy. Argentina has aligned itself more closely to the west and
announced its intention to comply with a raft of international agreements it
previously refused to sign.
It has sought better relations and closer economic integration with its
neighbours. It is committed to the creation of a tariff-free common market,
which would group Argentina with Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay.
Economic stability had eluded the previous government of President Raul
Alfonsin who was forced by economic crisis to relinquish power to Mr Menem
five months early in July 1989. The economy was in hyperinflation, and food
riots and lootings had prompted the implementation of a state of siege.
Mr Alfonsin had taken office in December 1983 from a military government
disgraced by seven years of political repression and economic mismanagement.
Its final humiliation had been the military defeat by British troops on June
14, 1982, following the Argentine invasion of the Falkland Islands.
During his time in office, Mr Alfonsin and his radical party had succeeded
in further weakening the influence of the military in government. He also
(rare enough in Argentine history) managed to hand over power to another
elected president.
But lack of success in handling the economy overshadowed his presidency. Two
economic 'shock' programmes - the first and second Austral plans of 1985 and
1987 - failed to stabilise the economy.
A mixture of wage and price controls and devaluations, the plans failed to
address the central cause of Argentine economic instability: an
out-of-control budget and a central bank with little monetary discipline.
Mr Menem dismisses the Austral plans as 'announcements, nothing more'.
Indeed, his administration can claim to have tackled the root of many of
Argentina's economic troubles by curbing the budget deficit and securing a
law forbidding the central bank to print money unless backed by foreign
currency.
An aggressive privatisation campaign is helping to keep the deficit in
check. Under it, companies accounting for no less than 30 per cent of the
Argentine economy will be transferred rapidly from the state to the private
sector.
The government has fixed the Argentine currency to the dollar and pledged to
keep it there, despite complaints that it is hurting business. Mr Cavallo is
convinced that Argentines are so inured to inflation that the competitive
benefits of a devaluation would be offset by price rises in a matter of
weeks.
With a lowering of tariff barriers and a removal of much of the regulation
that has hobbled the private sector, Mr Cavallo reckons the government is
removing the causes of the severe malfunctioning of the Argentine economy.
There will be no going back, he says, to the system of multiple exchange
rates, industrial promotion, over-regulation and state lending that fostered
enormous corruption. Argentines are not lazier or more corruptible than
other people, he says: they respond to incentives like everyone else. 'Under
the old system, there was an enormous incentive to corruption and the result
was huge corruption. That has now gone.'
The reform programme should indeed reduce the opportunity for corruption in
Argentina, but it will take time to erase it from the system. As one former
central bank governor says: 'There are still thousands of subterranean
contacts between the government and the private sector which can lead to
corruption.' The head of one US company told the FT that a project his
company had won to build a new port in Argentina was being held up by his
refusal to pay a bribe.
Indeed, one of the important consequences of economic stability is that it
removes the distorting prism of rampant inflation. This allows a clearer
vision of the challenges that will have to be faced for Mr Menem to achieve
his much-vaunted desire to bring his country back into the first world.
The picture is far from negative. Argentines are more literate and their
wealth is distributed far more evenly than in most other Latin American
societies. Its traditional natural resources, such as its abundant, fertile
land, remain.
However, the vital questions are whether the private sector can respond in
its new role as the engine of growth; and whether the public sector can be
effective as provider of public goods, such as health, education, security,
and as a reliable arbiter of justice. The two issues are interlinked:
private investment, for example, will be discouraged by a corrupt justice
system.
There is selective evidence of the private sector responding to the cold
wind of foreign competition, but it is too soon to say in what sectors,
apart from food production, the country can carry comparative advantage.
Similarly, the ability of the state to provide public goods has
deteriorated. Turning this round will be critical: the Argentine people will
not be satisfied for ever with stability. If they are lucky enough to obtain
a few unbroken years of low-inflationary growth, they will start to demand
that the state performs effectively its reduced role, particularly in the
provision of education and health services.
The next 12 to 18 months are widely viewed as critical to further and
consolidate the economic programme. Reform is needed, for example, of labour
and social security legislation. In this period, it is quite likely that the
exchange rate regime will have to change and this will need to be done
carefully to avoid fracturing confidence.
The continuation in office of Mr Cavallo is also viewed inside and outside
Argentina as critical to the maintenance of confidence. While elements of
the economic reform will remain with or without Mr Cavallo, it is difficult
to identify anyone who would do the job better, observers say, and there are
legions who would do it worse.
In this sense, the reform programme may still be said to be fragile and
unhealthily dependent on a few enlightened members of the government.
One fear is that Mr Menem's commitment to economic reform is that of a
populist, albeit an astute one, rather than that of a 'conviction'
politician. His response in the event that he becomes unpopular is thus
unknown.
There are also concerns about his apparent desire to run for office again,
which is forbidden under the current constitution. Mr Menem says he has not
yet made up his mind on the issue. There may be a risk that he will trade
away part of his economic programme to secure support for constitutional
change. And the other changes which would have to be made to give the
project an air of respectability could lumber the country with an unworkable
constitution such as that which is now hindering Brazil's reform efforts.
Mr Menem has given Argentina its best chance in years to reverse the
economic decline of the past 60 years. Further increasing those chances
would seem a more important priority for his country than a personal project
to rule Argentina almost to the next century.
