BRITAIN'S first supertram made its debut yesterday, carrying fare-paying
passengers after months of delay. Metrolink's first tram left Bury for
Manchester at 6am, carrying a total of 200 passengers and dignitaries.
The supertram is unique in Britain because, when fully operational, the
two-car trams will use conventional rail tracks as well as tramlines: taking
to the streets when they reach Manchester city centre. The trams will link
Manchester's Victorian rail termini, enabling a regional rail and tram
network to be developed as the system is extended over the next decade.
Railway safety inspectors gave the go-ahead last week for the tram's first
phase after engineering and training delays. The trams are expected to take
to the streets with fare-paying passengers in four weeks - the first to run
on tramlines since 1949, when Manchester scrapped its double-deck
'rattlers'. A third phase, running on railway tracks to Altrincham, will
open in May, with a city-centre spur between the high street shops and
Piccadilly station four weeks later.
Although there are less than than two miles of track running through
Manchester city centre, Metrolink is revolutionary because of the way it has
been managed politically and financed so as to minimise impact on public
funds. The key has been DBOM - 'design, build, operate and maintain'.
Politicians and public-transport authorities from throughout Britain, Europe
and the US are now studying it as a model for funding other public projects.
The scheme has resulted in quasi-privatisation of part of the public rail
network, but retaining public control. The system will be operated and
maintained by the same private-sector organisation that designed and built
it.
The operator is contracted to the regional public-transport authorities  -
in this case Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive, British Rail
and the city of Manchester - to provide and guarantee the service.
To win the Manchester contract, bidders had to come up with a scheme
requiring the smallest public subsidy, assuming balancing capital costs of
development and construction against revenues and profits from future
operations.
That differs markedly from the public sector's financing and eventually
running such a scheme, with contractors' responsibilities virtually ceasing
after building the infrastructure or supplying vehicles. The theory is that
if the designer-builder also has to operate and maintain the system, the
onus for quality runs through every stage of the process. In effect,
everything has been franchised out. Greater Manchester owns the rails, but
does not control the vehicles, and the operator has to deliver the service
contracted for.
Contractors are responsible not just for delivering the vehicles but for
keeping them running for the 15 years of the contract. As Mr Roger Hall,
deputy director-general of Metrolink, says: 'If you can tie the builder in
to operating the system and have a share in running it, he cannot build you
a pig in a poke.' Each supertram costs Pounds 860,000, compared with Pounds
100,000 for a double-decker bus.
Metrolink's private-sector backers - GEC Alsthom, Mowlem and Amec - have
paid Pounds 5m for the operating concession and have formed a company with
25.1 per cent of the shares each and with Greater Manchester Buses and the
transport executive owning the remaining 24.7 per cent between them. The
structure keeps the public sector's interest below the 25 per cent limit
permitted by law for participation in private companies. GM Buses is jointly
owned by the 10 boroughs and cities making up the county of Greater
Manchester and is thus regarded as a public-sector company.
There has been criticism that Pounds 5m is too small a sum for the private
sector to pay for the Metrolink monopoly, but local politicians say the
public will benefit because the operator's right to exclusive profits has
been limited. That level is a commercial secret at present but is believed
to be low. Anything above it has to be shared with the public-transport
authorities.
Public-transport providers from cities throughout Britain, continental
Europe and the US are now studying the scheme. Sheffield will have a
supertram system next year, and Southampton and Croydon, south of London,
are among others planning schemes of their own.
