JUBILANT Euro-sceptics at Westminster last night welcomed the Danish
rejection of the Maastricht treaty, which will ensure chaotic scenes if
legislation to enact the agreement comes before MPs today, as scheduled.
The result could scarcely have come at a more embarrassing time for the UK
government, both in terms of discussion of UK legislation and for the
British presidency of the Community, which begins at the start of next
month.
Pressure was growing among politicians last night for debate of the bill to
be postponed, with some MPs claiming the treaty was already 'dead'.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, is to discuss implications of the result
with Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, today. The government is almost
certain to make a statement to the House of Commons this afternoon.
Last night Downing Street would say only that Mr Major was being kept
informed of developments and was assessing the result. Government officials
said they had not yet heard what the Danish administration intended to do.
Whatever its course, it is bound to make the UK presidency more complicated.
While Downing Street emphasised that there was no reason not to press ahead
with UK legislation, and re-emphasised that the UK had got 'a good deal'
from the Maastricht summit, Mr Peter Shore, a former Labour cabinet minister
and a leading Euro-sceptic, said the news meant the bill could not continue.
Rebel backbench MPs on both sides of the House described the referendum as
'wonderful' and 'delightful'. Sir Teddy Taylor, Tory MP for Southend east
and secretary of the dissident Tory European Reform Group, said the result
was 'glorious news for democracy'.
Euro-sceptics had already proposed amendments to the Maastricht bill to
ensure a referendum in the UK before legislation could come into effect. The
Danish result will increase both pressure for such a referendum and
reluctance of government to countenance one. Ministers rejected the idea
during the last parliament, when Mrs Margaret Thatcher was one high-profile
supporter.
