DANISH voters, who threw a spanner in the EC's works two months ago by
rejecting the Maastricht treaty, appear to have grown still more resolute in
their opposition to European union.
An opinion poll published yesterday indicated that 57 per cent of Danes
would now vote against the Maastricht treaty with only 43 per cent in
favour.
The survey - in the financial newspaper Borsen - also showed large
opposition to a common European currency, with 54 per cent of Danes opposed
and only 31 per cent supporting it.
The poll underlines the difficulties faced by the EC in its attempt to find
a compromise with Denmark this autumn to bring the country back to the
mainstream of the Maastricht process.
Even if the French electorate vote 'yes' to Maastricht in next month's
referendum in France, the treaty will still need to win backing from Denmark
before it can go into effect as planned next year.
Latest French opinion polls point to a narrow majority in favour of the
treaty in next month's referendum. But since it will partly be a vote of
confidence in President Francois Mitterrand, the outcome will be heavily
affected by domestic politics.
The Danish government intends to bring out a white paper after the French
referendum on September 20 to outline ways of gaining electoral acceptance
for the treaty, as demanded by Copenhagen's ratification procedures.
Denmark's dilemma is however that full-scale renegotiation of the treaty is
unacceptable to its EC partners.
The most likely option being examined in Copenhagen is to insert into the
document additional pledges against centralisation of EC power. This,
however, probably would not prove sufficient to persuade anti-Maastricht
Danes to vote 'yes' in a second referendum.
Denmark's deliberations are of crucial interest to the UK government,
currently holding the Community presidency.
Assuming a French 'yes' next month, Britain will still not reintroduce the
Maastricht ratification bill to the House of Commons until Denmark has made
plausible proposals on how to resubmit the treaty to the Danish electorate.
Whitehall officials say the bill may be reintroduced in October or November,
but it may be delayed until the beginning of next year.
British officials said yesterday that the opinion poll - emphasised the
pressure on the Danish government to come up with an acceptable formula. 'It
was always very difficult to see how the Danes would change their mind just
like that,' one British diplomat said.
Yesterday's poll showed a significant increase in the strength of Danish
'No' feeling compared with the June referendum, when the electorate rejected
Maastricht by a narrow 51 to 49 per cent.
Yesterday's survey indicated that 47 per cent of Danes would approve a new
treaty if commitments to closer European political and military cooperation
were omitted, with only 33 per cent opposed.
However, since such a drastic rewriting of the treaty would effectively rip
out its core, this particular option is clearly not on offer as a way of
pacifying anti-Maastricht feeling.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish foreign minister, has refused to comment
on his country's plans for solving the imbroglio until after the French
vote.
