THERE IS a myth that diesel-engined cars make sense only when bought by
owners who drive huge annual mileages. That, it is said, is the only way
their extra cost can be offset by the saving made from using lesser amounts
of generally cheaper fuel.
It might have been true years ago when diesel cars used to be at least 10
per cent dearer than their petrol-engined equivalents. They also needed more
frequent servicing and were pretty boring to drive - but neither is true
today, either.
As more and more Britons are buying diesel cars (nearly 12 per cent of new
registrations at the moment) the makers are fighting for market share. One
result has been a reduction of the price premium, in some cases almost to
disappearing point.
For example, the latest Citroen ZX 1.9 Turbo Diesel (from Pounds 11,370) is
cheaper than a comparable petrol-engined VW Golf 1.8 GL (Pounds 12,386) or
Vauxhall Astra 1.6i CD (Pounds 12,684) but outperforms both cars for speed,
acceleration and, of course, fuel economy. As most second cars are, by
definition, bought out of taxed income, running costs - and reliability -
are of crucial importance. Diesels shine on both counts.
Although not many second cars cover big annual mileages in total, they often
make a great number of short trips of two or three miles or even less. In a
typical day, the engine may be cold-started several times and, in winter,
may never reach its proper working temperature from one week's end to
another.
Under these conditions a diesel engine is vastly more economical than a
petrol engine.
Generally, a diesel car is reckoned to be about 20-25 per cent more
economical than a petrol car of similar size, weight and performance. This
appears to be confirmed by the official fuel consumption data put out by the
Department of Transport.
But the official figures in simulated urban, open road and motorway driving
conditions are recorded with the engine at working temperature. This
considerably understates a diesel's economy advantage.
While warming up and running on a rich fuel/air mixture, a petrol engine
uses far more fuel than it does at its correct operating temperature.
Volkswagen, which has no axe to grind because it makes more petrol than
diesel engines, says tests have shown that for the first mile, a petrol
engine uses three times as much fuel as a diesel.
Atmospheric pollution is directly linked to fuel consumption. Because a
diesel uses far less fuel than a petrol engine and burns it more
efficiently, it is more environmentally friendly. Overall, a diesel is
cleaner even than a petrol engine with the most sophisticated kind of
catalytic converter.
So for second car buyers concerned about the environment as much as their
bank balances, a diesel is the obvious choice.
As it does not have an electrical ignition system, which any AA or RAC man
will confirm is the main cause of starting problems and roadside breakdowns,
a diesel engine is inherently reliable.
Given the minimum of regular servicing - usually a six-monthly or 6,000
miles oil and filter change - a diesel engine will run trouble-free for
years.
Cold starting in winter is no problem. Nor do the latest winter-grade fuels
'freeze' or congeal in bitter weather. They flow freely at temperatures
rarely experienced in Britain and most modern diesel cars have fuel-line
heaters anyway.
If the battery is in good condition and the pre-heat warning light is
allowed to go out before the key is turned, a diesel fires up instantly. (In
13 years of running diesels as my personal cars, none has ever failed to
start on the first flip of the key).
The main disadvantage of a diesel car is noise after cold starting (and to a
lesser extent when idling) and particulates in the exhaust. If one drives
off straight away after start-up, the noise largely disappears and at normal
running speeds, it is hard to tell a modern diesel from a petrol car.
Particulate emissions (in other words, exhaust smoke) should not be a
problem with a sensibly driven diesel car in good condition.
Lorries, with large, direct injection engines are another matter, especially
if overloaded, ill-maintained and inconsiderately driven.
With over 150 different hatchbacks, saloons and estates listed in the
current issue of Diesel Car magazine, the choice for the second car buyer is
almost confusingly large. Most kinds of car, from runabouts to big executive
saloons, are available in diesel-power form.
New list prices start at under Pounds 7,000 for a Seat Ibiza three-door and
go up to Pounds 30,000-plus (Mercedes-Benz 300TD estate). If you expect a
diesel car to perform with a petrol car's vigour, go for one with a
turbocharged engine.
It will still be the more economical. But even a diesel cannot be
fuel-miserly if you insist on being first away from the lights every time
and on accelerating flat out up long gradients. Diesel cars give of their
best for drivers with a thought for the environment, not an urge to be
always at the head of the pack.
