A CHAP called Tigger Stack Ramsay-Brown, MC, had the good taste to stay at
the Galle Face. So did Lord Mountbatten. And Pandit Nehru. And Laurence
Olivier. And the Maharishi. And Bo Derek. And me.
Some are murdered with migraine. Some are banjaxed by bunions. Jet lag is my
particular purgatory. Even a London-Dublin flight leaves the body reeling
and in need of urgent resuscitation - thankfully, a commodity available
easily in the Irish capital. But a flight to the other side of the world,
especially going east, means at least a week of sleepless, nauseous nights
and fatigue-filled, dazed days.
The Galle Face is the antidote - a venerable, fusty pile of an hotel coming
up to its 130th birthday, perched on the shores of the Indian Ocean in
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
The anti-lag plan is simple. Go to Heathrow airport. Board, drink three
gallons of orange juice, sleep. Wake up, get off in the Gulf and stretch the
legs. Back on board, tease the system with a Sri Lankan-style curried
breakfast and, in a dip of a wing, fly into Colombo. Go straight to the
Galle Face. After a suitable interlude, which might last several days,
proceed on your journey, ready to meet the frenetic east head-on.
Cyril Gardner is the owner/proprietor of the Galle Face. He admits his
establishment has certain shortcomings: the water runs brown occasionally.
When it rains, the roof might leak. The lights might blink a bit. The teak
floorboards creak. Phones are not one of the Galle Face's strong points.
'I always describe my hotel as more like a cream caramel than a fancy
wedding cake,' says Gardner. 'It is imperfect, we all know that. But it is
rather special.'
Gardner purrs over the Galle Face like a cat over its kittens. He inherited
its stewardship from his wife's family, the descendants of Dutch burgher
settlers. Not so long ago, there were 600 staff. Now, there are 200. 'You
will notice many of them are elderly. I have tried to make economies but no
one has ever been sacked,' says Gardner.
To some, he might seem a trifle eccentric. There are signs at every turn:
'Please use the stairs - it's much healthier,' and 'Please don't smoke in
the bed. The ashes we find could be yours.' Gardner admits his hotel is not
everyone's cup of Ceylon tea. 'If people want business centres or all manner
of leisure activities, they should go elsewhere. People come here to relax.
There's no better place for it.'
When I was last at the Galle Face, there were few guests. The slurp of Brown
Windsor soup echoed across the dining room. Blink, and a bevy of waiters was
at the table.
One evening, at sundowner time, a black storm came galloping in from the
Indian Ocean. The tables did cartwheels across the verandah. Waiters
struggled to hold trays aloft while trying to stop the wind from blowing up
their longis. A German priest read a comic. A lady who looked like Miss
Marple ate a cream bun.
Several astronauts have touched down at the Galle Face staying in bedrooms
big enough to accommodate a galaxy. One of the hotel suites, the King
Emperor, has what is believed to be the largest lounge of any hotel bedroom
anywhere. All for a fraction of the cost of the anonymous
chocolate-on-the-pillow-type hotels which litter the world.
So far, the Galle Face has resisted takeover attempts. 'What would new
owners do with my boys?' said Gardner, pointing to two grey-haired waiters.
'They have been with the Galle Face all their lives, and their fathers
before them.'
In a perfect world, imperfect hotels like the Galle Face would be left
alone. A special fund would be created to keep the Philistines at bay. No
piped music would be allowed. Receptionists would be forbidden from saying
'Have a nice day.' Noel Coward would bounce bon mots about on the verandah.
The Maharishi would sit on the sea wall, lost to the world. Tigger Stack
Ramsay-Brown, MC, would dance with Bo Derek.
And I would sit by the hibiscus, never again to climb aboard a plane.
The Galle Face hotel, Colombo, Sri Lanka. Tel: Colombo 541010-6, fax 541072.
