BRAZILIAN investment in mineral research and prospecting may reach only
Dollars 40m this year, one-third of what was spent in 1988, according to Mr
Arthur Schultz Junior, head of the research department of the Companhia de
Pesquisa de Recursos Minerais, a state-owned prospecting company.
Given an average lead time of about eight years until exploitation, Brazil
could be faced with a severe drop in mineral output by the beginning of the
next century if the trend is not reversed. 'High potential and low
production' is the obvious result, in the words of Mr Samuel A. Hanan,
director-vice president of Paranapanema, the world's largest tin exporter
and Brazil's largest private mining company.
Three factors are blamed for the depressed investment climate: the extended
domestic economic downturn, depressed international prices for most minerals
in recent years, and a clause in the country's 1988 constitution that
prohibits foreign capital from holding majority interest in mining
operations in most cases.
Mr Schultz's prediction is an extrapolation of data from two recent CPRM
studies on investment in the Brazilian mining sector. They show that in
1990, the last year for which firm figures are available, Dollars 46.2m was
spent to discover mineral deposits in Brazil. In Canada, a country of
comparable size and mining potential, some Dollars 1bn is invested annually,
about Dollars 100 per sq km. In Brazil, just Dollars 5.40 is spent per sq
km.
Private domestic companies reduced their investment in mining research from
Dollars 53.4m in 1988 to Dollars 19.6m in 1990. State-controlled companies
accounted for Dollars 30.8m in 1988 and Dollars 24.4m two years later.
Over the same period, investment by multinational companies fell even more
dramatically, from Dollars 37.5m to Dollars 2.2m. Many foreign companies are
waiting to see if constitutional changes backed by President Fernando Collor
de Mello will be approved by parliament. An amendment that would eliminate
ownership restrictions for foreigners was offered as part of the president's
1991 package of constitutional reforms but congress has taken no action on
that proposal. Foreign mining interests and administration officials now
seem to be looking forward to the mandated 1993 revision of the
constitution.
The foreign ownership clause is like 'swimming against the tide of history,'
says Mr Schultz, who adds that Brazilian companies have a limited investment
capacity and cannot develop the country's vast mineral resources alone.
Under the current constitution, foreigners may maintain majority control of
a mining company in Brazil if they undertake 'industrial' activities.
Enabling legislation that would define what qualifies as industrialisation
is still lacking and lawyers are not sure if it means mere enhancement or
more elaborate processing.
Bucking the downward trend in foreign mining investment is RTZ's subsidiary,
RTZ Mineracao Brasil. Already the majority partner in a gold mining joint
venture, RTZ is studying two additional projects. One is a nickel mine at
Fortaleza das Minas, in Minas Gerais state. It is also negotiating a
proposed joint venture with Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, the state-controlled
company, to exploit the Salobo copper deposit in the Carajas region of the
Amazon. The company's budget for exploration and prospecting this year is
Dollars 6m, says Mr Apolinar Guzman, managing director and chief executive
officer.
Besides lobbying for its proposed constitutional amendment, the Collor
administration is taking other measures to stimulate investment in mining.
One is approval by the Securities Commission of equity funds for mining
firms listed on the country's stock exchanges. The scheme, based on Canada's
'floater shares' programme, is expected to raise Dollars 100m-Dollars 200m,
says Mr Elmer Prata Salomao, director of the National Department of Mineral
Production (DNPM). 'It will guarantee that shares in companies that are
prospecting have liquidity.'
The second initiative is to pool information and resources at the federal
and state levels and share them with companies that hold mining permits in
relevant regions. The first such effort will be in the Rio das Velhas region
in Minas Gerais state, the site of a potential gold deposit, says Mr
Salomao.
He adds that his department has prepared a deregulation package for the
mining sector that is expected to be presented to parliament shortly.
