THE European Community's plan for electricity represents one of the most
ambitious aspects of the single market - and also one of its most
controversial.
From the moment Mr Antonio Cardoso e Cunha, the EC energy commissioner, put
forward his proposals in January, he has been subjected to a barrage of
complaint and criticism from much of the EC's electricity industry. So
heated have the exchanges been on occasions that an official from one large
member state described them as 'a dialogue of the deaf'.
Does this mean that Mr Cardoso's plan is ill-conceived, or that he has
successfully targeted deeply entrenched interests? Part of Mr Cardoso's
difficulty lies in the diversity of the EC's power industry, which ranges
from huge state monopolies such as Electricite de France to small
privately-owned local generators. In some countries, the industry is
monolithic, in others it is split between generators and distributors.
Mr Cardoso's original plan aimed to break up the monopolies using the EC's
special powers. But that was plainly an unrealistic goal, and Mr Cardoso
backed off. Instead, his proposal seeks to attack the monopolies through a
different route: by introducing more competition, and making it harder for
large companies to use their complex structures to disguise their true
costs.
The plan has two main parts. One will give power producers the right to sell
electricity to customers in another member state by guaranteeing them access
to the local power grid. This is known as third party access (TPA).
Initially, TPA will apply only to users of more than 100GW hours of
electricity a year, which would limit it to the 400-500 largest power
consumers in the EC. But after three years, it would be extended to smaller
customers, effectively opening up the entire EC market to cross-border
competition.
The second part will oblige integrated companies to unbundle their accounts
so that the various segments (generation, distribution, contracting etc.)
operate more autonomously. This should make it easier for outsiders to gauge
the market and compete.
Mr Cardoso's vision is of a market that will eventually be so fluid that
consumers will be able to buy their power from any generator in the EC, no
matter how distant. Power companies will also be able to locate plant in
other states and become, in effect, multinationals.
Mr Cardoso wants his plan to start next January, but an early timetable
seems unlikely, given the high level of opposition. At a ministerial meeting
in Portugal early last month, a majority of energy ministers agreed to end
monopolies on electricity production and construction of energy networks.
But they baulked at the TPA proposals.
Broadly, the EC has divided between the Continental countries, with their
well-ordered and (often) state-owned power monopolies which have objections
to the plan, and the UK with its newly privatised system which supports it.
In between are Mr Cardoso's Portugal, where the industry is partially
privatised and is looking for new opportunities, and smaller countries such
as Denmark which have given qualified support.
The objections of the Continental power lobby were summed up by Mr
Alessandro Ortis, vice president of Italy's Ente Nazionale per l'Energia
Elettrica, and president of Euroelectric, the Brussels-based trade group. He
told a recent meeting at the European Parliament that he favoured free
transit and price transparency. But he believed that the TPA proposals would
be damaging.
In Frankfurt, Mr Wolf Heinemann, the deputy director of VDEW, the German
electricity trade group, said his members also rejected the proposals. 'We
are not against competition as such,' he stressed. 'But we do not believe
the plan will lead to higher efficiency.'
He warned that it could even drive up prices for small consumers as power
generators tried to recoup the margins they lost in competing for the
large-customer business.
Mr Heinemann also said the highly integrated German power industry was not
susceptible to the same kind of unbundling as the UK industry. If German
consumers paid higher prices for their power than others in the EC, this was
not due to inefficiency so much as to special local conditions, such as
charges mandated to preserve the German coal industry, and tough
environmental regulations.
In France, Mr Claude Destival, the director of economics and strategy at
EdF, had similar reservations about the practicability of third party
access. But he also said that the introduction of unbridled competition
would prevent EC member states from having a national energy policy. 'Energy
policy is too important to be left to market forces,' he said.
By contrast, the UK industry is strongly enthusiastic about the plan - which
accords with the spirit of the post-privatisation market - though cynics
might argue that UK power companies are protected from external competition,
having only a single cable connection with the Continental grid.
But UK companies are less interested in exporting power than in establishing
themselves in foreign markets. Mr Ed Wallis, chief executive of PowerGen,
the smaller of the two main UK generators, says his company doubts that it
can compete in France and Germany. But it plans to invest in projects for
gas and coal-fired power in Portugal, and in a gas plant in Greece.
Mr Cardoso faces a long uphill battle to win acceptance for his plan, which
will come up before its first ministerial council in late May. One political
factor in his favour is that the UK assumes the EC presidency for the second
half of the year, and will doubtless be gunning for it, though even that may
not be enough to get it approved by Mr Cardoso's original January 1993
deadline.
