AN ATTEMPT to force the Department of Trade and Industry to disclose
documents for use in a pending criminal trial has thrown more light on
dealings between Goldman Sachs, the US investment bank, and the late Mr
Robert Maxwell.
Mr Peter Marks, a director of stockbroker Branston and Gothard, is to be
tried in June for alleged offences under the Financial Services Act.
It is alleged that on October 12 1990 he told Mr Timothy Medland of Goldman
Sachs Securities that he believed that on that day Mr Robert Maxwell would
be calling in the liquidators or filing for bankruptcy of Maxwell
Communications Corporation - a statement Mr Marks is alleged to have known
was untrue.
Mr Andrew Collins QC, for the DTI, said at Knightsbridge Crown Court
yesterday that Mr Marks made about Pounds 2,000 from his 'bear raid' -
dealing in MCC shares on the assumption that they would fall.
Mr Marks' lawyers asked the court to order the DTI to hand over any
documents relating to Goldman Sachs' involvement with Maxwell.
The DTI claimed the documents sought were government papers that it was not
in the public interest to disclose, and were in any event not relevant to Mr
Marks' trial.
Mr Collins said the documents dealt with concerns about what might have
happened in relation to Goldman Sachs and Mr Maxwell and what should be
done, but they were not relevant to Mr Marks' trial. It was no secret that
there was a continuing investigation into Mr Maxwell and his companies, he
added.
Judge Hordern said the DTI had established its immunity claim but he would
look at the documents to see whether they were relevant to the trial. Mr
Anthony Scrivener QC, for Mr Marks, told the court that the whole case
depended on what was said between Mr Marks and Mr Medland.
The documents already made available showed that on July 26 1991 the DTI
wrote to Mr Maxwell raising queries about a possible breach of the Companies
Act and said: 'We understand the facts to be that . . . on August 13 or 14
1990 . . . you granted Goldman Sachs an option to sell you 15.65m shares in
MCC.'
The option gave Goldman the right to sell 15.65m shares to Mr Maxwell in
November at a previously fixed price and so could have given it an incentive
to buy MCC shares, or not to sell ones it already held. Goldman has said
that when the option was issued it already held enough shares to fulfil it
and so had no incentive to buy.
