Falling interest rates and an increasing likelihood that the electorate will
approve the Maastricht treaty on May 18 in Denmark's second referendum on
this issue have brought joy back to the equity market.
The all-share index is up by 16.9 per cent this year and 4.0 per cent over
the past week. The KFX index is at its highest since last July, closing
yesterday at 87.85.
The opinion polls indicate that the referendum will show a 60-40 split in
favour of the treaty, which was narrowly rejected in last summer's
referendum.
The question is whether the result has by now been largely discounted by the
markets. Mr Lau Svenssen, of Copenhagen brokers Fibroco, believes that the
market will rise by another 10-15 per cent by the end of the year in the
event of a 'yes' vote, a judgment which is fairly widely shared.
However, the economic picture is not wholly reassuring. The krone,
participating in the ERM, has appreciated by about 7 per cent over the past
year as the UK, Swedish, Finnish and Italian currencies have depreciated.
This appreciation is putting pressure on profits and order books in export
industries, and the recession in Germany, which accounts for about a third
of Denmark's exports of manufactured goods, is additional bad news.
Furthermore, preliminary estimates of exports in the early months of the
year by the Bureau of Statistics in Copenhagen point to a 10 per cent fall
in the value of exports.
The big Danish banks and the Federation of Danish Industries agree that
there will be little or no increase in GDP this year.
Inflation is low, 1.3 per cent over the 12 months to March, but unemployment
is now 12 per cent.
Among the immediate beneficiaries of falling interest rates are the banks.
Realised and unrealised gains (or losses) on the value of their bond and
share portfolios between the first and last days of the accounting year go
straight into the profit and loss account.
Unless there is a set-back later in the year, this factor alone should mean
that the larger banks, which were heavily in the red in 1992, will have a
happier year. Den Danske Bank's share price so far this year has risen 37
per cent to DKr327 and Unibank's by 50 per cent to DKr185.
The A. P. Moller shipping and oil and gas group's listed companies, D/S 1912
and D/S Svendborg, have risen by 26 per cent, after performing better than
most of its international competitors in 1992.
However, the other big shipping group, Lauritzen, has slipped by 16 per
cent. The EC's decision restricting imports of South American bananas may
have had an adverse impact on Lauritzen's refrigerated cargo vessels as well
as its shipyard, which has specialised in building large 'reefer' vessels
for the fruit trade.
The year's disaster is Baltica Holding (which is changing its name to
Gefion). It was the holding company for the Baltica insurance companies
until a reorganisation, backed by Den Danske Bank, took place in March, when
Baltica Holding was reduced to being a minority shareholder.
Baltica Holding's share price has been halved to DKr89, which is DKr12 under
par, so far this year.
An attack on Baltica by its main domestic rival, Hafnia Holding, in 1990-91
was a factor in Baltica Holding's collapse.
Hafnia Holding itself collapsed last year when the Hafnia insurance
companies were sold to Codan, the Danish company controlled by the UK's Sun
Alliance, in March.
Investors apparently approve, with Codan's share price currently 18 per cent
up this year.
Among the larger industrials, Danisco, the sugar, distilleries and packaging
group, has risen by 36 per cent, GN Great Northern, electro-technical and
telecommunications, by 29 per cent, while Carlsberg, the breweries group,
and Novo Nordisk, pharmaceuticals and enzymes, and FLS Industries,
engineering, have performed more modestly, all putting on just under 7 per
cent this year.
The East Asiatic Company, the large trading group, was forced by financial
difficulties to sell its Europe-Far East container shipping line to A. P.
Moller this spring, since when its share price has recovered from a low of
DKr52 to Dkr95, which is still DKr5 below par.
