MOROCCO has generally been the domain of the French traveller. As Lord
Salisbury commented in the House of Commons in 1890: 'We have given the
Gallic cockerel an enormous amount of sand. Let him scratch it as he
pleases.'
The French are still there in force - on mountain bikes, in Renault 4's,
even on foot, though their rule ended in 1956. They still treat it as a
colonial playground, rather like the South Africans treat Botswana.
Eight of us set off in two Land Rovers, with local drivers and a guide. Our
luggage and camping equipment was loaded on to roofracks. The plan was to
drive from Marrakesh to the Sahara, camping on the way, then back over the
Atlas mountains.
It is important in a party of this size (most of whom had never met) that
everybody gets on well: two bottles of Scotch between us and a bottle of red
wine each on the first night ensured that if there had been any flickerings
of animosity, we were unable to remember them.
First stop was the Glaoui casbah of Telouet, a castle set in a green valley
among brown hills. The Glaouis used to rule southern Morocco, and owed much
of their fortune to the patronage of the French. With the return of King
Hassan II, their lands were forfeited and their fortunes seized.
The casbah has been derelict for less than 30 years, but already the walls
are badly cracked and the chimneys falling down. Inside there are still
three rooms full of intricate tiles, kept locked by a guide wielding a
1ft-long key, who dreads the final eclipse of the casbah as it will rob him
of his livelihood. In the meantime, it makes an impressive ruin. We had a
fine lunch in the gardens and watched a family of storks soaring above us.
When you camp for the night, you realise how little of the country you see
motoring through villages at speed. One evening we stopped at what looked,
from the road, an innocuous spot near a river. As the tents were pitched we
were free to explore for an hour before dinner. We discovered an oasis of
small walled fields - wheat, maize, peas and broad beans, with palm trees
along the hedgerows. The inhabitants were friendly enough, but shy. The
women weeding would wave, then run away if we approached.
From the comfort of a four-wheel drive vehicle the Sahara, at least at its
edges, is not that daunting. The countryside is often quite rocky: one day's
drive was like going round a gravel pit. In the afternoons we would gather
in a large tent and play bridge while the guide and drivers cooked chicken
soup or lamb kebabs. As it grew darker, camel spiders would enter the tent.
We stamped on them.
In a room in a house in a small village marooned 100km from anywhere we sat
on rugs while a village elder brewed mint tea on a gas stove. The air was
thick with flies. Five times he poured it out of the tea pot into glasses,
then back into the tea pot. Then he added more sugar. It tasted like very
sweet washing-up liquid.
When the wind blows in the desert, visibility falls alarmingly, even during
the day. It is then that you are glad to be in a vehicle, and not on foot or
camel. One evening we were due to camp among the largest sand dunes in the
world at Merzouga. There was nothing to see of the sand dunes, although we
could taste and feel them. We cruised past a man on a bicycle, blown by the
wind but seeming to make no progress.
A French-style inn called the Auberge du Casbah served us long cool glasses
of orange juice. In Erfoud we stayed in a hotel for the first time in three
days, and were able to wash.
After the desert it was a relief to head for the clean cool air of the High
Atlas mountains. At the foot of the Todra Gorge, where the view is most
exciting, are two small basic hotels. Next morning for the first time most
of us had food-poisoning.
Two hours' drive away is the Dardes Gorge, which boasts an outcrop of
phallic rocks. We picnicked under a walnut tree. Gradually a number of small
children crept up on us, although they hid every time we pointed a camera at
them. The final drive was over the Atlas to Ouarzazate, with the drivers
happy to be going home and the guide entertaining us with tales of illicit
liaisons with western travellers.
We had covered over 1,000km in a week. For some of the party this had been
too much motoring. But the sight of the stars in the Sahara and the view
from the top of a 300m-high sand dune, with Algeria away to the south and a
single track leading north to the horizon, were reasons enough to visit the
desert.
Among specialist tour companies, Worldwide Journeys &amp; Expeditions of 8,
Comeragh Road, London W14 9HP (tel: 071-381 8638) organises Land Rover
safaris in Morocco. For a 10-day round trip from London to the Sahara and
High Atlas, prices start from about Pounds 850 per person.
