Lord Bernstein of Leigh - who died yesterday, aged 94, was one of the most
important figures in 20th century British entertainment.
More than any other individual in that industry, he proved by example after
example that there is nothing incompatible about the simultaneous pursuit of
profits, excellence and popularity.
Born in 1899, by the early 1920s he had inherited eight 'kinemas' and music
halls which he ran as variety theatres. Instinctively he pursued both
popularity and quality: Albert Chevalier, Gracie Fields, Will Hay, and Marie
Lloyd appeared regularly on his bills.
Before the second world war he began to concentrate on cinema, building the
Granada chain. In the 1950s he created Granada Television.
Quality and popularity were always the watchwords. Granada Television
produced Coronation Street, which has been Britain's most popular television
programme for more than 25 years and a serial of notable quality; and also
such masterpieces of television drama as Brideshead Revisited and Jewel In
The Crown.
Today Granada is a multi-million pound group with interests in TV and video
rental, cable, satellite, bingo clubs, discotheques, casinos, motorway
services, property, insurance, computers and publishing.
Like the Winogradskys (or Grades, as we now know the family name), the
Bernsteins emerged from the 19th century pogroms of eastern Europe. Sidney's
father, Alexander, fled first to Sweden as a young man, then to Britain,
where he married Jane Lazarus and settled in Ilford.
He was a successful and lucky businessman whose early interests - in a Welsh
quarry and in London property - led him into show business, when he built
the Edmonton Empire as a means of popularising a shopping site. Sidney was
the fourth of nine Bernstein children.
Always strong-willed, he insisted on leaving school at 15, wanting to go
straight into his father's business. Alexander demanded that his son become
an engineering apprentice, but within four years Sidney was in the family
company (arguing passionately with his father), and when Alexander Bernstein
died in 1922 Sidney inherited the theatres. He was then 23.
Though he spent his early career in live entertainment, Sidney Bernstein had
other passions, notably film, travelling - which he did on foot, all over
Europe, with a rucksack on his back - and liberal politics. Having joined
the Labour Party, he served as an independent Labour county councillor for
Willesden between 1925 and 1930.
All these interests can be discerned in his cinema policies during the
1930s. He was one of the leaders of the move to turn mere cinemas into
'picture palaces': vast extravaganzas of Moorish and renaissance
architecture, where working class families could be royally entertained with
films, music from Wurlitzer organs, and a novelty called 'snacks'.
Taking on Komisarjevsky, the expatriate Russian architect and theatrical
impressario, to develop the first of these elaborate people's palaces, in
Dover, he then cast round to find a name for it.
In the winter of 1929, posters appeared all over the town instructing the
public to 'Start saying Granada'. Fond memories of a walking tour in Spain,
especially its architecture, caused Bernstein to light on this.
In 1930 he opened the Phoenix Theatre in London, with Noel Coward, Laurence
Olivier and Gertrude Lawrence starring in Private Lives (quality and
popularity combined, again), but cinemas continued as the centre of the
family business.
They were converted for 'talkies.' A battle was fought over Sunday opening:
in Dover, this seemed to have been won by the Lord's Day Observance Society
until the Bernsteins arranged for all Dover cinemas and theatres to be lit
up on a Sunday, with staff on hand to turn away the expectant public with
the explanation that these were Dover council's orders. The rules about
Sunday showings soon changed.
Sidney started children's matinees, and the company kept building cinemas;
in 1935 a new Granada opened every three months. Eventually there were 57.
In 1936, to the surprise of his friends - Sidney Bernstein tended to keep
his private life as secret as his business dealings - he married Zoe Farmer,
a journalist, but the marriage did not long survive the second world war.
During that war Bernstein served as films adviser to the Ministry of
Information, then as chief of film selection at Allied HQ in North Africa
and at SHAEF.
In 1945 he went into Belsen. What he saw made him determined to make a film
for showing to the German public, proving what had been done in its name. He
persuaded Alfred Hitchcock - a fellow Londoner, by then working in the US -
to cross the Atlantic and act as director. Thanks to the politicians the
film was not shown. It was buried in the vaults of the Imperial War Museum
and screened for the first time on British television in 1985.
But the Bernstein-Hitchcock partnership bore fruit: Sidney Bernstein went to
Hollywood and produced Hitchcock's next three films, Rope, Under Capricorn,
and I Confess. During this time he met a Canadian girl, Sandra Malone, whom
he married in 1954. They had a son and two daughters.
Back in the UK in the 1950s, with all his experience of wartime propaganda
behind him, Bernstein opposed the campaign for commercial television on the
grounds that the right to broadcast into millions of homes bore 'such a
great propaganda power that it could not be entrusted to any bodies other
than a public corporation'. Yet he campaigned for the right to compete with
the BBC's increasingly popular television service by operating a
large-screen commercial television system in his cinemas.
When the law permitting commercial television was passed, however, Bernstein
was one of the first to apply for a licence. His was one of the first three
awarded.
Today Granada is the only original franchise holder to have survived
throughout the history of British commercial television. The story goes that
Sidney Bernstein, in deciding on a particular UK region for his franchise
application, studied population densities and annual rainfall and reasoned
that what he needed was an area full of people obliged to stay at home in
the evenings - hence his choice of the Liverpool-Manchester area.
From the outset Granada Television was unlike what many had feared from
'Plug TV,' as the Beaverbrook newspapers called it. On the opening evening
the new company offered - of all things - a tribute to the BBC.
It was soon doing more to push out the boundaries of television journalism
than the BBC had done in a decade. Apart from party political broadcasts,
the BBC pretty well pretended, then, that politics did not exist.
At Bernstein's urging, Granada challenged the law by putting on screen all
the candidates in the Rochdale by-election of 1958. Then it started covering
the TUC congress and the annual party conferences, which had hitherto
received television attention except in post hoc reports.
What journalists at Granada found was that Sidney Bernstein, who had always
gone to law to protect his own or his company's reputation, would stand
unflinchingly beside them if he was convinced they had their facts right; he
would take on the Independent Television Authority, the British Steel
Corporation, or even the UK government if necessary. In Granada's first 25
years, he locked antlers with all three - and others. (He invariably won).
His staff also found that, as an immaculate dresser himself, he loathed
untidiness in others (he was, so it was said, especially opposed to beards,
suede shoes and earrings). He also acquired a reputation for meanness - yet
no other ITV company has generated such loyalty in its staff; many
broadcasters have spent their entire careers with Granada.
In 1969 Sidney Bernstein became Baron Bernstein of Leigh. 15 years later,
that honour was almost equalled when the leading American television
magazine Channels, devoting an entire issue to a 'search for excellence,'
declared Granada 'the best television company in the world'.
The magazine backed up this seemingly grandiose claim by quoting chapter and
verse on Granada's television journalism (World In Action to Seven Up);
drama (Sherlock Holmes to King Lear, starring Laurence Olivier); even its
staff structure ('Granada executives have almost all been programme makers
and generally still are').
Throughout his life Sidney Bernstein urged his colleagues not to
underestimate the intelligence of the public. Although he worked always in
the mass entertainment business, his own interests were refined. He took a
lively interest in the avant garde. He was a founder of the Film Society,
which attracted people such as HG Wells, Augustus John and Bernard Shaw, and
caused much controversy in the late-1920s by showing uncensored versions of
foreign films.
For one such occasion Sidney Bernstein got Nancy Cunard to bring a print of
Bunuel's notorious surrealist work Un Chien Andalou into the UK - and past
the UK customs officers - in her hatbox.
