PRESIDENT Bill Clinton may introduce even deeper spending cuts in the
economic plan he presented last week as a result of pressure from public
opinion and conservative Democrats.
The White House wants Congress to pass a budget resolution locking in the
long-term spending cuts in the Clinton plan before it votes on the
short-term Dollars 16bn (Pounds 11.2bn) economic stimulus package that had
been its first priority. Both measures should come to a vote by early April.
The move is partly symbolic: the budget resolution only contains an outline
of future tax and spending plans, whose details will be incorporated in a
larger budget reconciliation bill later in the year. But it also reflects
the concern of fiscal conservatives, including many first-term members of
Congress, to demonstrate that they are serious about reducing the deficit
before they set about voting on a stimulus bill that will increase spending.
The plan includes Dollars 247bn of spending cuts and Dollars 246bn of tax
increases in 1994-97, but these are offset by Dollars 109bn of spending
increases and Dollars 60bn of tax breaks. Overall, the White House expects
the package to reduce the budget deficit from Dollars 332bn this year to
Dollars 206bn in 1997.
Mr Clinton has been telling audiences over the past week that he has only
just begun the task of cutting government spending; public feedback to
congressional offices around the country so far appears to favour pushing
ahead with this task immediately.
While the Republican opposition has criticised the overall plan for raising
taxes too much and cutting spending too little, most Republicans have so far
shied away from Mr Clinton's challenge to say which specific programmes they
would cut. Senator Trent Lott has resorted to theatricals, producing a
document which he claims contains a long list of spending cuts, but which he
will not show anyone.
White House officials say they have many more potential spending targets,
and the Congressional Budget Office has just produced a list of 249 specific
deficit-reducing measures, ranging from cancelling the space station and the
superconducting supercollider (saving Dollars 14.2bn over five years) to
eliminating federal subsidies for wool and mohair production (saving Dollars
580m over five years).
But Mr Clinton has already adopted many of these - although he has only gone
halfway on wool and mohair, saving Dollars 278m over five years by capping
subsidies at Dollars 50,000 per producer. Other cancellations, such as the
space station and the supercollider, have been floated and sunk by
opposition from the members of Congress whose states benefit from the
programmes.
This leaves Congress's deficit hawks, many of whom come from the south, with
an interesting political quandary. If President Clinton bows to their calls
for more spending cuts, they may find the pork-barrel projects and
agricultural subsidies they have fought for in the past are at the top of
his cutting list.
