US drug stocks have had a torrid year so far. Since the beginning of
January, the Standard &amp; Poor's drug index has underperformed the S &amp; P
composite by 18 per cent.
The reasons for this are not hard to find: the sector, which generates an
unusually large proportion of sales outside the US, has been hit by health
care reform in most of its international markets, as well as changes in its
domestic customer base.
Growth of the US market, the world's most important, has decelerated rapidly
over the last 12 months. IMS International, the market research company,
estimates that it expanded at only 4 per cent during the first nine months
of this year, compared with the same period last year. Until last year it
was enjoying double-digit growth.
The deceleration has been caused not by the Clinton reforms, but by changes
in the customer base. Hospitals, doctors and other purchasers of drugs are
increasingly grouping together to purchase drugs.
These managed groups, often more interested in the price of a drug than its
safety and effectiveness, represent an increasingly large proportion of the
drugs market. They are also negotiating ever greater discounts from
pharmaceuticals companies.
The drugs groups' difficulties in the US have been exacerbated by a series
of significant patent expiries. These affect sales of not only the
off-patent drug but its patented competitors as well.
Many drugs groups are cutting prices to compete in this new environment. The
Clinton reforms, encouraging the creation of health alliances, can only
assist the market's deceleration. At the same time, pharmaceuticals earnings
have also been hit by changes in the tax regime in Puerto Rico, where many
of the US companies make their medicines.
US groups have found little help through exports. The Japanese market, the
world's second largest, is growing at only 4 per cent, while Europe's top
seven countries generated zero growth during the first nine months of this
year compared with the same period last year.
But although all US groups are facing similar problems, their abilities to
weather the health care storm vary enormously. Analysts have spent the last
12 months trying to explain to investors the difference between the haves
and the have nots of the drugs industry. They have almost completely failed.
The differences between the companies are immense. At one extreme there is
Syntex, the Californian-based group. The US patents of its most important
product, Naprosyn, expire this month and effects will devastate the company.
Naprosyn's US sales were Dollars 760m last year, compared with group
pharmaceuticals turnover of Dollars 1.8bn. Its shares have underperformed
the drugs market by 12 per cent since the beginning of the year.
At the other extreme is Merck &amp; Co, the world's biggest drugs group. Its
shares have also underperformed the drugs sector by 12 per cent, yet its
underlying volume growth rate is about 9 per cent.
Another star with a disappointing stock market performance is Pfizer. Its
volume growth remains in double digits and its main problem is minimising
its profits to prevent political embarrassment. Yet it has only outperformed
the drugs sector by 3 per cent and has underperformed against the market.
Those that have done well against the sector this year are not the
industry's traditional stars. Warner-Lambert, normally seen as a dull
consumer products, chewing gum and confectionery company - with a few drugs
tacked on - has outperformed the sector by 9 per cent so far this year.
Upjohn, which has been struggling with the patent expiries of three of the
group's leading drugs over the past 12 months, has also done well: its
shares are 10 per cent higher than the sector on the basis of takeover
rumours. At one stage it was outperforming by 26 per cent.
The only company whose stock market performance has matched its commercial
performance has been Schering-Plough. The analysts' favourite this year,
with its young portfolio of products, its strong position in antihistamines,
its programme of operating margin improvement, and its powerful pipeline of
new drugs, the company has outperformed the sector by 18 per cent. Even so,
the shares are only 5 per cent up since January.
The drugs industry is complicated. The market is fragmented, with Merck, the
world's largest drugs group, controlling little more than 5 per cent of the
market; there are about six important therapeutic areas which cover many
different diseases; for each disease there may be four or five different
classes of drugs that can be used; in each class there may be as many as 15
different drugs; and each of these probably has three different names.
When all drugs groups were generating 15 per cent earnings growth, such
complexity did not matter. Now, in spite of the quality of some drugs
companies, it is not surprising that many fund managers have been
disinclined to increase their weighting. The sector is too difficult for its
own good.
