It is easier to describe the work that Tim Head is currently exhibiting than
either to justify or to condemn it. The first thing to strike us, even
before we register his latest group of 15 canvases that occupies the huge
lower gallery of the Whitechapel, is the space itself. We enter a room
transformed, its walls now a light and uniform sky-blue, its floor covered
with green plastic turf. Head, the gentle manipulator of space, the teasing
confounder of familiarity and expectation, is at it again.
We need not go so far as his apologist, Marco Livingstone, who, in the
catalogue essay, compares the experience with that of being placed 'in the
perfect stillness of an eternal heaven by Fra Angelico', to take the point.
There is no deception: the means are obvious. Yet this great space, even as
we enter and recognise it, is not quite the Whitechapel we thought we knew.
It is bigger somehow, higher, more open and airy, yet, at the same time,
oddly more complete and enclosed.
Here hang these large canvases, 13 to the set and two more hors serie, with
their immaculate surfaces and their self-consciously bland and enigmatic
images. They are clearly untouched by hand, but the manner of their making
is not readily apparent. Only the catalogue can tell us that they have been
printed out on an ink-jet press, regulated by computer, the images amplified
from collage studies. It is at once frustrating and revealing that Head
never shows such preparatory material.
What are we to make of these blank, screen-like images, so gently curved and
subtly speckled? Again, only the catalogue will tell us that they derive
from 'the kinds of shapes used in packaging and presentation . . . Intrigued
that such shapes look comfortingly familiar but also odd in their synthetic
character, he built up a collection of them in the form of manufactured
objects, labels and printed matter, sometimes drawing the outline directly
from such things as plastic containers, at other times photocopying them and
redrawing them. Gradually refining the selection so as to eliminate the most
immediately recognisable forms, he arrived at a group of hybrid generic
motifs whose particular origins can no longer be identified.'
Upstairs, past the slide documentary of past work, and the 'Happy Eaters' in
the Gallery's cafe, we come to another total appropriation of the particular
space. The small New Gallery has been blacked out and ultra-violet lamps
installed to pick out the myriad coloured stick-on labels scattered across
the walls and ceiling. The trick is simple enough and the effect engaging,
as it were the darkest of nights and the stars bright in the firmament, 'the
floor of heaven thick inlaid with patinas of bright . . ' - well, yellow and
green and blue and red.
The Upper Gallery holds a selection of Head's work of the 1980s, and it is
here that his preoccupation with the synthetic product and detritus of the
modern, processed, computer-driven world is made clear. Here are the large
cibachrome photographs, produced to the highest gloss of contemporary
advertising, that take still-life as their ironical, impassive subject. Here
is a heap of plastic toys, pastel-coloured skulls that are really rubbers,
rockets, toy cars: and here a King Kong cityscape of transistor radios,
computers, product packaging, vibrators as skyscrapers.
Here too are the effluent and toxic landscapes, the cibachromes of what
might be pools or swamps filled with whatever we choose to throw away,
plastic bottle, strip and filler, unbiodegradable to the last button. The
charge is inevitable, but Head insists he is not an issues artist. 'It's not
straight-forward, and that's what makes it interesting. I am drawn to these
things. Close up, they have a strange physical beauty that I find compelling
. . . We can't pretend that this stuff doesn't exist.'
Further along hangs the 'Cow Mutation' painting, with which he won the John
Moores Prize of 1986. It is again a large canvas, but this time painted
directly and simply in black and white, the image derived from the cow motif
by the anonymous designer of the particular milk carton. And by degrees the
poor cow disintegrates in formal frenzy before our eyes. No issue there. The
series continues with such works as Prime Cuts, Deep Freeze and Replicator,
each apparently prettier and more disarming than the next in its
sophisticated simplicity, whites and pinks, violets and blues, so redolent
of late Matisse. It is only the imagery itself that gives us pause, images
of cells and organisms, mutant as may be, beneath the microscope. The large
green and black triptych at the end carries as its image a map of the world,
its continents and oceans breaking down in a desperate confusion. As I say,
no issue there.
Head, it seems to me, is very much an artist of his time and place,
fortunate in the sympathetic interest his work has elicited over the years,
by its very nature, in the eyes of those who command the public patronage of
the British art world. That of itself is no disqualification, and Head no
less an artist, of considerable refinement and intelligence moreover, for
the support he has enjoyed.
My feeling is only that he is as yet not fully the artist he is capable of
being simply because he has yet to trust himself fully to experience and
intuition, rather than, as hitherto, to idea and process. He is the victim
still of his background, Newcastle in the 1960s, under the influence of
Richard Hamilton, and the heresy that persists so destructively to this day,
that art, to be art, must be about ideas - as though ideas alone could make
a Titian, a Rembrandt or a Matisse. Idea and attitude are but the
straitjacket of the aesthete and the curatorial pedant, and Head, I should
have thought, too clever not to escape.
Tim Head: Whitechapel Art Gallery, Whitechapel High Street E1, until
February 28, then to Manchester City Art Galleries. Sponsored by Beck's
