THE KEATING government yesterday introduced its native land rights bill into
the Australian parliament, and indicated that it hopes to have the
contentious and complex legislation on the statute book by Christmas.
Mr Kim Beazley, leader of the government's business in the House of
Representatives, declined to rule out use of a parliamentary guillotine,
saying that speedy passage was desirable to ensure certainty. Mr Paul
Keating, the prime minister, also said that 'most aspects of the bill' would
come into force by January 1, provided parliament approved the package.
However, any forcing of the pace is being resisted by the opposition
parties, and by the West Australian government, which is vehemently opposed
to the federal package and has introduced rival land rights legislation.
The legislation aims to protect native title where Aborigines can show a
continuous link to traditional lands. Aborigines will be empowered to
negotiate on land use but will not have the right to veto development.
Native title tribunals are to be set up to rule on land claims and set
compensation. Mining leases will be validated, but native title rights can
be exercised after a grant expires.
The issue has sparked a bitter debate in Australia, with business, mining
and conservative political leaders predicting dire economic consequences if
Aborigines gained rights to land taken from them by white settlers.
The bill also establishes a National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Land Fund, which will help dispossessed Aborigines acquire and maintain
land.
Mr Keating gave no figures yesterday on the size of this fund, or on the
expected cost of compensation for the ending of native title claims. An
explanatory memorandum attached to the bill said that about ADollars 6m
(Pounds 2.6m) had been set aside to fund its initial implementation, but
added that it was impossible to identify any direct liability for
compensation that the Commonwealth might have to bear, although the sums
could be 'considerable'.
Both the opposition, which has yet to formulate a response to the land
rights issue, and the minority parties who hold the balance of power in the
Senate, were last night studying details of the bill before declaring their
positions.
