HE IS trim, dapper, fast-talking, and very much the modern trade union man.
He sits on the supervisory boards of three thoroughly blue-chip German
companies, Daimler-Benz, Volkswagen and Thyssen.
He wears suits designed by Hugo Boss, and ties from Armani. He is
chauffeur-driven to work every day in a Mercedes from his home in the Taunus
mountains, where Frankfurt's bankers live, to his offices near the main
railway station in the city centre.
He smokes good cigars, and unashamedly enjoys fine food.
He earns about DM270,000 (Pounds 110,000) a year, and has undoubtedly saved
a bit for his old age, like the careful Swabian he is. He jogs every day,
and plays tennis with Mr Edzard Reuter, the chief executive of Daimler and
Germany's top industrialist. The two are on familiar terms, calling each
other Du.
Now it is clear that Mr Franz Steinkuhler, head of IG Metall, the giant
engineering workers' union and undisputedly Germany's most powerful union
leader, is not averse to substantial speculation on the stock exchange. He
has admitted buying almost DM1m worth of shares in a Daimler holding
company, in a deal which netted him a windfall profit of DM64,000 almost
overnight.
He may yet prove to have been a bit too modern for his membership. For the
storm surrounding Mr Steinkuhler showed no sign of abating yesterday.
Indeed, it appeared to be gathering strength as trade unionists joined
conservative politicians urging him to resign.
Although he came from the left to take over his union, Mr Steinkuhler has
proved to be a reforming figure, respected in board rooms and the
Chancellor's office as a man with whom one can do business.
When Chancellor Helmut Kohl launched his bid to negotiate a 'solidarity
pact' last year with the opposition Social Democrats, trade unions and
employers, the first man he called in for secret talks was Mr Steinkuhler.
Once he was persuaded that a deal could and should be done, insiders were
convinced Mr Steinkuhler would deliver.
The negotiations lasted six months, instead of the 12 weeks intended, but
the deal was done. Mr Steinkuhler won a promise that ailing enterprises in
east Germany would get a new lease of life. In exchange he was supposed to
have promised pay restraint from his members.
The deal has held true in west Germany, but in the east Mr Steinkuhler
promptly led his members out on strike in defence of their deal for rapid
wage equalisation. Mr Kohl got his solidarity pact on paper; Mr Steinkuhler
preserved his reputation as a militant.
Yet now the union's hard man looks likely to fall foul of the rash of
scandals which has beset the German body politic.
There is no doubt he is a tough negotiator and a hard task-master, even
within his own slightly scruffy union office block in Frankfurt. They know
him there as 'Kaiser Franz', undisputed boss of a highly centralised
organisation since 1986, when he took over at the relatively young age - for
a union leader - of 49.
His immediate response to the latest accusations of insider dealing in the
shares of Mercedes Holding was typical. He came straight out, admitted the
deal, but denied insider knowledge. The shares were moving, and it was a
perfectly normal deal, he declared.
In spite of the recognition that German trade union leaders are well paid,
and that they move in top business circles on the supervisory boards of all
the main industrial companies, the revelation that Mr Steinkuhler was able
to come up with almost DM1m for the deal is proving hard for most of his
members to swallow.
Yet they also believe that it is a classic right-wing coup against a modern
left-wing leader; somebody leaked precise details of share dealings carried
out by Mr Steinkuhler's bank on his behalf.
The question is can he switch blame on to some conservative plot against
workers, or has he exhausted his members' sympathy by behaving too much like
the capitalists he was elected to fight?
