AMSTRAD, the consumer electronics company run by Mr Alan Sugar, has jumped
into the fast-growing mobile telephone equipment business through the
acquisition yesterday of Dancall Radio, the Danish cordless and mobile
telecommunications group, for Pounds 6.4m.
Dancall, based in Pandrup, has been in payments suspension since August and
the acquisition was approved yesterday at a creditors meeting. The Danish
group is one of the last established European stand-alone mobile equipment
businesses designing, assembling and marketing its own brand.
Last year the group, which has an extensive GSM (Groupe Speciale Mobile)
digital telephones research and development team, had sales of DKr380m
(Pounds 40m) based on cellular and cordless telephones. GSM is the
pan-European standard for the next generation of mobile telephone systems,
which are just beginning to appear across Europe.
Although relatively unknown in the UK, Dancall has a strong presence in the
Nordic markets - among the most sophisticated in Europe - and has sales in
some 25 overseas markets including the Middle and Far East.
Amstrad has been looking for a consumer electronics market to relace its
'blockbuster' products of the 1980s, which are now in decline. In addition,
the deal effectively enables Amstrad to leapfrog competitors and buy-in
technological and manufacturing expertise.
Mr Sugar has often expressed his interest in expanding Amstrad's
telecommunications equipment side, which already includes Betacom, the
separate, publicly quoted telephone equipment manufacturer in which Amstrad
has a majority stake.
Yesterday the Amstrad chairman said the group would 'unveil further
strategic plans' when it announced its year-end results next month.
Amstrad is forming a new subsidiary, Dancall Telecom, to manage the Danish
operations. Mr Malcolm Miller, Amstrad's sales and marketing director, has
been appointed chairman of the subsidiary, which will and will rehire 200 of
the 600 employees who were laid off when Dancall went into payments
suspension.
'By acquiring Dancall's GSM research and development group we are well
placed amongst a few leaders in GSM technology, as well as for making a
quick move into PCN,' he said.
As part of the deal Mr Miller said Amstrad, which usually subcontracts its
assembly work, will be taking over a state-of-the-art factory and one of
'the world's finest R&amp;D teams'.
