Yesterday's decision opens the way for independent gas companies to enter
the domestic gas market, something they have been pressing to do for years.
'This is good news for all consumers across the country,' said Mr Peter
Bryant, deputy chairman of United Gas, the independent gas supplier which
had anticipated yesterday's developments by linking up with several regional
electricity companies to sell gas to private homes.
Mr Heseltine's proposals match almost exactly a blueprint that a group of
independent companies, including United Gas, put forward earlier this year
for a free market in gas, backed by promises that prices for consumers would
come down.
The trade and industry secretary has opted for abolishing British Gas's
monopoly rather than breaking it up, as recommended by the MMC. This means
independents will get into the market sooner. Mr Heseltine and Ms Clare
Spottiswoode, the gas regulator, are also proposing a relatively free
regulatory regime, with independent companies defining their own geographic
markets.
Any aspiring gas supplier will be able to apply for a licence to serve an
area of its choice. Provided it can demonstrate financial strength and
access to adequate gas supplies it should be authorised as a public gas
supplier (PGS). It can then solicit business. The gas would be supplied
through existing pipes and meters which the company would rent from British
Gas.
The main licence condition will be adherence to a network code. PGSs will
have to supply gas to anyone in their area who asks for it, and all on the
same terms. This is to ensure that de-regulation does not lead to 'cherry
picking' by independents seeking only well-heeled customers.
The main aim is to force through competition and bring wider choice and
lower prices to households. The independents have been claiming that gas
bills could go down by 10 per cent or more because their operating costs are
only a fraction of British Gas's.
These claims have been challenged by British Gas and greeted with some
scepticism in the market. 'The single issue for consumers is whether wider
choice means lower gas bills,' said Mr Ian Powe, director of the Gas
Consumers Council.
The National Consumer Council is also worried. The director Ms Ruth Evans
said free competition could mean larger customers benefiting at the expense
of the smaller.
There is a strong likelihood that some areas will attract more competition
than others, so some consumers will get more choice and possibly lower
prices. Ms Spottiswoode said that prices might vary around the country, but
only by about 2 per cent. She also thought it likely that several companies
would apply to serve the whole of the UK.
Some 80 companies currently have licences to supply the non-franchise
market, though only 30 or so are active. They have already taken 20 per cent
of the segments of the non-franchise market that have recently been opened
to them.
Mr Norman Ellis, managing director of Kinetica - a joint venture between
Conoco, the US oil company, and PowerGen, the UK power generator - predicted
a structural change in the gas market as a result of yesterday's decision.
