WORLD SUGAR stocks are expected to decline next season by another 1.81m
tonnes, according to London trader C. Czarnikow's initial forecast for
1993-94.
In its latest Sugar Review, Czarnikow estimates that world production will
rise in 1993-94 by 1.34m tonnes to 112.55m, while consumption growth will
continue - albeit at a slower rate than in recent years - taking the world
total up from 1992-93's 112.22m tonnes to 113.76m. The projected fall in
stocks allows for the 'disappearance' factor.
'The overall totals might suggest that, with world stocks now returned to a
mid-range figure, price movements may prove rather neutral in the coming
months,' the review says.
'However, there are contrasts in the outlook as some producers seek to
recover from weather related problems last season while several of the
larger individual countrioes have balances that are moving into deficit.
'Supplies appear to be plenttiful over the remaining months of this calendar
year,' Czarnikow notes, 'but there are already signs of localised supply
difficulties which are likely to make an impact in the market next year.'
The review cites India as a case in point. 'Generous stocks were available
in 1992-93 to bridge the gap between a sharply lower crop and steadily
rising demand,' it says. 'There was even sufficient to meet some export
commitments but, in all, 2m tonnes were needed (from stocks) to assure a
balance. With stocks depleted to that extent, there are not the reserves to
repeat the exercise.'
Czarnikow also reports uncertainty about the situation in China, where
government policy has concentrated on encouraging sugar consumption. This,
together with sharply higher exports - mainly to Russia - has helped to
reduce the internal surplus from the record 1991-92 crop, the review says.
Meanwhile, as a delayed reaction develops to the increased use last year of
IOUs to pay farmers, the area planted to sugar has slipped back.
Russia's 1993 sugar beet harvest will be between 24.2m and 26.65m tonnes,
little changed from last year's 25.5m, but below the five-year average of
30.2m tonnes, Interfax news agency said, reports Reuter from Moscow.
