FORD's continuing losses in Europe have forced the US-based vehicle maker to
scale back its ambitious plan for restructuring its European research and
development operations.
It is reducing the number of jobs to be transferred from the UK to Germany
and is to keep open its Aveley engineering site in Essex, which had been
earmarked for closure.
Ford announced a year ago that it planned to consolidate its UK and German
design and production engineering operations at two sites - Dunton, Essex,
and Merkenich, near Cologne.
The company said yesterday, however, that it had reviewed the plan 'to
ensure that every element of proposed expenditure is absolutely justified in
the light of our present business situation'.
Ford's European automotive operations, including Jaguar, made a record loss
last year of Dollars 1.3bn (Pounds 840m) compared with a loss of Dollars
1.079bn in 1991.
The European operations are being drastically restructured, with about
10,000 job losses in Ford of Europe (excluding Jaguar) announced last year.
In spite of earlier optimism about returning to break-even this year Ford
this week admitted that 'as economic conditions have developed, it is
increasingly unlikely that the company's European operations will return to
profitability in 1993'.
Aveley will keep its pilot plant and manufacturing and process-engineering
workshop facilities.
The 'likely benefits' of consolidating the operation at Dunton were
'outweighed by the substantial costs involved', the company said.
Under the revised plan for reorganising research and development the number
of jobs to be transferred from the UK to Germany has been reduced to 226
from 309 a year ago. The jobs are in chassis engineering, body engineering
and transmission operations.
The number of jobs being moved from Germany to the UK, in instrument panel
engineering, has been cut to 22 from 26.
Ford said yesterday that 776 jobs would now be moved to the Dunton technical
centre. Of these 346 would come from Aveley, 172 from Dagenham and 258 from
Basildon. About 400 jobs will remain at Aveley.
Ford said the scaling back of the plan had not compromised its aim of
locating its design and manufacturing engineering staffs at only two
locations in the UK and Germany.
The moves were aimed at improving the efficiency of the operations through
increasing use of simultaneous engineering - involving both design and
manufacturing engineers in project teams.
The company will remain at a disadvantage against its rivals in Europe by
having these functions divided.
