NOW comes the hard part. After the decisive Danish Yes to the Maastricht
treaty, the EC faces a dual challenge: to recapture public support for
European integration and to make the much-abused treaty work.
Ever since Danish voters rejected the Maastricht treaty last June, the EC
has been trapped in what Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president,
calls a period of depression and inaction - a reflection of his own state of
mind as much as the mood in the Brussels bureaucracy.
But on Tuesday night, as the first exit polls showed a resounding Yes,
European commissioners came bounding into the underground press room in the
Bredel headquarters. For the first time in months the made-for-TV smiles
looked genuine. 'We can breathe again,' said one EC ambassador.
The Danish endorsement of Maastricht will most likely hasten ratification in
the UK, the lone treaty hold-out; more important, it builds on the Edinburgh
summit last December when the UK presidency engineered a series of deals on
the EC budget and enlargement which gave the Community a more secure
framework for its development to the year 2000.
The billion Ecu question is whether this framework will be of the loose
variety favoured by Britain and the Danes, or whether federalist forces in
Belgium, the Netherlands and the Commission will try to force the pace
toward closer political and monetary integration.
The Danish vote does not provide an answer, because it does not represent a
true test of public support for European union. The version of Maastricht
which Denmark approved on Tuesday contains legally-binding opt-outs on core
elements of the treaty, including the single European currency, EC
citizenship, and defence policy.
Yet in the short-run, the special Danish deal may not matter. The battle to
ratify Maastricht has come to resemble a religious war; now is the time,
says one senior EC official, to focus on 'real' issues such as rising
unemployment, low investment, monetary stability as well as the political
and economic integration of eastern Europe.
The first test of whether the Community has put an end to its introspection
will be the EC summit in Copenhagen on June 21-22. Leaders will be asked to
approve a bolder-than-expected Commission paper proposing accelerated trade
liberalisation with Poland, Hungary, the Czech and Slovak republics,
Bulgaria and Romania.
Failure to reach agreement would not only be a slap in the face for the
emerging democracies in eastern Europe; it would signal growing support for
protectionism in France, Spain and Portugal and would bode ill for efforts
to reach agreement on a far-reaching market access package in the Gatt
Uruguay Round talks at the Group of Seven summit in Tokyo in July.
The second summit test is whether member states can restore growth to their
economies, reversing the rise in unemployment which will top 17.5m in the EC
this year.
The Danish presidency and Mr Delors are pushing hard for a strengthened
growth package, with member states shifting more resources into capital
spending. But severe constraints remain, because of the Maastricht
'convergence criteria' covering targets for inflation, budget deficits and
government debt which member states must meet in order to qualify for
monetary union.
At present, only Luxembourg qualifies on all three grounds. But when Mr
Philippe Maystadt, Belgian finance minister, said last weekend that member
states should soften the convergence targets if recession continued into
next year, he received no audible support.
In Brussels yesterday, Mr Wilfried Martens, former Belgian prime minister
and president of the powerful Christian Democrat group of parties in Europe,
disowned his Belgian colleague. 'If we modify the criteria we would be
taking a large political and economic risk,' he said.
For the UK, which was forced out of the European exchange rate mechanism
(ERM) along with Italy last September, these divisions appear to confirm
what ministers concluded at the 1991 Maastricht summit: that the third phase
of monetary union was not, and never would be, feasible.
Mr Douglas Hurd, UK foreign secretary, went a step further recently. 'With
the Community bound together by shared interests,' he said, 'there must be
room for flexibility provided the core remains intact. I am not talking here
about a two-speed Europe, but of a Community which responds more flexibly to
the increased diversity of its members.'
This comes close to a Europe a la carte; but as a recent Royal Institute of
International Affairs paper points out, the EC is already moving towards 'an
uncertain pattern of co-operation in different groups on particular policy
areas'.
