ASEA Brown Boveri, the world's largest power engineering group, has reported
flat pre-tax profits of Dollars 497m (Pounds 333.5m) for the first half and
sees little improvement for the rest of the year.
'Short-term growth prospects in western Europe have not improved. In North
America, the beginning of an economic recovery has so far had only a
marginal impact on ABB's range of products,' the Swiss-Swedish group said.
In view of depressed demand in Europe and North America, the group said it
would accelerate its rationalisation programme, eliminating a further 7,000
jobs by the end of the year. New provisions of Dollars 500m would be made
against 1993 earnings.
Since spring 1990, ABB has eliminated 40,000 jobs. However, total employment
has risen from 213,000 at the end of last year to 218,000 through
acquisitions.
ABB said that a number of production and engineering plants in Europe and
North America had been identified for closure or cuts but gave no details. A
spokesman said the reductions would be made across its divisions, with the
exception of the power distribution division.
New orders were down 12 per cent to Dollars 15bn in the first half and the
intake rate worsened in the second quarter.
The level of new orders for power plants and transportation equipment held
up close to previous year levels, but those for other divisions dropped
significantly, notably in the industrial plant sector, where they plunged 25
per cent to Dollars 2.24bn.
Group revenues were off 5 per cent in the first half to Dollars 13.1bn.
Excluding currency effects, however, they rose 2 per cent. Operating income
advanced 4 per cent to Dollars 937m, thanks to higher earnings in the power
plant and financial services segments. Profits before non-recurring items
and taxes eased 2 per cent to Dollars 518m, but excluding currency effects,
were up 10 per cent.
ABB said order intake had begun to pick up in the second half. It confirmed
a previous forecast made by Mr Percy Barnevik, its chief executive, that
pre-tax profits for the full year, before non-recurring items, would reach
about the same level as last year's Dollars 1.11bn.
Lex, Page 14
