It is easy to make too much of it, but a painter still tends to be known by
his subject matter. It follows that when a marked shift in an artist's
apparent interest should appear to have taken place we are only too ready to
speculate as to motive and intention, when really all that has happened is
that something fresh has caught his eye, a circumstance has changed, or a
natural extension of the work has proposed itself.
The point may seem obvious, but it needs to be made all the same in a time
when the literary and literal reading of art history would turn all painting
into history-painting and an annexe of social study.
The Impressionists - if the word retains any collective sense - turned their
attention to the particular play of light as it fell upon the world about
them and, by extension, found the generality of their material in what was
immediately to hand, mundane and everyday. If they looked to the nearer
landscape of suburban gardens and small-holdings on the edge of Paris that
even as they worked on them were being encroached upon by the growing city,
rather than to a countryside more remote and idealised, it was because that
was where they were. They saw a factory chimney in the distance rather than
a church tower, a railway engine rather than a horse and cart. And while
such details may fix the epoch for us with a peculiar poignancy, that is not
to say that it was ever the artist's conscious thought to do so.
Camille Pissarro, that most assiduous and archetypal of impressionists, with
his stated principles and socialist and anarchist leanings, has suffered
much lately by an over-sociological reading of his work. Even now, with this
magnificent exhibition at The Royal Academy, London, of the urban series of
his last years, we can sense the danger, with these high views over the
bridges and docks of Rouen and along the great boulevards of Paris, as
though to bring home to us the dehumanised, ant-like commerce and traffic of
the modern city.
And perhaps he did indulge from time to time in feelings of that sort - as
who has not. Perhaps he did offer up the rationale that he was looking to
the contrast of new and old, the conventionally ugly against the
picturesque, the questionable weight of tradition embodied in the Louvre as
he saw it rising above the trees of the Tuileries Gardens. But in front of
the actual works, so informed are they with a sense of immediate engagement
and excitement in the thing seen, such thoughts soon fall away, irrelevant
and hard to credit.
It cannot be emphasised enough that Pissarro was nothing if not a painter.
Painting is a very practical business, and whatever the nature of his
anticipatory notes or his post-facto ruminations, in front of the canvas it
is quite clear that the practice and the stuff of the paint absorbed him
utterly.
He was already 66, an elderly man, his sight failing, when in 1896 he
embarked on the first of these great series projects, the paintings of the
bridge and water-front at Rouen. The energy with which he sustained this
enterprise thereafter, in projects that often overlapped each other at
Rouen, le Havre, Dieppe and Paris, was extraordinary. Seven years on and
1903 saw him working variously at Dieppe, Paris and le Havre through the
spring and summer, and back in Paris in the autumn to complete the series of
views along the Quai Malaquais. Working to the last, he was taken ill and
died that November.
While such evident commitment was remarkable, the actual shift in
preoccupation, from the landscapes and rural genre subjects that
characterise his earlier career to these ambitious extended sequences of
cityscapes, was rather less so. Indeed, it seems perfectly reasonable. What
each series has in common is a high and consistent viewpoint, taken from the
balcony or window of an hotel or apartment deliberately chosen for the
purpose as temporary studio.
Come into somewhat more comfortable and reliable circumstances in his mature
career, the old man had not merely decided that the time had come for him to
work indoors, but had further realised that doing so would offer him, if
anything, even more scope in his address to the real and visible world. He
was not the first to paint the boulevards, the factories, the docks, nor yet
the first to work thus en serie, but this practical peripatetic combination
is his own.
And what a wonderful late achievement it produced and sustained. What we see
is almost a new artist, an artist at least renewed and refreshed, appearing.
The former insistent and systematic application of the paint, dab upon dab,
disappears, and as the handling of the paint grows ever more broad and free,
so the pictorial organisation, the underlying composition, grows ever
simpler and more authoritative.
Such is the structured practice and discipline, once assimilated to the
point of intuitive response, that truly frees the artist - any artist - to
do whatever it is he wants to do. And here, to see old Pissarro conjuring
the life of the Grands Boulevards, their cabs and buses, the horses stamping
at the stop and the crowd beneath the trees, out of the lightest stroke and
merest smudge of paint, is a pure delight.
The paintings of those Norman towns, Rouen, le Havre and Dieppe, with their
ports and markets, are well enough, but the purer visual pleasure and
excitement comes with the paintings of Paris. For here is the Paris we know,
for all that the streets are now full of cars and the pedestrian of
necessity less, well, pedestrian.
Here is the Avenue de l'Opera slushy as only Paris can be slushy in the
snow, the rue Saint Honore bright black and silver in the rain. Above all,
here is the Paris of crisp autumn days, the river hazy in a golden mist, the
bare trees bright in the sun, city of light.
Pissarro: the Impressionist and the City - The Sackler Galleries, The Royal
Academy, Piccadilly W1, until October 10. Sponsored by the Banque Indosuez
Group.
