LAST ACTION HERO (15) John McTiernan
DENNIS (PG) Nick Castle
CHAIN OF DESIRE (18) Temistocles Lopez
JUST ANOTHER GIRL ON THE IRT (15) Leslie Harris
It is Mayday time in the media and movies. Major leakages are happening
between monitored make-believe and rebel reality. Designer dinosaurs turn
into ravening beasts; Conservative prime ministers slip into off-air
obscenity; and Arnold Schwarzenegger falls out of the cinema screen into the
real world of crime-ridden New York.
In today's pop science jargon they call it Chaos Theory. Last Action Hero,
starring the aforementioned Austro-American hulk, confirms what Hollywood's
Jurassic Park and British TV's 'Bastardgate' have just hinted. That in
today's hi-tech age the best-laid plans of mice and men, scientists and
politicians, are powerless to paper over the cracks between parallel worlds
and the slippages between design and denouement.
But - and when does show business fail to come up with a 'but'? - one can
always make a new art form from the debris of the old. Last Action Hero is
metafiction for the popcorn set. Spoof mixed with pastiche wrapped in
hommage, it tells us what happens when fictional Los Angeles cop hero Jack
Slater (Schwarzenegger) is joined inside his latest film by boy movie buff
Austin O'Brien, propelled into the screen by a magic ticket stub. (It once
belonged to Houdini).
Several adventures later, Slater repays the interdimensional visit by
crashing into the boy's native New York. So does the film-within-a-film's
villain Charles Dance, a white suit with a beard and braying RADA accent.
And so does the armoury of stunts and special effects assembled for this
Dollars 50m blockbuster directed by John (Die Hard) McTiernan.
If I tell the plot in detail, you will go mad. It involves the usual
foreground of fistfights, car chases, shoot-em-ups and hand-me-down tough
guy dialogue. What lends variety this time is the background. Cliches are
pixillated by context. In one scene the boy, watching Olivier's film of
Hamlet in school, daydreams a gun-toting parody version with
Slater-Schwarzenegger as the Dane. ('To be or not to be' quips the
fuse-lighting hero - 'not to be]' as Elsinore explodes around him). And
throughout the movie reality slides around in continuous flux, lubricated by
ludic in-jokes. The hi-tech police station is none other than Columbia
Pictures' own palatial lobby; the schoolmistress teaching Hamlet is none
other than Lady Olivier; and every other guest star carries his own
movie-referential hand luggage, from FBI agent F. Murray Abraham ('He killed
Mozart') to a roaring, grunting Anthony Quinn, capping all the Mafia capos
he ever played.
Foolish to make large claims for this amiable, untidy, overlong film. It
bears all the signs of a committee-born brainwave, with its cross-generation
casting and keep-em-awake piling of disparate incident. But Last Action Hero
also comes closer than any Hollywood film I have seen to a deconstructionist
primer on how to 'read' popular cinema. No sooner does the film perpetrate
twaddle than it comments on it and disarms it. As the cliches line up for
frisking - from the statutory hero's catch-phrase ('Beeg mistake]') to the
one-man arsenal of weaponry Schwarzenegger wears about him - we realise that
this is that rare and dangerous animal, a self-aware Hollywood action movie.
What ever next? Star Trek VII; The Intertextuality Zone? New Readings In
Rambo? Where Eagletons Dare? Hang on to your hats. Post-modernism may be
coming to the picture show.
No sign of it, though, in Dennis. The only segue between these two American
romps is Joan Plowright. New York schoolmarm here becomes Illinois housewife
 -both played with a majestic indifference to accent - and the teaming of
Lady Olivier's chubby aloofness with Walter Matthau's bloodhound-faced
dyspepsia is the chief inspiration in this maniac-child comedy scripted by
John (Home Alone) Hughes.
Based on the American newspaper strip-cartoon 'Dennis The Menace' (no
relation to the UK version), the movie jitters along from jape to jape as
10-year-old Dennis (Mason Gamble) sabotages false teeth, pours paint into
barbecues, catapults aspirins into grown-ups' sleeping mouths, wrecks
prize-winning gardens and makes life hell for his parents and next door
neighbours (Matthau/Plowright).
Master Gable is clearly cloned from Macaulay Culkin - Hollywood was into DNA
experiments long before Jurassic Park - and he goes through a near-identical
repertoire of fluttering eyes (mock innocence), gaping mouths ('Register
shock now, Mason') and whoops of delinquent triumph. The film climaxes in a
long, witless re-run of the boy-versus-burglar brutalities of Home Alone,
with Dennis subjecting footpad Christopher Lloyd to ordeal by bonfire, baked
beans and near-drowning. But before that there are moments of brighter,
sourer hilarity: especially when Matthau clumps into view, his jowly
asperity lighting up the screen like a sodium flare, his sinal twang sending
simple lines thudding to their comic target.
Chain Of Desire is La Ronde done on the cheap in New York, and as resistible
as that sounds. Venezuelan-born writer-director Temistocles Lopez
daisy-chains 12 tales of love and lust, their linking characters played by a
middle-magnitude cast including Malcolm McDowell (gay writer), Linda
Fiorentino (sultry chanteuse), Elias Koteas (stud repairman), Seymour Cassel
(action painter seeking extramarital action) and Assumpta Serna (action
painter's wife seeking ditto).
The press show audience was prone to incredulous mirth: as who would not be
when presented with the movie's dim dialogue, gauche camerawork and po-faced
procession of soft-porn encounters. The orgasmic transports of a shoe
fetishist; acts of sex atop a still-wet artist's canvas; simultaneous
masturbation by three window voyeurs . . . but no, enough. You might want to
see the film and make your own choice between goggling and giggling. The
wackiest touch, I thought, was the coffee-table book entitled
'Deconstruction' placed dangerously near one energetic daytime coupling. Was
this a comment on what might happen to the coffee table? Or is it part of
the movie industry's marching orders for a New Cerebralism we noted in Last
Action Hero?
Just Another Girl On The IRT is no less ill-focused but more strident: the
tale of an unmarried black girl from Brooklyn who gets pregnant, rails
against fate, screams at her boyfriend, refuses to have an abortion and ends
up developing that nastiest of pre-natal symptoms: talking to the camera.
(Deserted by everyone, she has only the audience to hector). Debut director
Leslie Harris is the first African-American woman to have a film distributed
in the UK. One applauds the breakthrough, but not the whingeing one-note
movie.
Elsewhere - and we warned you about the summer silly season - the choice is
between Liquid Sky (18, ICA) and a season of Ealing comedies at the
Barbican. The first is a 10-year-old cult sci-fi fantasy about aliens
cannibalising drug- and sex-crazed New Yorkers. The second is a time trip
back to the dear old days when sex had not been invented, New York was on
another planet and Britain was a comic cosmos unto itself. We have seen them
all before - Whisky Galore, The Lavender Hill Mob, The Ladykillers - but in
a week like this there are worse fates than seeing them all again.
