RECESSION AND growing awareness of the cost of implementing the world's
green aspirations have pushed environmental concerns down the political
agenda. After a decade of enthusiasm for regulation and international deals
on the environment, it is a time for priorities.
The best reason for acting in environmental questions is when there is a
risk to health and safety. Many environmentalists go further, arguing that a
duty exists to preserve the environment for posterity, whether or not health
is at risk. Lady Thatcher spoke of this generation's responsibility for a
'full repairing lease' on the planet in her 1988 speech to the Royal
Society.
That approach, captured in the notion of 'sustainable development', is
problematic. Many economists find it incoherent, since consumption of
perishable, non-renewable resources, such as oil, cannot be sustained
indefinitely. At its purest, the notion of 'sustainability' amounts to a
plea for conservation for its own sake, be it of whales or of particular
habitats, like rainforests. This position enjoys public support,
particularly in rich countries. But governments should carefully distinguish
conservation from concern about threats to people's physical well-being.
They should also be clear about the price they are willing to pay for the
preservation of blue skies or rare animals.
If health and safety are to be put first, global warming, the subject of one
of the two treaties at the Rio summit last year, should be viewed as the
most important single global risk. The threat of a rise in the planet's
temperature from growing concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane in the
atmosphere has not yet been proven: some scientists believe that clouds and
the oceans might counteract the change. Nevertheless, warming would cause
widespread social and agricultural disruption, if it were to occur, while
achieving better knowledge will take decades of research. Given the slowness
of international negotiations on curbing emissions as well, the issue should
be tackled urgently.
Rio sidestepped other important questions, notably population growth, to
which more attention should be paid. Similarly, it gave little time to trade
questions, though recent challenges to the proposed North American free
trade agreement and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade show how
environmental worries may lead to protectionism.
But the environmental concerns that merit attention are not only global
ones. Governments should also pay attention to local miseries. Urban air
pollution, for example, is suspected of causing rising asthma levels.
Equally important are contaminated land and mismanaged rubbish tips, while
noise is among the main complaints in rich countries and polluted water in
poor ones.
Nevertheless, not all environmental concerns deserve the attention they are
given. Ozone layer depletion, for example, poses far less of a threat than
global warming. Now that curbs on many of the chemicals responsible are in
place, ozone levels will correct themselves naturally over decades.
Governments should also cast a sceptical eye over recycling and renewable
energy. Those two issues have become a moral crusade for the green movement.
Yet their economics and even their environmental benefits are questionable.
Arguably, the most overblown issue of all is preservation of biodiversity,
the number and distribution of species, which was the subject of Rio's
second treaty. Maybe plants deep in tropical jungles contain hitherto
unknown medicines. But the sensible response is to catalogue the species and
preserve some of each, in a modern-day Noah's Ark.
Choices need to be made. If environmentalists insist that all things green
are equally important, they are likely to lose their influence. If
governments are distracted by items of minor importance from the
campaigners' agenda, they will not be effective. Sound environmental policy
requires clearly stated priorities.
This is the first of a series of editorials on environmental issues
