A FLIGHT into Lima on a clear day tells you a lot about the Peruvian fishing
industry. Seemingly hundreds of small boats are crowded along a narrow strip
of Pacific shoreline in pursuit of sardines and anchovy, most of which is
destined to be processed into fishmeal in one of the numerous coastal
factories.
The number of boats indicates the size of the industry in Peru, which last
year became the world's number one fishmeal producer, exporting a total of
1.37m tonnes. The boats' proximity to the coast also demonstrates the
shortcomings of the national fleet which, for the main part, cannot venture
into deeper waters where huge resources of horse and jack mackerel remain
largely unexploited.
According to Mr Cesar Chavez, executive director of the Peruvian Marine
Institute, the country is fishing close to its maximum sustainable level in
terms of anchovy and sardines. He believes that fishing companies should
concentrate their expansion efforts on jack mackerel, which can be processed
into fishmeal or sold for human consumption in Latin American markets such
as Bolivia, Ecuador and Colombia. Last year only 100,000 tonnes of jack
mackerel were netted against a sustainable catch estimated by Mr Chavez at
2m tonnes.
To achieve such catches companies would have to invest heavily in
refrigerated deep-sea boats fitted with electronic equipment capable of
pin-pointing fast-moving shoals of jack mackerel. 'There has been
modernisation taking place,' says Mr Ismael Benavides, former fisheries
minister, 'but there's still a lot to be done.'
'Fishing has traditionally been too easy and too accessible,' he says. 'If
you can catch anchovy off the coast, why go out and fish for mackerel.' He
sees this attitude as short-sighted. 'The incentive would be that you could
fish all year round without the limitations of fishing bans. The other
advantage would be that you could use part of the catch for human
consumption and get better prices.'
Mr Salomon Manzur, president of Carolina fishmeal and canning company,
agrees that jack mackerel is 'very important to the future of the industry'.
Carolina is completing designs of two modern boats, which will cost a total
of Dollars 12m and which Mr Manzur hopes will be catching a quarter of a
million tonnes of jack mackerel by next year.
Most analysts agree that to consolidate on recent improvements in the
industry, Peru needs to take the twin-track approach of making fishmeal
production more efficient while expanding into other more lucrative areas,
such as canning, freezing and aqua-culture.
The debate is becoming more pressing with the proposed sale of state-owned
Pesca Peru, which produces about 40 per cent of Peruvian fishmeal in 20
antiquated plants along the length of the coast. There are growing fears
that if these factories are transferred to the private sector they will
become better managed, creating greater pressure on finite anchovy
resources.
'The problem in the short or medium term is that if the capacity keeps
increasing the fish resources will become exhausted,' says Mr Victor
Ostolaza, vice-president at Carolina. He estimates that there is already a
five-fold overcapacity in fishmeal production, a situation that would only
deteriorate if Pesca Peru factories were transferred to private hands.
Carolina, in conjunction with other private sector operators, hopes to
persuade the government not to sell Pesca Peru, but to close down its plants
instead. Proposals have been mooted to set up a fund collected by means of a
special industry tax which would be used to compensate the state for loss of
sales earnings.
The government is hoping to raise at least Dollars 200m from the
privatisation of Pesca Peru, although industry insiders describe this figure
as inflated. Mr Marco Espino of the Marine Institute says that fears over
fish stocks are unwarranted. He is confident that existing legislation,
which prevents the introduction of additional fleet capacity, will safeguard
fish levels. Potential changes brought about by the sale of state assets are
primarily 'social and economic', he says. 'Happily, they will not effect the
resource itself.'
But private sector worries continue. Among the most persistent is a fear
that Pesca Peru, which is to be sold off in separate units, may be snapped
up by the Chinese who last year bought 60 per cent of Peruvian fishmeal. The
concern is that private companies will be squeezed out of that lucrative
market and that the close relationship between Chinese buyers and sellers of
fishmeal could depress prices.
Whatever the outcome, it is certain that there is room for greater
efficiency and quality control in fishmeal production. According to Mr
Benavides, the fish to fishmeal ratio in Peru is about 19 per cent, a
recuperation rate that could be raised to 23 per cent.
There have been private sector efforts to modernise plant both to increase
efficiency and to produce fishmeal with higher protein content and lower
toxicity for sale to specialist markets. The private sector estimates that
it has spent a total of Dollars 200m in modernisation over the past two
years.
Mr Benavides says that such efforts must continue. 'The future for Peruvian
fishing is to be more efficient in fishmeal production and to try to
diversify into other areas such as canning, freezing and aquaculture.' He
sees great potential in areas such as shrimp farming (Malaysian shrimp
thrive in the Peruvian jungle), turbot and trout. Chile's highly successful
development of a thriving salmon industry points the way, he says. 'Frozen
fish is another interesting area that has yet to be exploited.'
Mr Espino agrees. The main challenge now facing the industry, he says, is to
diversify into more profitable areas. 'The aim should be to copy New Zealand
which has added a great deal of value to relatively small fish stocks. That
is the future.'
