MR JOHN MAJOR has ruled out sterling's re-entry into the European exchange
rate mechanism this year. He also raised the prospect of extending
international monetary co-operation beyond Europe to other currencies if
Britain returned to managed exchange rates.
The prime minister said one of the causes of tension within the system over
recent months had been the 'disequilibrium' between exchange rates and
interest rates in Europe, compared with those in the US and Japan.
The fall in the value of the dollar, in particular, made Europe relatively
uncompetitive, he said in an interview yesterday on BBC television's
Breakfast with Frost programme.
'Now we may need to look also - if we go back into the ERM and if the ERM is
reconstituted in anything like its old form - at some form of relationship
between the European currencies and the dollar and the yen.'
Mr Major suggested that it could be done informally, and Downing Street
later emphasised that the prime minister was not proposing a whole new
system of inter-related currencies.
It was made clear, however, that the UK believed this point would be
addressed in the work on the 'faultlines' in the ERM set in hand after the
October EC summit in Birmingham.
Although ministers have previously signalled that sterling would not return
immediately to the ERM, Mr Major's statement should make it easier for the
government to deal with the issue when MPs resume the debate on the
Maastricht bill, even though he will have disappointed the more
Euro-enthusiastic Tories.
Mr Major contrasted present circumstances with the downturn of the early
1980s, when unemployment continued to rise until 1986, even though the
recovery had begun.
This time around, he said, employers had shed staff earlier than in the
previous recession, leading to 'reasonable expectations' that unemployment
would not carry on rising for so long after growth had returned.
He repeated his upbeat message that 1993 would see economic growth, but his
tone was more cautious as he renewed warnings against taking any risks with
inflation.
His comments failed to satisfy his critics. Euro-sceptic Tory MPs said he
should have ruled out any return to the ERM.
Major applauded, Page 18
Wynne Godley forecast, Page 26
Editorial Comment, Page 27
Lex, Page 28
Markets slow down on road to convergence; ERM chart, Page 29
