When you're strapped into your seat 30,000ft in the air, waiting for the
hours to pass on an intercontinental flight, it might be reassuring to know
that the aircraft's exact position is known to those on the ground. For much
of its route, however, this is not the case, whether you are flying over
land masses such as the Indian subcontinent or large tracts of water like
the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Radar stations cannot be planted all over
Asia or across the seas and radio contact is limited and unreliable over
vast distances.
For much of their journeys across the Atlantic, aircraft are out of contact
as they fly between the radar stations on the Scottish and Canadian coasts.
Pilots report their position by radio, but this can take time. Thus aircraft
have to be kept far enough apart - 60 miles each side, 2,000ft vertically
and 10 minutes' flying time behind each other - to ensure maximum safety.
But two things are happening which promise to change the world aviation
picture: air traffic is expected to grow at around 6 per cent a year up to
2000, with aircraft movements set to double in Europe by 2010; and
technology has advanced to the stage where computers and satellites can be
used to pinpoint aircraft positions so accurately that separation levels
could eventually be halved and more flights safely accommodated on the same
routes.
Although the technology is available, this will not happen quickly.
Governments, airlines and regulatory bodies have to agree on how and when it
will be phased in - there is broad agreement on its desirability - and the
air traffic management (ATM) systems have to be tested thoroughly. Airlines
also have to decide the investment is worthwhile.
Aviation experts stress that the new satellite-based technology of automatic
dependent surveillance (ADS), in which a stream of data is fed back
automatically from the aircraft to the ground, is not aimed at increasing
safety but at maintaining it, as more flights are allowed into the available
airspace.
Flying is one of the safest forms of travel, although the spectacular nature
of air disasters makes them especially frightening: the worst was a
collision at Tenerife airport in the Canary Islands in 1977 which killed 582
people.
'The objective is to improve the efficiency of the airspace with no
reduction in safety,' says David Featherstone, air traffic services
development manager at Inmarsat, the international satellite organisation.
'Safety is not at issue,' agrees Michael Parry-Evans, ATM marketing
executive at Siemens Plessey Systems, part of the Siemens electronics group.
'There would be delays rather than any imperilling of passengers if air
traffic control systems proved inadequate. The aim is to put in place a very
viable transport infrastructure.'
Today's infrastructure works, but is stretched and needs updating. Large
areas of the world, such as India, Africa and parts of southern and eastern
Europe, are poorly equipped with radar. In northern Europe, congestion can
cause lengthy delays. Now, the development of high-powered computer systems,
allied to the satellite network, has made it possible to plan for a new
generation of equipment.
Ten years ago, the International Civil Aviation Organisation set up a
committee on Future Air Navigation Systems (Fans) to look into the
navigational needs of the next 20 years. It is under the auspices of Fans
that ADS is being developed.
The satellites needed for ADS are in place. They cover four global regions
and will - once ADS is introduced towards the end of the century - enable
data to be sent digitally via satellite to a ground station and then into
air traffic control centres. Those on the ground could follow an aircraft's
track and direction based on the data - sometimes called 'pseudo-radar' -
being sent back. 'It will make the controller's job a lot easier,' says
Featherstone.
Pilots, too, should benefit. Based on the satellite data, they could be
given new flight paths to avoid bad weather or save fuel by keeping away
from strong winds. Engine data could also be monitored.
ADS is basically a development of the in-flight telephone systems that
airlines are introducing for passengers. Since the latest generation of
ground-air communications allows telephone and data services to be combined,
the instalment cost per new aircraft of up to Dollars 500,000 (Pounds
340,000) for each ADS unit and cabin equipment could be paid for by call
charges.
That is what British Airways and its competitors hope. 'We believe that to
make satellite navigation successful and cost-effective for the airlines,
we've got to bring a number of applications together,' says Gerry Selves,
BA's manager for flight technical projects. This means a combination of ADS,
telephones and data transmission for passengers and airline use, and
facsimile machines.
The UK's Civil Aviation Authority has taken an early lead in studying the
value of ADS. Using a Boeing 747-400 from BA, it carried out extensive tests
on a flight from Osaka, Japan, to London's Heathrow airport. Reports were
sent back from the aircraft via satellite every 10 seconds, but the CAA
expects the typical reporting period for North Atlantic flights to be every
five minutes.
'The CAA has taken the initiative on this programme,' says Leo Gallagher,
commercial director of Racal Avionics which has co-operated with Honeywell
of the US on Satcom, the leading aeronautical satellite communications
system. 'It is the first aviation authority in the world to grasp the nettle
of ADS.'
Other airlines such as United Airlines and Qantas are also studying ADS, in
which Rockwell-Collins of the US is also a player, but all are cautious
about investing at a time of economic uncertainty and stiff competition.
They want to be sure of the savings ADS can bring by allowing them to fly
the quickest routes and to avoid poor weather.
It is not only airlines which are under pressure to spend more money.
Airport and traffic control authorities, too, are investing in
high-performance systems to streamline the complex task of aircraft
approaches, landings, takeoffs and manoeuvrings on the ground. 'The drive in
the short- to medium-term is for increasing sophistication of air traffic
systems,' says Siemens' Parry-Evans.
With more powerful, integrated systems, air traffic controllers should be
able to concentrate more on difficult and potentially disastrous incidents
by having much of the routine taken away from them. On Siemens' latest air
traffic management system, each aircraft is identified with a marker and
information about its height, direction and speed is attached. The picture
can be blown up, viewed on more than one screen and be overlaid with weather
data. There is a built-in conflict alert to show if two aircraft are
dangerously close.
In competition with companies such as IBM, Raytheon and Hughes of the US,
Thomson of France and Alenia of Italy, Siemens is keen to move deeper into
the ATM market, worth more than Dollars 2bn a year.
The European part of that is valued at some Dollars 500m. As efforts by
Eurocontrol (the European agency for air navigation safety) to harmonise and
upgrade different national ATM systems - many of them dating from the 1960s
 -bear fruit, investment will be substantial. Among the new technologies
being introduced are systems which use microwaves for quicker and safer
landings.
The series continues next week with a look at vehicle safety.
