SHETLAND Islands Council yesterday activated its contingency plans to deal
with a Braer-type disaster but was thwarted by severe storms.
The storms may help the clean-up operation by breaking up the oil in high
waves - the Braer's cargo is a light crude which is easily dispersed. Mr Ian
White, managing director of the International Tanker Owners Pollution
Federation, estimated that up to 70 per cent of the oil would evaporate or
disperse naturally.
He said the severe weather rendered conventional methods of dealing with oil
pollution useless.
Aircraft were unable to spray chemicals and neither booms nor skimmers
stored on the island could be deployed.
He said the spill could not be compared with the Exxon Valdez disaster in
1989. In that spill, in Alaska, the oil was congregated in relatively still
water.
The Marine Pollution Control Centre at the Department of Transport, which
tackles pollution at sea, sent up six aircraft yesterday to track the slick
and spray dispersant, but all the aircraft were forced back by the weather.
One of the organisation's remote sensing aircraft, which has radar and
infra-red equipment to track an oil slick, managed to reach the shipwreck
but had to return because of the storm-force winds.
The aircraft were waiting in Inverness to try to reach the scene at first
light this morning.
Mr Michael Hudner, chief executive of Bermuda-based Bergvall &amp; Hudner Ship
Management, which operates the tanker for its Liberian owners, was due to
reach Shetland last night with a response team to co-ordinate the salvage
operation. He said yesterday: 'We regret this incident occurred.'
Smit Tak International, a leading ocean salvage company based in Rotterdam,
was awarded the contract for the salvage operation. The company's payment is
tied to the amount of environmental pollution it can contain.
The company said last night that the first aim would be to board the vessel
to assess the situation, but that has been impossible so far because of the
high winds.
The company is hoping it can pump the oil from the damaged tanker with
equipment aboard a salvage vessel on its way from Rotterdam.
Smit Tak will have two teams of six salvage experts in Shetland by this
morning with three vessels - one locally contracted salvage ship and two
from Rotterdam.
