THE Conservative party's deep divisions over the European Community
re-emerged yesterday as pro- and anti-EC MPs threatened a fresh battle in
the wake of Maastricht. Rightwing Euro-sceptics said they were disappointed
by the German constitutional court's decision to allow Germany to ratify the
treaty.
Sir Teddy Taylor, the rightwing MP for Southend East, said the government
would face a further fight over a bill to increase British contributions to
EC finances. Enough MPs were willing to vote against the government to block
the bill, which implements revisions to the EC budget agreed at last year's
Edinburgh summit, he added.
The threat of a further battle indicates that the right has not been
mollified by the sceptical tone of recent government comments on Europe.
Ministers believe there is little prospect of defeat on the bill, which will
be introduced in the next session of parliament beginning next month.
But senior ministers concede that the rightward shift in government rhetoric
has prompted 'rumblings' of discontent among previously loyal MPs on the
centre and left.
Pro-Europe MPs were annoyed by anti-EC passages in speeches delivered at
last week's Conservative conference by Mr Peter Lilley, social security
secretary, Mr David Hunt, employment secretary and Mr Michael Howard, home
secretary.
Sir Edward Heath, former prime minister, said the speeches showed a 'very
nasty nationalistic approach' which was 'childish and stupid'.
He said pro-Europe MPs planned 'a major fightback' against the right, and
urged Mr John Major, the prime minister, to ignore 'the people who criticise
us in our own ranks'.
He said pro-Europe MPs had helped the government by remaining silent during
the passage of Maastricht bill. He warned: 'We are not going to stay silent
any longer.'
Labour yesterday tried to exploit Tory divisions over Europe by publishing a
list of 24 Conservative MEPs who voted for a European parliament motion
supporting a federal EC.
Leading rightwingers, including Lord Tebbit, have said they will decline to
campaign for federalist candidates in the European parliament elections next
June.
Mr Michael Portillo, the rightwing chief secretary to the Treasury, said on
Sunday that federalist MEPs should be deselected.
