THE Cuban government's attempts to broaden trade links with its neighbours
in Latin America and the Caribbean have been given a fillip by a series of
joint venture agreements with several privately-owned Brazilian companies,
following a visit to the island by Brazilian businessmen.
The agreements coincided with a decision by the heads of government of the
Caribbean Community (Caricom) to establish a joint commission with Cuba to
improve trade and other relations with the island, following statements by
some Caribbean leaders that it was time the US ended its 30-year trade
embargo on Cuba.
The Brazilian businessmen ended five days of talks in Havana with agreements
in principle on 10 ventures which will be further studied by both parties.
The island's struggling nickel industry, troubled by inefficient plants and
insufficient fuel, is of particular interest to the Brazilians, who want to
buy the product from Cuba.
The agreements also cover Brazilian-funded citrus plants in Cuba, production
of sugar cane harvesters in Brazil, and the creation of a shipping line to
operate between the two countries.
The decision of the Caricom heads of government to establish the joint
commission with Cuba follows the island's application for the status of an
observer to the 13-nation community.
Several of Cuba's Caribbean neighbours have been upset by the implementation
of legislation six months ago by the US to prevent foreign subsidiaries of
US companies from trading with Cuba and penalising shipping companies
calling at Cuban ports.
Dame Eugenia Charles, the prime minister of Dominica, and traditionally
among the more conservative of the region's leaders, has argued in favour of
an end to the trade embargo.
Privately-owned Dominica Coconut Products has become a leading exporter to
Cuba, and is planning the construction of a processing plant in Cuba.
Cuba's attempts to develop economic ties with its neighbours have also
benefited from the island's admission to the Caribbean Tourism Organisation
after three years of trying.
There is, however, likely to be US objection to Cuba's growing trade links
with Brazil and those it is developing with its neighbours in the Caribbean
archipelago. The island gained entry to the regional tourism body over the
objections of two members, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands,
both US possessions.
Caricom countries have been warned against closer ties with Cuba by Ms Sally
Cowal, US ambassador to Trinidad and Tobago.
