WE WERE on holiday in France when we saw an English newspaper with news of
the Tories' defeat at Christchurch and England's defeat at Headingley, both
by awesome amounts. There was an air of inevitability about these results,
which was why it was so nice to go to Lord's last Sunday with a sense of
uncertainty, indeed a twinge of national hope.
There was no reason England should lose the Women's World Cup final to New
Zealand. It was the kind of sensation I had not felt since 1991, when
England managed to draw the series with the West Indies and the nation
celebrated Graham Gooch and Derek Pringles' victorious trudge off the
Headingley pitch in the drizzle. It felt lovely.
On Sunday there were about 4,000 spectators at Lord's, including two men who
had flown from New Zealand to watch their countrywomen play and were much
elated by their trouncing of the old Australian enemy in the semi-finals.
Compared with that, everything else was peanuts.
Even so, only the Test match drew a bigger Sunday crowd to Lord's this
summer: a compliment to the Women's World Cup, which attracted a lot of
interest, and a dim reflection on the Sunday venture into brightly-coloured
hit-and-run, which people have not been flocking to watch.
This was old-fashioned, white-clothed, blue-blazered cricket played in a
sporting spirit. It was only when one of England's pace bowlers (about
fast-medium by men's standards), Suzie Kitson, put on the bright blue hat
she had lost in a burst of ferocious fielding that I even noticed what the
players were wearing.
No-one made bad jokes about the divided skirts and long white socks because
the cricket was much more interesting. For one thing, it was keen. Each side
got through its 60 overs quickly and enthusiastically. I used to play
cricket, so I was not at all surprised to see how well these women played,
but I was surprised and impressed to see New Zealand bowl 45 overs in the
two hours 15 minutes before lunch.
There was not one no-ball all day. Bowlers marched, fielders and umpires
trotted back to their marks. When England's left-handed all-rounder, Jo
Chamberlain, was sent in early to speed up the scoring, she and right-handed
Barbara Daniels knocked up 57 in 53 balls, punctuated by flurries of
adjustment in the field every time the batting changed from left to
right-handed.
Chamberlain bats and bowls left but throws right-handed, leaving a trail of
confusion in her wake. It is relatively common to bat with one hand and bowl
with the other, but Hampshire's Kevan James is the only man I can think of
on the county circuit who bats and bowls with his left and throws with his
right, as Chamberlain did on Sunday. Chamberlain ran out Debbie Hockley, New
Zealand's top run-scorer in the World Cup, for 24 with a brilliant,
unexpected right-handed throw from the covers.
Splendidly umpired by Val Williams and Judith West, the game was played with
an abundance of hand-shaking and good behaviour. New Zealand were so pleased
to have reached the final that they may even have been a bit too helpful to
England. Their captain is one of the Illingworth clan, born in Lancaster,
now a police officer in South Island.
She is naturally competitive but it never occurred to her when she won the
toss that by putting England in to bat she might be giving them a nice
start. Some of the World Cup games had been played on grim pitches, like the
one at Beckenham on which New Zealand shot out Australia for only 77, a
total they then reached without loss as the sun dried out the damp.
On their way to the final, New Zealand developed a fixed preference for
batting second. Women's cricket in New Zealand is a tough business but used
to good conditions. Last September, it amalgamated with men's cricket to
form New Zealand Cricket (Inc), and the kind of second-class conditions
enjoyed by English female cricketers came as a nasty surprise.
Unfortunately for the New Zealanders, England were delighted to bat first.
Both Janette Brittin, with 48, and Carole Hodges, with 45, were unlucky to
fall short of their half-centuries, batting with absolute correctness.
Brittin's boundaries included a series of deft leg glances and late cuts.
The women's ball is 0.5 oz lighter than the men's, and they cannot hit it as
hard. In order to score fast, two of the first skills they learn are
straight hitting and good timing. Even so, when 42 overs had gone and there
were only 100 runs on the board, Chamberlain was sent in to add a bit of
muscle. She was bowled all ends up 33 balls later, with 38 robust runs to
her credit, having established herself as the crowd's favourite the moment
she began to wield her bat.
She has more sparkle than skill. The glamorous West Indian next to me stood
up in the sunshine and shook her mammoth ear-rings to celebrate every time
Chamberlain hit the ball. I hope they were clip-on ear-rings.
New Zealand had one other problem. Their fielders, like England's, were fast
and efficient over the ground, but unlike England's they dropped their
catches. I saw New Zealand drop five reasonably easy catches, including one
of Chamberlain's wilder pulls and a mis-hit by Hodges when she had only 29.
England's Suzie Kitson, by contrast, removed opener Kirstie Bond with a
truly sensational, airborne catch in the gully.
Adhesive catching and mean bowling (Clare Taylor 12 overs, two for 27; Karen
Smithies 12 overs, one for 14; Chamberlain 12 overs, three for 29) made
England's total of 195 look increasingly inaccessible and the later stages
of New Zealand's batting hopelessly frantic. They were all out for 128,
England quick to clap them off and share a beer.
Much women's cricket in Britain is informal, small-scale and, as it were,
unestablished. All of it is resplendently amateur. Women held their first
World Cup two years before men, in England in 1973, and are old hands at
managing on a little. Among the patrons thanked by the Women's Cricket
Association for help with this World Cup were many private individuals,
sports associations as varied as MCC and Copdock Cricket Club, and a wide
range of firms and unions.
But how could industry stand back when England's star players include a
deputy manager at Coral Racing (captain and all-rounder Smithies); a sales
support administrator with British Airways (opening bat and brilliant
fielder Brittin); a bank clerk (No 3 bat, off-spinner and close fielder
Hodges); and a van driver with Mann Egerton (fast medium bowler, fast bat,
expert fielder and man (]?]) of the match Chamberlain)?
