The Brussels bourse was among the best performing European equity markets in
the first quarter of 1993, the Bel-20 index rising by nearly 12 per cent.
But at the same time, Belgium's other financial markets - government bonds
and currency, in particular - were experiencing unprecedented turbulence.
Investors took fright after a series of unsettling domestic political and
economic developments, starting with the Belgian parliament's approval of
the first in a line of wide-ranging constitutional reforms, which will turn
the country into a federal state.
That provoked largely unjustified fears that a continued process of
federalisation would exacerbate the country's looming budget deficit.
Finally, in the last weeks of March, Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the prime
minister, tendered his government's resignation after the coalition failed
to agree how to reduce the deficit.
Within a week, however, he had managed to broker a deal between coalition
partners and the 'mini-crisis' was over, returning a semblance of calm to
bond and money markets.
Equities, on the other hand, moved into reverse. Since April 7 the Bel-20
index has slipped 5.4 per cent in spite of yesterday's gain of 10.26 points
to 1,201.04.
This is not simply a belated reaction to the unstable political situation.
Two emergency interest rate rises in as many months, although quickly
reversed, have unsettled investors; but the decline in April has been more
of a punishment for earlier speculation.
The gradual reduction in German interest rates, for example, revived the
slightly dog-eared theory that the cyclical stocks which dominate the
Brussels bourse were set for recovery.
For those which have bitten the bullet and carried out painful restructuring
over the last two years, that may be true. For instance, Bekaert, the wire
and steel cord producer, returned to profit last year and more than doubled
its net dividend.
But recession is still the dominant economic factor in continental Europe.
Results from other cyclicals and, in particular, their gloomy predictions
for the rest of 1993, have punctured the optimists' forecasts of an upturn
within nine months.
For example, Arbed, the Luxembourg steelmaker, was the best-performing stock
of the first quarter, with a 61 per cent increase on the beginning of the
year. But it lost LFr2.9bn (Dollars 88m) in 1992, and warned last month that
it would be unable to pay a dividend in 1993.
Belgium's exporters - which means almost all its large companies - have also
suffered from the strength of the Belgian franc against recently devalued
European currencies. Glaverbel, the glass-maker, complained publicly that
'competitive devaluation' last year had allowed some of its rivals, such as
Pilkington, of the UK, to undercut prices.
Chemicals and steel producers have experienced similar price competition,
exacerbated by cheap imports from eastern Europe.
Speculation on individual large stocks has also failed to bear fruit. The
hardy Brussels perennial - possible divestment of holdings by Societe
Generale de Belgique - has yet to flower, and widespread rumours of a
takeover bid for Petrofina, the oil and gas producer which is Belgium's
largest industrial company, have been cut down by the most likely suitor,
Elf-Aquitaine, of France, and the group's principal shareholders. The shares
now stand at BFr8,160, having touched BFr9,750 a month ago.
In the near future, then, the outlook for the bourse must be gloomy, with
investors waiting until the September results season for solid evidence of
trading conditions.
The exchange has a new president - Mr Henri Servais of brokerage firm
Dewaay, Servais - who has pledged to attract some of Belgium's extensive
individual savings towards the bourse and away from government bonds. In the
current climate, he may find that he has his work cut out.
