EC environment ministers moved closer yesterday to agreeing Community-wide
rules on packaging waste. A majority of the Twelve inclined towards setting
flexible, five-year targets for overall recovery of waste, instead of
ambitious five- and 10-year goals for each type of waste, with prescribed
portions which had to be recycled.
The shift in opinion is partly a result of Germany's experience with its own
recycling legislation, which has sent subsidised German waste exports
flooding into other EC states. The UK, France, The Netherlands, Denmark,
Belgium, Spain, Ireland and Italy have all complained bitterly that
Germany's dumping of waste because of its lack of capacity to deal with its
high targets is stifling their own infant recycling industries, particularly
for plastics, paper and board.
The German minister, Mr Klaus Topfer, began yesterday's discussions by
offering bilateral negotiations to deal with the problem, after France
threatened an import ban at the last environment ministers' meeting in June.
Mr Timothy Yeo, the UK's junior environment minister, said 'clearly we will
pursue (negotiations with Germany) at official level'. The air thus cleared,
ministers agreed in principle that setting ambitious percentages for
different types of recovery - re-use, recycling, incineration and so on -
could quickly lead the EC into the German waste mountain problem.
The proposal had been for 60 per cent recovery of waste over five years,
with 40 per cent recycling, and 90 per cent after 10 years, with 60 per cent
recycling. Ministers now appear likely to settle on the first overall
figure, with equivalence of recovery methods that would be decided at
national level, and to have a review after five years rather than set a
10-year target now.
The Belgian presidency made little headway yesterday in softening UK
opposition to the mixed carbon and energy tax proposal, which has been mired
in controversy for the past 18 months.
The European Commission yesterday attempted to buy a new lease of life for
the tax, which would reach Dollars 10 per barrel of oil equivalent by 2000.
It offered a detailed formula to phase in the levy for the poorest four
member states. But Mr Yeo reaffirmed that 'we are not willing to accept (an
energy tax) imposed by the Community.' He acknowledged, however, that 'this
is an issue which is not going to go away.'
