MR JOHN MAJOR yesterday refused to say whether the government would consider
itself bound by next week's Commons vote on Maastricht's social chapter, as
ministers prepared for a possible stalemate in the event of a government
defeat.
Challenged repeatedly to show his hand by Mr John Smith, the Labour leader,
the prime minister said only that he expected to win next week's vote and
proceed to ratify the treaty he had signed.
His approach triggered the response from Mr Smith that it would be a
'monstrous violation' of MPs' rights for the government to defy 'the will of
the House of Commons'. Such a move would 'in one fell swoop . . . undermine
our parliamentary democracy,' the Labour leader said.
The exchanges came as the government announced a motion for next week's
debate which is designed to gain the widest possible support.
It avoids expressing support for Britain's social chapter opt-out, simply
noting the government's policy on the adoption of the social policy
protocol. The bill can only come into force after MPs and peers have come to
a resolution on the matter.
But in an atmosphere of mounting intrigue at Westminster, both Euro-sceptics
and social chapter supporters were last night saying the government could
face a potentially devastating stalemate on Maastricht if its motion falls.
If that happened, MPs would almost certainly hold an immediate debate of
confidence in the government, which even opposition MPs concede the
government would win.
The stalemate would arise if Tory Euro-sceptics joined forces with
opposition parties to defeat the government. The House would not then have
to come to a resolution and so the bill could not come into force.
In such circumstances, they say, parliament's in-house legal specialists
have informed them the treaty could not be ratified. This would apply
whether or not the Labour amendment - which will be voted on first - was
accepted. Hard-line Euro-sceptics would prefer that this amendment was
carried, since this would permit them to argue they were opposing the social
chapter in the second vote.
If the Labour amendment was carried, the government would need to decide
whether to ignore parliament's verdict in the way alluded to by Mr Smith and
brave the ensuing outcry.
Government business managers were last night signalling privately that they
would be quite prepared to force parliament to continue sitting into the
summer recess, or to reconvene early in the autumn, until such a stalemate
was broken by the formulation of a new motion supported by a majority of MPs
and peers.
In a further development, Mr David Trimble, Ulster Unionist MP for Upper
Bann, said last night he expected his party's nine MPs to vote against the
government next week. The Ulster Unionists are widely thought to be the most
likely of the opposition camps to be persuaded to support the government.
