DARKNESS has fallen on Beijing and a chill wind is slicing across the city.
Most people have scuttled indoors, but in Beijing's Dongdan park a Chinese
Aids campaigner is pursuing a lonely crusade.
Mr Wan, an official of China's National Health Institute, is accosting
homosexuals who frequent the park to advise them of the dangers of
unprotected sex.
The young Chinese health worker finds a receptive, albeit wary, audience.
As Mr Wan observes ruefully: 'In 1985, a public health official wrote an
article in which he stated there were no homosexuals and no intravenous drug
users in China. But actually we can say that everything happens in China.'
Mr Wan fears that grudging official acceptance of the dangers of the spread
of Aids among high-risk groups such as homosexuals, prostitutes and
intravenous drug users will delay action needed urgently to educate the
public.
'I worry that if we don't tackle the problem there may be an Aids explosion
in China in 5-10 years' time,' he says.
According to official Chinese statistics a mere 969 HIV positive cases had
been reported to the ministry of public health by the end of last year, but
this almost certainly understates the problem. Mr Wan believes that numbers
infected may well exceed 100,000, and could run into millions fairly soon.
Mr Wan is also worried about the spread of Aids among prostitutes, now that
the world's oldest profession is being practised fairly freely on the
streets, and in the bars and discos of Chinese cities.
Indeed, Mr Wan journeyed to a city disco where he tried to convey the
message to prostitutes. His reception was not all that encouraging, with one
young woman insisting that 'Aids is very far from Beijing.'
Mr Wan has instituted anonymous Aids discussion groups and Aids 'hotlines'
which are now operating in five Chinese cities. Volunteers counsel callers
who fear they may have contracted the disease.
A big problem in China, however, for the health authorities in their efforts
to encourage Chinese to have voluntary Aids test is a fear confidentiality
will not be respected.
Mr Wan is surprisingly outspoken in his criticism of what he perceives as a
slack official response to the Aids challenge. The health ministry's
approach is to tell people not to have sex, they don't tell them how to have
safe sex, he says.
Dr Li Jingwu of the Department of Epidemic Prevention at the health ministry
exhibited what might be regarded as a fairly unsympathetic view. 'We have
many ways to control the problems of prostitution and homosexuality - we can
lock them all up, can't we,' he said in an interview.
'Just let the foreign human rights groups denounce us, so long as we are
preventing these people from further spreading this dangerous thing.'
Dr Li said that, in any case, his ministry was much more concerned about the
possible spread of HIV by way of contaminated needles used in rural clinics
where cost and sheer weight of numbers have meant that many patients are
obliged to share needles.
The health ministry official also expressed concern about the Aids threat in
China's southern Yunnan province which adjoins the 'Golden Triangle' of
Burma, Laos and Thailand. Some 300,000 Yunnanese are estimated to be drug
addicts.
Dr Li also rejected Mr Wan's criticism that not nearly enough was being done
to educate people about the spread of Aids in the world's most populous
country. The government, he said, spent Dollars 4m on Aids education in 1992
and had stepped up its counselling efforts among high-risk groups.
'I think the government has realised that sooner or later Aids would cause
serious social and economic trouble if we don't take drastic measures now.'
