SHIPPING organisations countered calls from environmentalists yesterday for
tougher regulations in the wake of the Braer disaster by pointing to the
virtual inevitability of oil spills so long as tanker trade continues.
Mr Chris Horrocks, secretary general of the International Chamber of
Shipping, said: 'It is a trade-off between how much the world wants oil and
the amount of environmental pollution it can put up with.'
The wreck of the Braer in the Shetland Islands, coming so soon after
December's oil spill off north-west Spain, is focusing attention on tanker
safety. But until the Exxon Valdez disaster off Alaska in 1989, the amount
of oil spilled at sea had been steadily declining for almost a decade.
Much can be done to minimise the risk of oil spills and contain disasters
when they happen. The European parliament has called on European countries
to take unilateral action similar to that taken by the US after the Exxon
Valdez spill.
US legislation has concentrated on the introduction of double-hulled tankers
and the phasing out of older oil carriers with a single-skinned hull over
the next 15 years. But since about 80 per cent of oil spills are caused by
human error, there is an urgent need for harmonising training procedures
throughout the seafaring world.
Although tanker crew members must have internationally recognised
certificates of training, it is notoriously difficult to achieve sufficient
uniformity in institutions that award them. Training certificates can also
be bought and sold in the back streets of Hong Kong.
The Philippines provides the greatest number of the world's seafarers, with
India a close second. Although very high standards are achieved at some
colleges in those countries, there is a wide disparity, according to Mr
Horrocks, who is also director of the International Shipping Federation.
'There are indications that overall world training standards have
diminished,' he said.
Mr Horrocks' organisation is working to improve them by, for example,
helping the Indian authorities to find a way to pay instructors more in an
attempt to overcome the dearth of teachers in the sub-continent.
Legislation has been introduced to improve the safety of tankers themselves.
Even so, the world fleet of about 4,400 oil tankers is ageing fast and the
industry is severely underfunded.
The cost of a new tanker with the most up-to-date pollution control measures
is about Dollars 125m (Pounds 82.2m). In order to make a worthwhile return,
tanker owners need to make Dollars 60,000 a day on charter rates. Rates have
dropped this year to Dollars 15,000 a day.
Mr Kristian Fuglesang, head of Intertanko, the International Association of
Independent Tanker Owners in Norway, said: 'We feel charterers should be
prepared to pay for good-quality tonnage and shouldn't charter sub-standard
ships. That's the only way the world fleet will be renewed.'
Yet oil companies, which are short of cash because oil prices remain low,
are taking advantage of overcapacity in the tanker industry to strike very
hard bargains on freight rates.
Mr Fuglesang said that in 1991 the freight cost represented just 1 per cent
of the final price of petrol at the pump in the US and 3 per cent in
Germany.
Although freight rates have fallen, it is still more lucrative to run
tankers than to scrap them. The rate of scrapping old tankers - most of
which were built at the peak of the oil price boom in the mid 1970s - rose
last year, but at the same rate it would still take 200 years to scrap the
entire world fleet.
The International Maritime Organisation will require tankers more than 25
years old to be brought up to the standard of newly built vessels after
1995.
However, the RMT maritime union called on the government yesterday to ban
all bulk carriers and tankers that are more than 15 years old from entering
British waters unless they met UK safety standards.
That highlights the need to tighten the random inspection procedures of
vessels calling at UK ports. There have been calls for increases in
resources to step up the inspection regime.
The government appears to be moving towards extending the inquiry of the
Braer disaster to include tanker safety as a whole.
The Merchant Navy Officers' Union has criticised the use of flags of
convenience such as Liberia (where the Braer was registered) in UK waters,
saying it has led to a fall in standards. Shipping experts say, however,
that Liberia's safety record is better than average.
Mr Jim Wallace, Liberal Democrat MP for Orkney and Shetland, who called for
an improvement in safety procedures in a letter to the government 18 months
ago, called on the government yesterday to designate a mandatory exclusion
zone around the Shetland Islands, giving coastguards the power to levy fines
on vessels that infringe it.
Mr Wallace also wants the introduction of transponders, a radio device
fitted to ships and aircraft that responds to a radar wave so that vessels
can be identified when in trouble as well as tracked.
Meanwhile, the Meteorological Office yesterday called for changes to
maritime law to compel ships carrying hazardous cargoes to receive regular
weather forecasts.
The UK is unlikely to act outside the International Maritime Organisation,
which requires international consensus to pass regulations. That means that
changing and updating the statutes takes many years. Until countries take
concerted action, the waters of the world will grow more polluted.
