THE BUDGET delivered by Mr Norman Lamont on Tuesday afternoon was a huge
political gamble. The chancellor has rolled the dice on two propositions and
tempted fate on a third.
His first bet is that the Treasury's complicated collection of changes in
taxation will convince the markets, the Conservative party, and the public
that the government has regained the equilibrium it lost on Black Wednesday.
It is too soon to call this bet. The markets remained remarkably steady
yesterday, in spite of the realisation that Mr Lamont's medium-term strategy
for reducing the budget deficit is, to say the least, unambitious.
All talk of a balanced budget has been thrown overboard. Next year's public
sector borrowing requirement will rise to Pounds 50.1bn. If Tuesday's
forecasts are correct - a big 'if' - the proportion of gross national
product consumed by public spending will fall to 44 per cent by 1996 -
exactly where it stood in 1979. Yesterday's relative calm in the markets may
suggest that there is a willingness to give the government the benefit of
the doubt. The explanation may, however, be more mundane: an expected cut in
German interest rates today.
Mr Lamont's second bet is that accelerating economic growth will lead to
comfortable increases in real earnings in time for an election in 1996 or
1997. Extra cash in pockets would wash away the bitter taste of the
extension of value-added tax to domestic fuels, along with the pain of the
other salami slices of additional taxation announced on Tuesday. But the
chancellor cannot have it both ways. Too low an earnings increase would not
win the votes; too high would rekindle inflation and keep unemployment
rising.
The chancellor's third flirtation is with Lady Luck. The Conservatives
presumably base their hopes for a fifth election victory on the cynical
belief that voters will quickly forget that a campaign fought in April 1992
on the promise of no increase in taxes was followed by a Budget in March
1993 that put on more new taxation than Labour's Mr John Smith dared think
of. This is a dangerous assumption. Political memories are usually
mercifully short, even though some bad experiences enter the tribal
consciousness of the nation, as Labour found to its cost after 1978-79.
If there is discontent in Britain it will arise not only from the recession
but from the government's bits-and-bobs, unstrung-pearls method of
budgeting. Treasury-driven, it makes and cancels railway investments in
London with little thought for the transport needs of the capital, and
simplifies then complicates taxation with little evidence that it has a
clear structure in mind. This may be a government with a 'grip' on the
economy, but voters will have to pinch themselves to believe it.
