UTOPIA AND OTHER PLACES by Richard Eyre Bloomsbury Pounds 16.99,
SOME OF Richard Eyre's ancestors were explorers. His maternal grandfather
went with Scott on his first expedition to the Antarctic and had a
crustacean named after him: roydiss formosa. On his father's side of the
family, Edward John Eyre was one of the first white men to visit the centre
of Australia around 1840, and also one of the first to speak up for the
Aborigines. As a boy at school in the 1950s Eyre would read epics about
mountain-climbing. Nowadays, he writes, 'our horizons have contracted and
and the only unexplored territory is the territory of the human soul'.
There are other odd facts about the director of the Royal National Theatre.
His father did not want him to go to university, but he pressed on
regardless and entered Cambridge via physics and chemistry. He switched to
English and claims to have learned far more from Kingsley Amis than from FR
Leavis. He believes he saw a ghost in Cambodia. He idolised Marlon Brando.
For a man whose political persuasions are plainly on the left, his book
contains a remarkable number of favourable references to Winston Churchill -
and not only because it was on the day of Churchill's funeral that he
decided to give up acting and become a director.
This is a tantalising semi-autobiography, far too short to be the real
thing. The family history is selective, almost always detached, as if, in
his own phrase, he is wary of being seen 'standing too close to the canvas'.
As a book about theatre it is selective, too, sometimes simply anecdotal,
but, as in all good direction, it is the details that are telling.
When he was still an actor, Eyre had a virtually one-line part in Macbeth:
'The Queen my Lord is dead.' He rushed onto the stage and spoke it as if
were one long word. 'No, Richard, no,' said Trevor Nunn, the director. 'Milk
it'. He notes advice from the actress Peggy Ramsay about how to tell whether
an actor is in character: 'Look at the feet, dear.'
Then he picks up guidance from the American writer, David Mamet: 'Choice of
actions and adverbs constitute the craft of directing'. 'Get up from that
chair,' Eyre goes on, 'and walk across the room. Slowly.' In other words,
don't just say it; do it. One of the reasons he admired Brando is that he
had the 'ability to appear to think slowly, so that the audience feels it's
being admitted to the intimacy of the thought processes, and embraced as
conspirator in the emotions.' How it all shows in Eyre's best productions
such as The Night of the Iguana]
'Utopia,' which as distinct from the 'Other Places' is never to be found,
pays proper tribute to Harley Granville-Barker, one of the greatest English
language playwrights of this century and the real founder of the National
Theatre. Eyre also lauds, and has clearly learned from, Granville-Barker's
now sometimes neglected Prefaces to Shakespeare. If Amis was his best
teacher, he notes, Granville-Barker was a kind of surrogate father.
At other times, however, Eyre can be remarkably silly. One always thought
that he read too much into Richard III as a role model for Hitler's Germany
and Pinochet's Chile, yet here he is sitting down during rehearsals and
seriously discussing what would happen should Britain become a fascist
country. The Irish designer, Bob Crowley, would be in a concentration camp
for a start, but assuming Eyre was still director 'at what point would I
stand up and say 'No'?'
That is not quite the only departure into fantasy. I suspect from a random
reference that Eyre does not much understand France. Nevertheless, as a
director, Eyre will always make sure that the feet are in the right place.
Firmly.
