THE apogee of the Royal Academy's Year is, of course, the Summer Exhibition
(this year starting on June 6 and running until August 15) with the
vernissage a must for assiduous pursuers of the society round. But there are
lots of other reasons for visiting the RA, not least one of its best-kept
secrets - a framing shop tucked away near the back entrance in what looks
like an old mews or stable.
Now that every museum or gallery has cottoned on to the fact that there is
money to be made out of ancillary commercial enterprises many are branching
into new fields. But for The Royal Academy, the framing shop is no bright
new venture, rather a well-established service that in its present form has
been going for eight years but under previous ownership was started
something like 40 years ago.
It has long been known among the many artists exhibiting at the RA and many
London dealers, such as Agnews and the New Grafton Gallery, use it all the
time. The pity is that it is so little-known by the public.
The shop is run by David Nelson and Edith Robertson and tucked away in the
warren-like series of rooms is a specialist team of craftsmen and gilders.
Piled high with frames, mounts and pictures it has the air of a busy,
old-fashioned atelier, occupied by serious and skilled craftsmen
specialising in quality work. It is not the place to go for a cheap-jack
solution to framing a poster - more the place to go for expert advice, for
quality frames, for conservation advice and treatments.
This means it is by no means the cheapest place to get your pictures framed
 -quality mounts and materials do not come cut-price. Conservation is high
on the agenda and all the materials used help to ensure that works are
properly protected from ultra-violet light, humidity, insects and air
pollutants. The choice of frames is vast - everything from simple wood and
metal to ornate hand-gilded numbers.
Besides framing, the workshop will also restore, clean and repair pictures
or frames. It is a friendly place which anybody going to an exhibition might
like to look into just in case they need a better class of frame.
The Framing Shop's entrance is in Burlington Gardens, next to the Museum of
Mankind. Otherwise use the RA's main entrance in Piccadilly.
