Einstein defined common sense as the collection of prejudices people have
accrued by the age of 18, while Victor Hugo maintained common sense was
acquired in spite of, rather than because of, education.
Common sense, by definition, is supposed to be the most widely distributed
quality in the world and nearly everybody believes they have a good measure
of it. Many selectors look for, and all managers are supposed to have,
common sense. But what is common sense in the manager's world? And if
management is common sense, why bother to teach it?
The so-called 'discipline' of management science often has low status in
business schools, partly because the hard men of figures despise the soft
waffle of organisational behaviour.
Management science is thought to be a trivial, expensive and pointless
exercise in describing or proving what we already know. All findings are
intuitive, unsurprising and uninformative; worse it is packed with esoteric
jargon which obfuscates common sense in the pretence of clarifying it.
But there are serious problems with the common sense argument. First, common
sense is frequently contradictory. 'Clothes make the man' is at odds with
'You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear'. 'Out-of-sight,
out-of-mind' and 'Absence makes the heart grow fonder' also seem
contradictory. Although it is possible that both are true under different
circumstances, common sense does not tell you which.
Second, if all management is common sense, nothing can be the result of
faulty reasoning. Research in the social sciences is full of such examples
and it would not be surprising if some aspects of management science were
the same; that is, the opposite of common sense.
It could be argued that current management knowledge is absorbed from
management science as it is frequently popularised in newspapers and
magazines. Thus, ironically, common sense could be the result of the ideas
of management science being commented on in the popular press. A frequently
discussed finding from research cannot remain non-obvious to managers, any
more than a joke can remain funny to people who hear it again and again.
If all management is common sense and most people supposedly have this
curious trait, why do they disagree on issues, processes and procedures?
When managers try to specify the 'competencies' essential for high-flyers in
a company, many are tempted to include common sense, despite the fact that
it is almost impossible to define, measure and select. It may indeed be like
the search for the Holy Grail - long-standing, complicated and unsuccessful.
But why not test yourself? Are the following statements true or false? Mark
them accordingly and see how you rate on the common sense factor.
1. If you pay someone for doing something they enjoy, they will come to like
this task even more. T/F
2. Most people prefer challenging jobs with a great deal of freedom and
autonomy. T/F
3. Most people are more concerned with the size of their own salary than
with the salary of others. T/F
4. In most case, workers act in ways that are consistent with their
attitudes. T/F
5. In bargaining with others, it is usually best to start with a moderate
offer - near to the one you desire. T/F
6. In most cases leaders should stick to their decisions once they have made
them, even if it appears they are wrong. T/F
7. When people work together in groups and know their individual
contributions cannot be observed, each tend to put in less effort than when
they work on the same task alone. T/F
8. Even skilled interviewers are sometimes unable to avoid being influenced
in their judgment by factors other than an applicant's qualifications. T/F
9. Most managers are highly democratic in the way that they supervise their
people. T/F
10. Most people who work for the government are low risk takers. T/F
11. The best way to stop a malicious rumour at work is to present covering
evidence against it. T/F
12. As morale or satisfaction among employees increases in any organisation,
overall performance almost always rises. T/F
13. Providing employees with specific goals often interferes with their
performance: they resist being told what to do. T/F
14. In most organisations, the struggle for limited resources is a far more
important cause of conflict than other factors such as interpersonal
relations. T/F
15. In bargaining, the best strategy for maximising long-term gains is
seeking to defeat one's opponent. T/F
16. In general, groups make more accurate and less extreme decisions than
individuals. T/F
17. Most individuals do their best work under conditions of high stress. T/F
18. Smokers take more days sick leave than do non-smokers. T/F
19. If you have to reprimand a worker for a misdeed, it is better to do so
immediately after the mistake occurs. T/F
20. Highly cohesive groups are also highly productive. T/F
Correct answers to questions 1-5 F, 6-10 T, 11-17 F, 18-19 T, 20 F. Score of
five or less, why not try early retirement? Score of six to 12 perhaps you
should consider an MBA. Score of 13 to 15, pretty average but no room for
gloating. A score of 16 or above - yes indeed, you do have that most elusive
of all qualities: managerial common sense.
Common sense might be a desirable thing to possess in the world of
management, but do not kid yourself that it is widespread.
The author is head of the Business Psychology Unit at University College
London.
