GREEK shipping is still an offshore industry, although it makes a generous
contribution to inflows of foreign exchange, injecting more than Dollars 2bn
into the domestic economy in 1992.
Greek-owned merchant ships accounted for 14.1 per cent of world tonnage in
March this year, totalling 2,479 vessels and almost 104m deadweight tonnes.
They are just as likely to be operated from offices in London and New York,
Monaco and Montevideo, as from Piraeus. The ships are registered under
numerous flags and employ a patchwork of nationalities in their crews.
By June, the Greek-controlled fleet had jumped to 2,835 ships totalling
107.5m dwt, representing almost 52 per cent of the European Community fleet.
Since January, Greek owners, wherever based, have spent at least Dollars 1bn
on sales and purchases. One London-based broker estimated that out of a
total of around 450 second-hand ship purchases in the first half of this
year, as many as 350 vessels had gone to Greek owners.
At the same time, Greek owners have been putting in orders for new buildings
for the first time in many years. Asian yards, notably in South Korea, have
received orders worth Dollars 700m in recent months. Greek owners have also
jumped at opportunities to take over contracts placed with east European and
former Soviet shipyards, at very attractive prices.
So far, however, the reasons behind the Greek rush for acquisitions remain
unclear. Are Greek owners taking advantage of comparatively low ship prices
to position themselves for an international economic recovery? Or are they
looking for a quick return on their investment as prices are pushed upwards?
'The US and Europe keep seeing green shoots but from here we don't see any
sustained growth yet,' says a Piraeus banker.
However, the shipping industry is more likely to be driven by fundamental
changes in demand rather than by fleet growth and tonnage supply. As Mr
Dennis Stonebridge, of Drewry Shipping Consultants, pointed out recently:
'There is fairly close correlation between peaks and troughs in the shipping
market and business cycles in the world economy. Any global economic
slowdown has always, after a time-lag, undermined the financial performance
of the shipping industry.'
The revival of Greek orders for new vessels can be attributed to tougher
regulations to cut marine pollution. Three of the four double-hulled,
double-skin very large crude carriers (VLCCs) delivered this year went to
Greek owners.
In the wake of the Exxon Valdez disaster and the ensuing American Oil
Pollution Act (OPA 90), companies trading with the US have started to make
the huge investments called for by the new regulations.
The London-based operator Lykiardopoulos took delivery in January of the
280,000 dwt Arosa from Hitachi Zosen, the Japanese shipbuilder. In March,
the Onassis group took delivery of the 280,000 dwt Olympic Loyalty from
Sumitomo Heavy Industries. In May, the G S Livanos group took delivery of
the 301,824 dwt Chios from Hyundai of South Korea.
As one analyst puts it: 'All three vessels can be considered the latest in
ecologically-conscious tonnage that will give a boost to their operators'
image.'
Eletson Corporation, the Piraeus-based operator of products carriers,
recently placed an order for two 45,000 dwt double-hull, double-bottom ships
with Hyundai. The company says it has invested Dollars 500m in new ships
over the past eight years.
Even owners who had been content to operate with older tonnage have been
buying newer vessels, reflecting a growing tendency among charterers to be
more demanding about the state of vessels.
There is no shortage of opportunity, as the state-owned shipping companies
in the former eastern bloc struggle to find ways of surviving.
Last month, Forum Maritime, the Piraeus-based operator, reached agreement on
a Dollars 650m deal to acquire a 51 per cent stake in Petromin, a Romanian
state shipping company. Forum agreed to pay Dollars 335m in cash
instalments, with the remainder to be covered through repair and upgrading
of vessels. Forum will manage more than 100 vessels belonging to Petromin,
totalling some 4.5m dwt.
The deal followed a number of smaller agreements between Greek owners who
took over Romanian ships on a bareboat charter basis. The Greek operator
also agreed to finance repairs and improvements as needed.
The Forum deal, criticised for its lack of transparency, stirred
considerable political controversy in Romania. But with much of the
country's commercial fleet laid up and some vessels left unfinished in state
shipyards, the deals with Greek owners offered the Romanian government a
solution to the problems of fleet expansion and replacement.
For their part, some Greek operators have found that the Romanian vessels,
though solidly built, needed more work than expected. Greek operators who
have taken over Russian vessels have similar complaints.
'Structurally, the east European ships will last and last. But they aren't
designed for cost-effective operating, their engines are often in bad shape,
and crew living conditions are unsatisfactory by western standards,' says
one analyst.
