CHRISTCHURCH was not quite the record-breaking result that some have
suggested.
The 31 per cent drop in the Conservative share of the vote far exceeds their
worst performances in the Thatcher-Major era - 24 per cent in Richmond in
1989 and 23 in Ribble Valley in 1991 - but it was topped by the 32 per cent
Tory slump in Rochdale in 1958 and Labour's drop of 38 per cent in
Bermondsey in 1982.
The Conservatives have been quick to find comfort in history. Their worst
by-election disaster in each of their last four parliaments in office were
reversed in the subsequent general election.
But the Conservatives have no excuses. Nothing in the constituency or the
candidate or the campaign was especially adverse, they suffered from the
greatest anti-government swing on record because the government is
unpopular. The public has, at least temporarily, lost confidence in the
Conservatives' ability to govern.
The Liberal Democrats have learned the art of not boasting during a
by-election campaign and even their stupendous triumph is being downplayed.
Victory has too often been followed by disappointment.
But the triumphs of Newbury and Christchurch will enable the party to
recruit money and candidates in a way that will add to their credibility
when they come to try to pick up a few seats in the Euro-elections next
June. Although they are the largest Liberal party in the Community, the
first-past-the-post electoral system has denied them representation at
Strasbourg.
For Labour to find comfort it must look to its nationwide poll standing  -
44 per cent, 17 points ahead of the Tories and 19 points ahead of the
Liberal Democrats.
In Newbury, its vote fell from 6 per cent to 2 per cent. In Christchurch the
fall was proportionately greater from 12 per cent to 6 per cent.
Labour had prudently hinted in advance that its supporters were welcome to
be beastly to the Tories in any way they saw fit - a tacit encouragement to
the tactical voting that has become increasingly prevalent.
But tactical voting does not work symmetrically. Most Labour voters prefer
Liberal Democrats to the Tories.
The Liberal Democrats are more evenly divided. There are few seats where
tactical vot-ing greatly helps Labour.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, cannot countenance a formal
pact with Labour just because it would drive so many of his supporters into
the arms of the Conservatives.
One feature of government by-election disasters is that the record swings
have always been to the centre, not to the main opposition party.
Although the Christchurch swing would oust the Conservatives in every seat,
the movement would surely be much less in seats where Labour was the
challenger.
This year the Liberal Democrats have scored two huge victories in the safest
of Conservative seats.
No one expects places of this sort to fall in a general election. And
there's the rub for Mr Ashdown - it is in the safer Conservative seats that
his party fares best.
Liberal Democrat strength is not in the right places. If all three parties
won equal votes in the next election, Conservatives and Labour would each
get more than twice as many seats as the Liberal Democrats.
Thursday confirms the new law. No government seat can be held in a
by-election. No Tory MP can hope for a peerage or a plum job while this
parliament lasts and no seat could be found for Mr Chris Patten, Hong Kong
governor, or any alternative saviour.
Mr John Major's Huntingdon, the safest of all Conservative seats, would have
been lost by 10,000 on the Christchurch swing.
The only vacancies will come from mortality. Actuarial calculations suggest
that six more Conservatives MPs are likely to perish before the next
dissolution. In the previous three parliaments death caused Tory vacancies
at the rate of two a year.
Six by-election losses would reduce the government's majority from 17 to
five - but, with luck, that would not happen until 1996.
Even the most sensational of by-election results creates but a small ripple
in the ocean of time. The impact of Christchurch will be deadened by the
summer recess.
When the politicians and commentators return from their holidays their eyes
will be on the party conferences.
Will the unions behave themselves for Labour? Will the Euro-sceptics behave
themselves for the Conservatives?
The government must hope for no more by-elections, but an economic recovery
may be slow and the lag between economic recovery and political recovery may
be considerable.
Mr Major and his party have a rough road ahead. But one can exaggerate how
much Christchurch adds to their burdens.
The author is a fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford
