IT WAS, said Mr Ronald Bartle, the deputy chief metropolitan magistrate, a
fairly average day at Bow Street Magistrates' Court. A steady stream of the
sad, the slightly mad and the just plain bad.
A drunk and disorderly, a licence application and 20 remands - for
sentencing, for committal and for variation of bail.
A young man, unemployed, accused of attempting to steal 47 books worth
Pounds 250 from Dillons. Why? To feed a drug addiction.
A Scot accused of assault on the underground. Defendant was begging. Offence
'committed in drink'.
Another drug addict accused of 'going equipped' with a foil-lined carrier
bag to steal from shops in Covent Garden. Unemployed, 16 previous
convictions.
A young woman accused of stealing a handbag in Harvey Nichols. Temporarily
homeless, attending the psychiatric unit at Guy's Hospital.
Mr Bartle does not think social conditions are largely responsible for
rising crime. He said: 'I think crime is largely a matter of choice.'
In court his actions belie his hard-boiled image. While he remarked several
times that 'drug addiction cannot be a permanent excuse for crime', he
deferred sentence for six months on one addict to give him a chance to get
off heroin. And the woman accused of stealing the handbag was given 'one
last chance' and put on probation.
He is doubtful about the deterrent effect of tough sentencing - blaming the
high crime rate on a low level of detection.
'In the magistrates' courts you get a lot of sad and inadequate people with
awful problems and it is wrong to be tough on them if anything else might
help,' he said.
Much of the day was spent on committal proceedings. The Royal Commission on
Criminal Justice recommended that they should be abolished - and Mr Bartle
agrees. 'They are mainly fishing expeditions by the defence,' he said.
He is not worried that that would leave magistrates with little to do. There
would still be all the minor offences to try. He also believes stipendiary
magistrates should have the power to sentence people to up to two years in
jail. That would substantially increase the number of cases they could deal
with, relieving pressure on crown courts.
Does he favour abolishing the right of the defendant to choose trial by
jury? 'Yes, as a matter of principle I don't see why the defendant should
choose where he is tried.
'Only 20 per cent of those who elect jury trial actually contest the case at
the crown court. It's a waste of time and costs.' In the event, the one
person who had the opportunity during the day to choose decided to be dealt
with by Mr Bartle there and then.
Mr Bartle said: 'I would never suggest abolishing the lay bench, but there
should be greater use of professional magistrates. Also there should be
strict rules about the academic qualifications of jurors.'
