THE TABLES have been turned on Aberdeen Petroleum, the USM-quoted oil and
gas group, which yesterday became the focus of a surprise announcement of an
unwelcome approach from a US company.
Houston-based Bellwether Exploration has said that in December it approached
the UK-quoted company with merger proposals on the basis of 3.75 Aberdeen
shares for each of its own.
Based on an exchange price of Dollars 1.5395 to the pound, and Bellwether's
share price of 62 1/2 cents, the proposal values each Aberdeen share at 10
3/4 p. The shares last night closed  1/8 p higher at 8 5/8p.
Mr Darby Sere, chief executive of Bellwether, said the announcement was made
in light of the almost-50 per cent rise in Aberdeen shares since the
approach had first been made.
He stressed the synergies between the two groups, which both own and operate
North American assets.
If an eventual offer succeeds, then the enlarged company would lose the USM
quotation.
Bellwether, an oil and gas exploration and production company, is traded on
Nasdaq in the US. It has a market capitalisation of about Dollars 11.5m
(Pounds 7.5m) and is 80 per cent held by three UK institutions and
Torchmark, the US insurance company.
It is extremely unlikely, however, that Aberdeen would accept the initial
proposals from Bellwether.
Both companies have been in informal discussions for more than a year, said
one observer close to Aberdeen.
Yet the Bellwether proposal was believed to be somewhat different from the
tentative arrangements discussed in the earlier informal meetings.
The irony of yesterday's announcement was not lost on Aberdeen, which last
month received short shrift from Brabant Resources, another USM-quoted
company, to its own surprise merger proposals.
Last week Brabant issued a strong statement stressing that Aberdeen's plan
did not have the support of the board.
Brabant said its North Sea assets and focus on exploration did not fit with
Aberdeen's largely American base.
Mr George Robb, the new chairman of Aberdeen, said his company was meeting
with financial advisers to determine an appropriate response.
The announcement would not alter the situation with Brabant, he added.
