GROUPWARE means a combination of computer hardware and software that makes
it possible for a number of individuals to work as a team using a network of
personal computers.
Put like that, it seems too obvious and basic a concept to need much
elaboration. It is common experience that business people tend to work
together, sharing a variety of different kinds of information, rather than
in isolation. Information networks should ideally provide the underpinning
to automate the way people work. The public telephone system, for example,
has provided businesses with effective, if limited, groupware for more than
a century.
Networked computer systems obviously offer the potential to share a great
deal more than conversations; today's computer software and services,
however, are principally aimed at individual users and their requirements -
spreadsheets, for example, or databases. Groupware, on the other hand,
introduces a new dimension; computer tools designed specifically for groups.
Why is there a need for this new product? Personal computers can be
connected together easily enough using a range of technologies, but that
does not mean they will function as a group network. In addition to basic
network management and communications software, there is a need for special
applications software that will manage interactions between the various
members of the group. Such software, for example, might manage the
production of a document by the group, keeping track of the various versions
and monitoring changes and amendments.
Acceptance of groupware has been comparatively slow despite the number of
suppliers who are marketing or developing groupware products. The list
includes Lotus, Microsoft, Siemens Nixdorf, Wordperfect, Corporate Software,
ICL, SunSolutions, Digital Equipment, Verimation and ESP.
In a simple way, groupware can be thought of as electronic mail with bells
and whistles; all sorts of information can be shared across the network and
workflow procedures automated.
The introduction of something as simple as electronic mail, however, can
produce significant cultural shock within an organisation; the management
implications of the insensitive introduction of groupware may go some way to
explaining its slow take-off.
The system will, after all, embody some of the beliefs and attitudes of its
creators. Experts point out that it is possible to design groupware systems
which operate in a manipulative fashion, directing their users towards
particular actions and conclusions.
Many companies including Ford, Unilever and Citicorp are beginning, on the
other hand, to report significant productivity increases through using
groupware.
Coopers &amp; Lybrand, for example, the accounting firm and management
consultancy, started to use one of the best known groupware products, Lotus
Notes, in 1991.
The aim was to let groups of accountants share financial information, advice
and analyses. About 500 of the company's auditors are using Notes now and
the intention is that 2000 will use it by next year. Already the company is
finding novel uses for Notes such as distributing tax-law changes to
clients.
EARLY RESEARCH
The origins of groupware go back to the 1960s when Douglas Engelbart, a
seminal figure in office automation, created a laboratory at the Standford
Research Institute to explore the use of computers to support human
intellect. Credited with inventing the 'mouse' pointer, Engelbart was a
pioneer of computer-supported teams; among the concepts he worked on were
teleconferencing, group programming, group databases and multimedia
communications. All these ideas are now appearing in groupware products and
services.
Like many early ideas in office automation, groupware was held back by lack
of adequate hardware at economic prices The difference today is that
buildings are wired for networking and low cost, powerful workstations
capable of handling text, video and graphics are available.
At the same time there has been a change in ways of doing business. Business
teams have become fashionable; the trend has been driven by industry
deregulation, declining numbers of middle manager as corporate structures
flatten, a trend towards contract work and mergers and acquisitions.
Business teams and task forces are approach to planning for an uncertain and
rapidly changing world.
The market for groupware therefore seems set to grow at a significantly
higher rate than hitherto: one reason is the steady acceptance of common
technical standards. Lotus, for example, is anxious to establish Notes as
the technical standard in groupware rather like Microsoft's MS/DOS and
Windows operating systems. They are encouraging software developers to
incorporate Notes in their products.
Another factor is likely to be the incorporation of 'softer' software in
groupware. Softer software is easier to use than today's software products
because it incorporates elements of artificial intelligence. Among the
developments that could be expected are 'agents' - computer programs able to
operate on behalf of human users, searching through databases for
information, for example, or able to learn the characteristics and
preferences of human operators. Elements of these kinds of softer software
are already appearing in groupware today.
