ANY TAX reform as sweeping as the chancellor's new fiscal regime for North
Sea oil inevitably creates winners and losers. The more important question
is whether it creates the right incentives to ensure that maximum economic
benefit is extracted from the dwindling energy resources that remain. Since
the present arrangements are excessively complex, incorporate inadequate
incentives for companies to control costs, and are ill-designed for a period
in which many North Sea oil fields are reaching maturity, the reforms
probably have more to commend them than the complaints of the smaller oil
producers might suggest. But if form is any guide, they will not produce
quite as stable a long-term regime as the chancellor predicts.
Under the old regime, only a small number of fields paid PRT at all and most
of these were older fields. This was because exploration and appraisal costs
could be off-set against the income from existing fields, thereby reducing
or eliminating the charge to petroleum revenue tax (PRT) and corporation
tax. The effect was to cut the cost of exploration and appraisal to less
than 17p in the pound, which provided a powerful incentive for drilling
activity. But the tax take from existing fields, which suffered from a
combined rate of royalty and tax charges of just over 85 per cent, provided
a countervailing disincentive to further development. As a result there was
a risk that substantial energy resources would be left untapped. This has
led to suggestions from some larger companies, which are responsible for
about 80 per cent of the development of existing fields, that the
exploration tail has been allowed to wag the development dog. It has also
led to a great deal of lobbying.
Underlying logic
In his budget package, the chancellor appears to have bought the big
companies' argument. A reduction in the rate of PRT from 75 per cent to 50
per cent means that the combined tax rate for those existing fields that pay
royalty and corporation tax as well as PRT will fall from 85 per cent to
nearer 70 per cent. And it is hard to quarrel with the underlying logic,
given that the current rate of PRT was set when the oil price was three
times higher in real terms and costs were significantly lower. The more
difficult question is whether the accompanying abolition of PRT relief on
exploration and appraisal costs, together with the switch to corporation tax
on new fields, will lead to an undesirable reduction in the amount of
exploration activity.
Unhappy timing
North Sea exploration has already been falling for predictable reasons: the
odds on drilling successfully, according to British Petroleum, have gone
from one in four to one in seven over the past five years. Exploration is
understandably gravitating to more attractive prospects elsewhere. Judging
by the initial reaction of many independent oil companies, this trend will
accelerate. But the fact that the PRT regime has actually been costing the
exchequer money poses a question about whether the government may now be
subsidising sub-optimal investment in the North Sea. Certainly the reforms
mean that future exploration will be more cost conscious; but because the
prize to be had from developing new fields will be greater under corporation
tax rules than before, the Treasury's calculation must be that drilling will
continue where the prospects of significant finds are best. From negative
PRT revenues of Pounds 200m in 1991-92, the Treasury expects an inflow of
Pounds 300m in 1994-5 and Pounds 400m thereafter.
It is nonetheless worrying that the hard-pressed independent sector, which
has performed a useful role in the North Sea, is being so obviously
disadvantaged relative to the giants of the industry - and hardly surprising
that independent companies are distrustful of the Treasury's motives. The
timing of the chancellor's move also looks unhappy, given the adverse job
consequences at a time of rising unemployment. That said, the broad thrust
of the tax reforms is right for a North Sea that is reaching maturity. But
if the suspicion that the Treasury's revenue calculations are based on
over-optimistic assumptions about the future level of exploration proves
right, the new corporation tax regime will no doubt grow complications just
as readily the old PRT did.
