that is the cost of getting a message through the Post Office's Edipost
service, launched last October.
True, the message goes by post - but the service enables even the smallest
of companies to meet their customers' demands for electronic trading,
without the set-up and running charges and without even having a computer.
With Edipost, a DEC Vax computer run by the Post Office is attached to the
various EDI services and receives orders and other messages sent
electronically from EDI-users to their suppliers. These are printed and
posted to Edipost customers by first-class mail.
The EDI user benefits because its messages are transmitted to another EDI
user - the Post Office - so the advantages of EDI still apply.
Each message costs 90p for up to 100 messages a day. The rate goes down to
40p for several thousand messages. The costs are typically paid by the big
EDI user and it is then up to that company to decide whether to charge its
suppliers.
However, a small company run by a former tomato grower in Norfolk has gone
two steps further. Meadowhouse Bar-Laser in Stalham has been running a
two-way postal EDI service for nearly a year and has more than 200 users.
Here, too, a Meadowhouse computer is linked to EDI services on behalf of its
customers. The company uses personal computers. Messages are received from
EDI users and forwarded by post, fax or courier. But Meadowhouse users can
also send messages to their customers through the service. They can send
information such as acknowledgement and stock details back to Meadowhouse,
which enters the data to the EDI service.
MEADOWHOUSE aims its bureau EDI service both at small firms and at suppliers
of highly seasonal products, which for example might only trade with a big
retail company for very short periods.
Managing director Mr Norman Ashton is reluctant to give sample prices. He
says charges depend on negotiations with the main partner in the EDI chain,
typically a big retail group, and on the level of delivery, printing and
other services required.
The bureau service has evolved from Meadowhouse's initial EDI business, set
up in 1986. This has been built round a program package which translates
received EDI messages not only into data for entry into business systems but
also into printed working documents such as barcode labels and despatch
notes.
The package is sold to EDI users and can also be run as part of the bureau
service. Prices start at around Pounds 1,500 for the first year and Pounds
800 for the second year, but this includes connection to an EDI service and
all data transmission. These prices are based on a personal computer linked
to the IBM EDI service.
This whole business was created by accident but has taken off in the last
three years, with 43 per cent growth last year to a turnover of Pounds 2.3m,
40 staff and over 1,000 package modules sold.
It was set up by Mr John Pennell, a tomato grower and now technical
director. 'He got a computer for his business and got hooked,' says Mr
Ashton. 'One day he was talking to friend who was working on producing
barcode labels from EDI data for BHS and felt he could do it better.'
Mr Pennell now leases his greenhouses to an organic farmer and works
full-time for Meadowhouse.
'Software and EDI service companies have focused on producing software which
converts EDI messages to update business data files,' says Norman Ashton.
'But small companies typically only want printed orders. So we set out to
enable small and medium-sized companies to put the EDI data to instant
business use.'
Unidoor International is a prime example of such a company. It imports
leisure-wear sold by high-street retail chains under their own labels. The
company, based in Dunstable, Kent, was no newcomer to computing, already
running a management system on a Mips computer. But on the product despatch
side it was 'drowning in a sea of paper', according to financial director Mr
Jerry Phillips.
'Each delivery means producing masses of labels showing product information,
the number in each box and so on, for every box,' Mr Phillips says. 'Each
delivery could mean 1,000 labels - and we were producing all this by hand.
We had 30 people working all day every day and over weekends just to produce
these labels. When Meadowhouse brought their package to show us, we wouldn't
let them take it away]'
Unidoor International now runs the Meadowhouse package and EDI on a Novell
personal computer network. This includes a laser printer which produces
barcodes as well as all the product labels.
Personal computer links are normally the cheapest EDI option for a computer
user wishing to connect its machine. The leading service providers typically
base their connection charges on the size of the user's computer. From its
entry into EDI as a data recipient last year, Unidoor International has
quickly moved on to gathering information on sales and stocks from some of
its customers and is looking at sending back invoices - 'EDI has not only
saved us from drowning but also, through the information exchange with our
customers, given us closer insight into what is selling,' says Jerry
Phillips. 'Through EDI, we've become true partners with our customers.'
Unidoor has no links between PC network and the Mips and Mr Phillips says
this means there is some duplication and rekeying of information.
Direct Home Entertainment, which sells a million videos, CDs and computer
games a year through catalogue shopping companies, has made such a link and
as a result has cut despatch time from a fortnight or more to 48 hours.
Previously, orders were received by post.
This company, with offices in London and a warehouse in Coventry, runs its
EDI link on a personal computer which is connected in turn to its Nokia
business computer system. It, too, uses the Meadow-house package to link to
EDI services and to produce labels.
'The leisure business is growing very quickly and the number of units we
despatch has doubled over the last two years,' says managing director Mr
Jerry Donahue. 'EDI has helped tremendously to handle this growth.'
After the relatively low-cost entry into EDI through a personal computer
link, Direct Home Entertainment, too, has quickly expanded its use. It is
planning to report back via EDI to the catalogue companies on unfilled
orders, so that customers can be informed as soon as possible. Previously,
such orders stayed on the company's system until they could be met.
Another personal computer EDI-user, sweets manufacturer Needlers, has gone
still further with its links. This company, with a Pounds 20m turnover and
based in Hull, again used the cheap option of a personal computer link to
get into EDI. Computer manager Mr Neil Dean says that, like other companies,
Needlers was 'pretty strongly encouraged' into EDI by Tesco, a big customer
committed to electronic trading, (see pages 15-16).
Meanwhile, Needlers was running its financial, manufacturing and
distribution software on an IBM AS/400 minicomputer using the Business 400
package from JBA.
'We were printing orders received by EDI into the PC and then keying the
information into the AS/400,' Mr Neal says. 'This was OK for one customer's
orders but we could see others going this way and manual keying would be out
of the question for 20 or 30 lots of orders.
'In addition it would not have been economic to upgrade the PC software
package to handle links to different services every time we added an
electronic trading partner.'
Needlers therefore went back to its business software supplier, JBA, and
added the company's EDI software module to its package. This was a
considerable investment: this module alone starts at Pounds 4,500, depending
on the computer size; in addition the Tradanet EDI service used by Tesco
charges more for links from machines bigger than a PC.
Needlers now links directly into EDI services from the AS/400, with the JBA
software handling the transfer of trading data from the services into the
main database.
This enhancement happened last autumn - and the investment has proved
worthwhile. Since then, Needlers has gone live on EDI with five retail
chains and expects to be up to 20 by the end of the year. Mr Neal hopes to
move to EDI with suppliers but Needlers does not have the resources to
handle this at present as it concentrates on establishing links with its
customers.
All these EDI users and suppliers illustrate the different ways that small
and medium-sized concerns - even one-man bands - can move into EDI. As Jerry
Phillips at Unidoor International puts it: 'These days it makes no sense for
anyone of any size not to go to EDI.'
*****
SUPPLIER PROFILES
Meadowhouse MEADOWHOUSE BAR-LASER, a privately-owned UK company formed in
1986, is based in Stalham, Norfolk, with 40 staff.
Products and services: pedigree range of software, handling connection to
EDI services, message conversion, printing of barcodes and documents from
EDI data; also bureau EDI service.
Turnover: 1991, Pounds 1.6m; 1992, Pounds 2.3m.
Price: Typically, Pounds 1,500-Pounds 1,700 in the first year, including
software, installation, training and all EDI network charges (based on IBM
network charges); Pounds 800 in the second year, including network charges,
software support and upgrades.
Number of users: over 1,000 Pedigree modules sold.
*****
JBA International
JBA International was formed in the UK in 1981. An IBM authorised software
house (business partner in IBM parlance); support centres worldwide; 800
staff; turnover Pounds 35m.
Product: Business 400, a business package including modules covering
accounting, manufacturing, distribution and so on.
Number of users: 1,500 users of Business 400 worldwide; 400 in the UK; 40 UK
users of the EDI module.
