THE financial services industry churns out endless reams of paperwork,
particularly in the insurance and mortgage sectors.
These are the areas, however, where the bulk of applications can be found
for document image processing (DIP).
Apart from improving customer-service efficiency, the industry is also
beginning to use DIP technology to cut staffing, according Geoff Bedser,
consultant at the finance division of the Computer Management Group (CMG).
'If you talk to financial organisations, they will mention the two points in
the same breath. In practice, the emphasis tends to be on improved
efficiency,' he says.
Unlike the computer industry which is increasingly moving towards standards,
DIP is still a jungle of proprietary systems.
There are some standards at the lower levels of DIP technology, such as the
fax format used for the images, but when it comes to the software that does
clever things like indexing, it is still a case of 'everybody for
themselves.'
So when customers choose a particular supplier, they have to be sure from
the outset that they will not want to switch suppliers later because they
will be well 'locked in' to an original supplier.
Most imaging systems now store images using the Group 4 fax standard from
the Consultative Committee for International Telephony and Telegraphy
(CCITT), which provides better image compression than its Group 3
predecessor.
'That is really all a fax does - like an imaging system, it turns a document
into a series of digits,' explains Mr Bedser.
'The main problem with standards is how you actually 'reference' an image on
a disk. Every supplier has a different indexing approach. In principle, it
would be quite simple for somebody to convert images from one system to
another by turning them into faxes - say, through a PC fax card.'
Most DIP systems scan images at a resolution of 200 dots per inch (200 dpi).
An A4-page scanned at this resolution in monochrome generates about 4m
pixels, occupying four megabits of storage, equivalent to half a megabyte of
data.
When it was first designed, Group 3 offered a line-by-line compression
algorithm. Group 4 compares the second scan line with the first, thereby
achieving a higher level of compression, particularly on certain characters
with uprights that do not alter from one line to the next. It effectively
represents the second scan line with how it differs from the first one.
Group 4 is more efficient, but requires better error-correction because if a
line is lost in transmission, so is the whole document, whereas because
Group 3 corrects itself at the end of every line, the worst that can happen
is one bad line.
Another commonly adopted standard for DIP is Aldus's Tag Image Format (TIF),
which allows users to move image files from one system to another. TIF can
be used to store images compressed in ways other than the fax standard, like
colour and greyscale images, for example.
TIF also allows users to scan images in at any resolution. However, doubling
the scan resolution from 200 dpi to 400 dpi, the print resolution offered by
most laser printers, quadruples the storage required in theory, although the
more data is captured the more redundancy it contains, so the compression
algorithm tends to be more efficient. In practice, therefore, the storage
requirement would only double.
'TIF in itself is still only effectively an image format,' says Tony
Hendley, technical director of Cimtech. 'You still need to describe your
definition of a document within the system. That's where you get into the
realms of document architecture standards.'
The large computer manufacturers such as IBM and Digital Equipment (DEC)
have defined a standard called Open Document Architecture (ODA). This allows
users to manage documents in a range of formats.
Most word-processors use IBM's Document Content Architecture (DCA) as an
interchange format for exporting documents to other word-processors. ODA is
the counterpart to DCA for document imaging, but still has some way to go
before being universally adopted as a standard to replace proprietary
architectures in DIP systems.
THE move to client-server computer architectures means that DIP systems can
now have one server managing the index database and another managing
document contents, be they images or text files. This will improve
performance because the types of searches done on the index database are
different from those done on the storage server.
'The best analogy is that of a hat-check system where you give your coat to
a cloakroom attendant and you get a ticket with a number on it. The
attendant does not know what the coat is or anything about it, and they
store it as they see fit,' explains Mr Hendley.
'The storage server operates on that principle. At any point in time, the
index database will deliver a series of tickets as a result of a search, and
the storage server will deliver the file.
'The benefit of having them as separate devices is that you can have many
companies who specialise in making storage management systems which optimise
the trade-off between storage cost and speed of retrieval.'
He recommends that users carry out some form of data modelling exercise in
advance or use free text indexing systems. Alternatively, they can create an
abstract of the document.
If the document is held as a text file, the user can search on any word in
the document itself. Whether the user has come through a structured search
or a free text search, the principle is the same - the result is a hit-list
of unique numbers from which to retrieve files.
'Most imaging systems use a standard database such as Oracle to hold their
indexes,' says CMG's Mr Bedser.
'The fact that it is pointing to an image is where the clever software comes
into play. Image is a technology which appeals to users, rather than IT
buffs, but ironically users see it as something which enables them to
automate their processes and bypass traditional IT professionals.'
Optical character recognition is now becoming more prevalent because the
system can then recognise part of the image as being characteristic of the
document, providing automatic indexing - this is particularly useful in
legal documents, for example.
