A QUIET Monday afternoon in the Commons chamber, dominated by Welsh business
and with no votes scheduled, gave the normally loyal Tory MP, chatting in
Members' Lobby time, a chance to ponder on the leadership qualities of the
prime minister.
'If you are saying, do we want a return to the apparent certainties of
Margaret Thatcher, then definitely 'no',' he decided.
'But we are being a bit wishy-washy. John Major's friends are trying to get
a bit of clarity of thought.'
His words were, perhaps, harsher than he intended. But the sense of unease
within Tory ranks at Westminster - though still a notch or two from open
revolt and driven largely by economic gloom - was palpable yesterday.
The prime minister's falling poll ratings have encouraged a febrile
atmosphere to which there seems no early respite. Only 19 per cent of
electors believe he is a capable leader, according to a Mori poll for The
Times. Just 21 per cent believe he understands the problems facing Britain.
'What is worrying is the criticism of Major coming from the constituency
parties,' said one young Tory, first elected last April. 'It is not acerbic
like the newspaper editorials, but it is there.'
A combination of past incidents and looming difficulties has meant that
among Tory MPs it is almost unfashionable not to add a measure of cynicism
or malice in the privacy of the Commons' lobbies.
The Maastricht bill is bogged down in committee, good economic news is
elusive, a package to save coalpits has yet to be agreed, and the
by-election in Newbury, caused by the death of Mrs Judith Chaplin, is
already being written off by many Tories as a Liberal Democrat gain.
'I would be amazed, astonished and delighted if we won; I reckon we will
lose by 5,000,' said one Tory MP for a constituency not far from the town.
Mr Major's efforts to impose authority are not yet seen as credible by the
right wing. There is frustration that Maastricht has pushed out other
government business, that there is an apparent vacuum of new ideas from the
cabinet.
An obviously stage-managed revolt by government loyalists against the
Euro-rebels at a backbenchers' meeting last Thursday won a few headlines but
changed nobody's mind.
'There is no leadership,' said an MP who voted for Mr Major to become prime
minister in 1990. 'What we get now and again is a petulant lashing-out -
headlines saying, 'Major to crack down on Euro-sceptics'  - and then nothing
happens. It is like a turn-of-the-century plane, lots of flapping of wings
and noise and then the thing nosedives.'
In the background is Baroness Thatcher, still a totem for the Tory right,
and her former cabinet ministers. Mr John Biffen, ex-leader of the House,
wrote last week that there was a 'determined restiveness' on the Tory
backbenches. Lord Lawson, a past chancellor, has derided the government over
its handling of sterling's exit from the exchange rate mechanism.
A lunch last week, hosted by the former prime minister and attended by
rightwing cabinet ministers Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, and
Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, set off
unsubstantiated murmurings of behind-the-scenes plotting.
In truth, ministers can legitimately argue that much of the pessimism is
transient and recession-related. 'The economy is always the thing that will
help bolster the government,' admited one Euro-sceptic. One veteran MP was
prepared to go against the trend. 'There is nothing unusual about the mood,'
he insisted.
But, for now, many Conservatives are restless over Mr Major's apparent
reluctance to replace Mr Norman Lamont as chancellor. 'A lot of the
pessimism is because of the occupant of Number 11 Downing Street,' said one
London Tory. 'There is a universal feeling that he should go to another
department.
'But I suppose that reflects frustration about Mr Major and his leadership
credibility.'
