THE European Community should respect the timetable for achieving monetary
union, Mr Alain Lamassoure, French minister for European affairs, said
yesterday. He played down remarks by Chancellor Helmut Kohl that the target
dates for creating a European currency might need extending.
'Let us keep to the calendar that we have together settled and on which we
are all agreed,' Mr Lamassoure said in a radio interview.
The German chancellor had warned on Monday that strict insistence on
economic convergence between EC member states could delay creation of a
single European currency 'by a year or two.' Under the Maastricht treaty on
European union, EC members are to introduce a single currency in 1997 or at
the latest by 1999.
But some French officials indicated a flexible stance on the timing of
monetary union. They said Mr Lamassoure's comments were mainly concerned
with the second stage of monetary union, which involves establishment of a
European Monetary Institute, precursor to a European central bank, and does
not involve strict convergence targets on inflation and budget deficits.
This stage is due to take effect from January 1 next year.
As to the third and more demanding phase of monetary union, French officials
said that, if EC member countries had difficulty in achieving the economic
convergence criteria, it might be better to extend the timetable than to
relax the required criteria.
One French official said that the question of the timetable for monetary
union would be discussed by the EC heads of government at their special
summit planned for October.
Mr Lamassoure denied any discord between Bonn and Paris and expressed
optimism about continued progress towards European integration.
Belgian Finance Minister Philipe Maystadt said that creating a single EC
currency by 1999 remained realistic, Reuter reports from Brussels.
He said Chancellor Kohl's remarks merely indicated 'in a realistic manner
that the timetable for a single currency is more likely to be January 1,
1999, than January 1, 1997,' he said.
