China yesterday established a new 'Association for Preventing Sexually
Transmitted Diseases and Aids' at a ceremony held in the Great Hall of the
People. It was a measure of China's, arguably belated, recognition of the
threat posed by Aids in the world's most populous country that the Great
Hall itself was given over to such a meeting on the eve of World Aids Day.
The Chinese bureaucracy appears to have begun to take the problem seriously.
It has started to devote more resources to public education, and officials
are now talking more openly about the issue. The shift echoes a rethink
taking place across Asia as governments in the region, which previously
preferred to sweep Aids under the carpet as a 'foreign' problem, come to
terms with the threat the disease poses to their populations - in
particular, to the economically active portion.
In India, where nearly seven in every thousand are testing positive to the
HIV virus which is believed to lead to Aids, 83 per cent are below the age
of 50 years, and more than two-thirds of those affected are between 20 and
40. Authorities in Thailand, the Asian epicentre, estimate that between 400
and 600 of its people are infected every day.
Attention paid to the issue is likely to increase ahead of the 1994
international annual conference on Aids, which is being held in the region
for the first time. According to Prof Yuichi Shiokawa, chairman of the
organising committee for the conference, in Yokohama next August, 'Asia
faces the possibility of an explosive increase in Aids from now to the end
of the century'.
The disease came fairly late to the continent - Japan registered its initial
case in 1985, the same year that the first annual conference was convened in
the west. This has given rise to hopes that, with preventive education, its
prevalence in the region may plateau at a lower level than elsewhere. But
economic considerations and cultural obstacles in many places still combine
to assist its proliferation.
As Asia is more urbanised than Africa, its cities provide the conditions for
even more rapid transmission. India's Directorate of Health Services has
projected that Bombay already has 120,000 citizens infected.
Mr Neil McKenna, the editor of WorldAids, a newsletter produced by the Panos
Institute, a development organisation, says: 'HIV is accelerating very
rapidly, as fast as it was in sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s . . . India's
great cities are a potential time-bomb.'
Labour migration is a factor. Indian truck drivers show a higher than
average exposure to the virus. According to Mr Zeng Yi, president of the
Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine, the main channels for HIV into China
are through Thailand and Burma.
The incidence of HIV-related infections, it is suggested, is particularly
high among Malaysia's large immigrant workforce. Malaysia is the world's
largest producer of condoms - but usage is still very low. With its high
rate of literacy and generally well organised medical services, the country
is in a good position to combat Aids. But government efforts to launch
nationwide campaigns and sex education programmes have been opposed by
conservative Moslem groups.
The Thai government gives away 80m condoms a year which can be obtained free
in many brothels. The use of condoms appears to have increased following a
modest decline in sexually transmitted diseases. However, Thai health care
workers say many customers still do not use them.
Conditions in Asia assist HIV's other common means of transmission as well.
In China, the fairly common practice of using one syringe for dozens of
people in impoverished country regions is blamed for the spread of the virus
in remote areas. Intravenous drug use in southern Yunnan province, which
adjoins the 'Golden Triangle' of Burma, Thailand and Laos, is believed to
have left thousands infected. While blood transfusions in Thailand are now
considered safe, the Indian government has by no means been able to clean up
its contaminated blood supplies. With the main source of blood being paid
donors, and demand far outstripping supply, it is virtually impossible for
the government to screen blood supply.
The developed countries of the region no longer have such problems. But even
in Japan, health care for Aids patients remains a low priority. The Health
and Welfare Ministry is currently telling regional governments to create
Aids facilities in at least two hospitals within a prefecture. But even in
Tokyo, only eight hospitals treat people with Aids, with just three
accepting in-patients.
In Australia the incidence of Aids cases per 100,000 population is about 18,
putting it in the top third of OECD countries (though the US has almost 86
per 100,000). Australia was probably fortunate in having a strong gay rights
movement, which built on experience in the US and disseminated HIV/Aids
information quickly when the infection surfaced. Early projections there
have proved overly pessimistic.
China, in coming to terms with the problem, still has official statistics
maintaining that only 19 people have developed Aids, 14 of whom have died.
But Mr Wan Yanhai, who has established Aids hotlines in several Chinese
cities, believes that numbers infected exceed 100,000.
The country has begun working more closely with international agencies. In
September, it drew up a draft programme with WHO. Mr Zeng of the preventive
medicine academy will attend the Yokohama conference - an indication that
China is becoming more willing to participate in global solutions to health
problems.
Reporting by Tony Walker in Beijing, Gordon Cramb in London, William Barnes
in Bangkok, Emiko Terazono in Tokyo, Nikki Tait in Sydney, Kieran Cooke in
Kuala Lumpur, Shiraz Sidhva in New Delhi.
