SINCE 1988, when Mr Percy Barnevik led Sweden's Asea engineering and
robotics group into a merger with the venerable but flagging Swiss power
engineering group Brown Boveri, the new ABB Asea Brown Boveri has hardly
paused for breath.
But a new streamlined management structure unveiled by Mr Barnevik yesterday
suggests that this uniquely multinational industrial group could move even
faster in the future.
In the past five years, ABB has acquired some 60 companies all over the
world, some of them, such as Combustion Engineering in the US, huge.
It has also marched boldly into eastern Europe, buying up rundown
engineering companies and successfully injecting western management
techniques. More recently, it has focused on fast growing Asian markets for
its heavy infrastructure products.
Along the way, ABB managers have closed dozens of plants and, since the
spring of 1990, eliminated more than 40,000 jobs. The group's non-recurring
charges typically run at over Dollars 100m a year.
But it now can claim that its Dollars 32bn in annual sales are spread fairly
evenly among the world's three main economic regions, whereas at the outset
it was active mainly in European markets. It also claims to be the world's
largest power engineering group whereas Asea and Brown Boveri were marginal
players.
However, it is not only ABB that has changed. As Mr Barnevik observes, the
creation of huge, rather protectionist, regional trading blocks has happened
with surprising speed. The economic integration of central and eastern
European countries into the European block is also proceeding apace. And the
elimination of protectionist barriers between western European countries is
accelerating.
For a group which produces heavy infrastructure equipment - from power
stations to railway locomotives - these changes have a big impact on the way
it should conduct its business.
One consequence has been faster growth of large turnkey projects. Developing
countries have always tended to purchase infrastructure on a turnkey basis
because they did not have the engineering skills themselves. Now developed
countries are moving that way as well, as privatised utilities shed the huge
in-house design and engineering bureaucracies that flourished under state
ownership.
Mr Barnevik recalled yesterday that when ABB was formed, his main objective
was to make managers within the group's thousands of operating units more
responsible for performance. No fewer than 5,000 profit centres were
established. The emphasis was on decentralisation and as few layers of
middle management as possible.
He still likes those principles, but he and other ABB directors have found
that they, and the management structures built to implement them, were not
enough for the new environment in which they operate.
ABB managers have been fairly successful in preventing individual ABB
companies from competing against each other for business, but they have
failed so far to bring together all their resources for making bids on big
turnkey projects.
Various group divisions supply most of the technology and equipment needed
to build steel rolling mills and pulp and paper mills. However, as the
know-how and marketing efforts are dispersed, ABB seldom makes effective
bids for large integrated projects.
'We want to facilitate integrated system thinking,' Mr Barnevik says.
Thus, the power distribution and power transmission divisions are being
combined. Most of the 'various activities' division is being put into an
industrial plants division.
ABB has so far used the popular matrix management system, under which
directors have both regional and line responsibilities. But in the new
executive board, this is being simplified, with three directors having only
regional responsibilities and four only divisional responsibilities.
Mr Barnevik said some board directors had been choking under the complexity
of their responsibilities. The solution will be to push more tasks down to
the next layer of management.
It remains to be seen how this will work out in practice. Mr Barnevik made
clear that no management consultants had been used in the design of the new
structure. 'We have enough management talent here that if we put our heads
together, we should not need consultants.'
One thing is certain; the pace of change at ABB will remain brisk.
Commenting on the group's decision to provide Dollars 500m for plant
closures this year, Mr Barnevik said he was unhappy having to put large sums
into the profit and loss account every year for non-recurring costs.
'A group like ours will have to live with restructuring as a normal part of
its business. So we are doing this big move now, and then I hope to get out
of the habit of reporting non-recurring costs.'
Asked what he thought an acceptable annual level of unhighlighted
restructuring costs might be, he replied, 'about 1 per cent of invoicing'.
