Surging health care costs have forced some US companies, such as Glazer
Steel in New Orleans, to drop health insurance benefits altogether. But
eliminating the perk is not easy. Most unions demand healthcare packages for
workers as part of labour deals; failing to offer them can put non-union
companies at a severe disadvantage when competing for talented personnel.
Soon, eliminating employee health benefits may no longer be an option for
any US company, since the Clinton administration is working on healthcare
reform which will probably require all employers to cover workers' insurance
payments. If they are to remain competitive, companies must find ways of
curbing health costs.
Until recently, most US companies offered benefits under the traditional
'indemnity' system. Under this system, employers pay workers' insurance
premiums. When the workers suffer illness, the insurance company covers most
of the cost. Many companies have found indemnity insurance expensive and
inefficient and have turned to 'managed health care'.
Under managed care, companies join forces with other groups in large-scale
organisations known as 'health maintenance organisations'.
HMOs claim to be cheaper than indemnity insurance. Their size means they
hold substantial bargaining power with physicians, pharmacies and other
healthcare providers.
Many HMOs cover millions of employees, usually concentrated in one region,
and this gives the organisation a great deal of influence on pricing.
Economies of scale help keep a lid on costs at the HMOs. 'Doctors and nurses
often spend an inordinate amount of time on administrative work,' said Alan
Raymond, a spokesman for Harvard Community Health Plan, one of the largest
HMOs in the country. 'If they join our network, we take care of all that for
them and everyone benefits.'
HMOs emphasise preventive medicine. Unlike indemnity plans, HMOs cover
regular check-ups, vaccinations and other benefits. Over the last few years,
many HMOs have extended their coverage to work-site health educational
programmes, diet workshops and fitness clubs.
There are some 550 HMOs in the US, covering about 15 per cent of the
population. According to health benefits consultants Foster Higgins, more
than half of all US corporations now offer HMO options to their employees.
HMO coverage is also extending to smaller companies. This is because many
small companies have joined forces through associations which agree to
handle the small companies' administrative work.
HMO plans are starting to pay dividends to the US private sector. A study by
Foster Higgins noted that the increase in health costs for HMOs rose 8.8 per
cent in 1992, compared with a 14.2 per cent surge for traditional indemnity
plans.
