THE BIG FOUR clearing banks could face exposure of between Pounds 400m and
Pounds 500m each following a law lords ruling on Thursday that gives
partners who act as surety for borrowings greater protection against losing
their homes.
According to the Bank Action Group, a consumer pressure group, thousands of
cases that were awaiting the outcome of Mrs Bridget O'Brien's case against
Barclays Bank can now go ahead. The group, which is already handling 30
similar actions, said it had been 'flooded' with inquiries yesterday from
people in similar situations.
Five law lords ruled that Mrs O'Brien could set aside a charge over her home
in Slough, Berkshire, because her husband had lied about the extent of the
guarantee liability, and the bank had failed to explain the transaction to
her and to suggest she seek independent legal advice.
Ms Patricia Griffiths, the national co-ordinator of the group, said: 'I
personally feel this decision does not go far enough. But it is clear the
floodgates are now open.'
She said the group had been advised that the clearing banks could face
exposure of between Pounds 400m and Pounds 500m each.
Mr Eddy Weatherill, chief executive of the Independent Banking Advisory
Service, said it was already dealing with more than 50 cases that raised
issues similar to the O'Brien case. That number would increase as the lords'
decision became more widely known, he said.
But he added that the service was very worried about the growing number of
cases where there were allegations of undue influence or misrepresentation
by the bank.
The issue of bank honesty was now the fastest-growing area of customer
complaint, he said, and the service would be raising the issue at a meeting
with the Bank of England next Friday.
The banks yesterday rejected Mr Weatherill's assertion and emphasised that
they had procedures to protect the position of the guarantor who was not a
partner in the business being guaranteed.
They acknowledged, however, that there was a limit to the information that
could be disclosed to guarantors without the agreement of the borrowers,
since the bank had a duty of confidentiality to their customers.
The banks are reluctant to put a figure on their potential exposure to
O'Brien-type cases but insist that each case will be treated on its own
merits.
Both Barclays and National Westminster Bank, the biggest lenders to the
small-business sector, claim there is only a small number of cases in
dispute.
