EURO DISNEY, the troubled leisure group behind the Euro Disneyland theme
park, yesterday confirmed it was heading for heavy losses this year after
announcing a fall in consolidated operating revenue.
Revenues declined to FFr1.47bn (Dollars 243m) in the three months to June 30
(the third quarter) from FFr1.5bn in the same period last year.
However, the slight reduction in revenue for the period disguises the
severity of the deterioration in the group's underlying performance, given
that the theme park did not trade for the full quarter last year. It did not
open until April 12 1992.
Euro Disney recently announced it had asked Walt Disney, its US parent, for
financial support while it attempted to restructure debt.
It warned of a net loss of FFr500m for the third quarter and yesterday said
that it had 'no reason' to change that estimate.
Analysts now expect a net loss of between FFr1.8bn and FFr2bn for the full
financial year to September 30.
The group, which initially hoped to be profitable from its opening year, has
already recorded a net loss of FFr1.08bn for the six months to March 31,
after losing FFr339m in the previous year.
The deterioration in Euro Disney's performance during the third quarter is
particularly grave, given that the spring months should be one of the
busiest periods for the park.
Euro Disneyland has been dogged by the European recession, which has led to
a slight shortfall in the number of visitors to the park and in the amount
of money they spend.
The group has faced the additional problem of the strong franc in the
current financial year, which began just after last September's currency
crisis.
As a result, foreign attendance has fallen sharply. The number of visitors
from the UK, previously one of its strongest markets, fell by 50 per cent to
310,000 in the first half.
But Euro Disney said bookings from outside France had already responded to
the franc's recent weakness following this month's reform of the European
exchange rate mechanism. It had detected an improvement in business from the
UK and Spain.
The company also hopes to benefit from cost-cutting. The number of employees
has been reduced from 18,580 on July 31 last year to 15,875 at the same date
this year, mainly through cuts in its permanent workforce.
