MR RICHARD Lines, the former chairman of MTM, the specialist chemicals
company, has sold his family's 7 per cent stake to a company advised by Mr
Refaat El-Sayed, who was convicted for fraud in connection with Sweden's
Fermenta scandal.
Mr Lines, who left MTM last year after misleading the City and exaggerating
profits, told the company he and his family had sold its 6.99m shares to AB
Hebi.
The company said AB Hebi had bought the stake in a private deal off the
market and now owned 7.08m shares, equivalent to 7.8 per cent of the
company.
Mr El-Sayed is acting as adviser and consultant to AB Hebi. He said: 'Our
intention is simple, we get the shares and we would like to see what happens
in the future.'
The deal has left City observers baffled. Since the departure of Mr Lines,
MTM's share price has fallen from nearly 300p to a close of 14.5p yesterday.
Mr Ken Schofield, the new MTM chief executive, has revised plans to
refinance the company's Pounds 120m debt through a rights issue. The company
has net assets of about Pounds 15m.
MTM is now understood to be approaching its bankers to seek a
debt-for-equity swap before the end of March when its banking facilities
expire. Such a refinancing, if successful, would dilute existing
shareholders, now including Mr El-Sayed.
AB Hebi described its interest in MTM as a friendly trade investment. The
company has investments in Sweden in the pharmaceutical industry and in
healthcare product companies.
Mr El-Sayed declared bankruptcy after being ousted from Fermenta AB, the
Swedish industrial and biotechnology group which collapsed under the weight
of its debt burden in 1987. He was charged with insider trading and selling
Fermenta shares before a negative report about the company appeared in 1986.
Mr El-Sayed still protests his innocence. He was convicted and released from
jail in May last year.
Since leaving his chairman's seat, Mr Lines has set up business in the same
office in Stockton-on-Tees from which he started to build MTM into one of
the stock market's most rapidly-growing stocks, with a market capitalisation
at its peak of more than Pounds 250m.
