The outlook has never been more uncertain for what were supposed to be the
two biggest US science projects of the 1990s: the Dollars 30bn (Pounds
20.9bn) space station and an Dollars 8bn atom smasher, the superconducting
super collider.
Although President Clinton favours both, many observers believe his
commitment is far from wholehearted. They doubt whether he would invest much
political capital in trying to save either project in the face of intense
pressure from congressional budget-cutters.
According to John Gibbons, the new White House science adviser, big science
projects may have been given too much urgency 'compared with other
priorities in terms of our national recovery and putting in place an
investment strategy for future economic progress'.
The Clinton administration's proposal for the SSC is to persevere with the
existing plans to build the world's largest particle accelerator in an 86km
tunnel beneath the plains of Texas, but to postpone the 1998 completion date
by at least two years in the hope of defining more closely the complex
equipment required and attracting international partners.
European nations will not contribute because they prefer to invest in their
own accelerator at Cern, Geneva. Asian countries have resisted US requests
to join the SSC and, even if Japan succumbs, foreign contributions are
unlikely to come close to the Dollars 1.7bn originally expected.
There is no question about the SSC's scientific value, says Gibbons:
'They're trying to solve some eternal questions about the nature of matter.'
By recreating on a small scale the conditions of the early universe soon
after the Big Bang, physicists hope to gain a new understanding of
fundamental forces and particles.
But cynics suggest Clinton's support for SSC may be more closely related to
shoring up his reputation in Texas, where there is an election in May for
the Senate seat vacated by Lloyd Bentsen, than to his interest in the
origins of the universe.
In the case of the space station Freedom, Clinton has told Nasa to undertake
a complete redesign to cut costs, currently estimated at Dollars 31bn. 'We
want to take a fresh look at this and not just take the existing station and
start peeling away the pieces,' said Daniel Goldin, Nasa administrator.
The space station has suffered several scaling-down exercises since
President Reagan initiated the project in 1984, with the goal of having
Freedom in orbit by 1994. The likely operational date has now slipped to
2000, although Nasa has already spent Dollars 8bn on preparatory work.
The latest design review and accompanying political uncertainties have left
Freedom's supporters in Congress and the aerospace industry feeling confused
and apprehensive.
'My biggest fear is that the whole programme could be lost if Congress votes
against it when the new design is presented in June,' says Tom Williams of
McDonnell Douglas. Space station contracts keep 2,500 people employed at the
company's aerospace centre in southern California.
The fate of Freedom will have ramifications well beyond the domestic
aerospace industry because the project has international partners, notably
Japan and the European Space Agency. Their representatives are now in
Washington working with Nasa's redesign team.
Esa plans to spend Dollars 2.9bn over the next seven years on its
contribution, a manned laboratory to be attached to the main US space
station. 'This could come out positively for Europe, if our support becomes
more important to Nasa because they have to drop some of what they were
planning to do,' says Daria Robinson of Esa. 'Or it could turn out
negatively if the Americans cut down the project to the point where it is no
longer interesting to take part.'
To keep its options open, Esa is also discussing co-operation on future
space stations with Russia. Esa may provide a module for the Russian Mir-2
in the late 1990s.
But Nasa too is talking about bringing Russia into its plans and optimists
believe there is now an opportunity of making the space station into a
global project.
