The skin seems superficially to be an easy target for the pharmaceutical
industry. It is more accessible than any other part of the body, and drugs
applied to the skin are relatively free of systemic side-effects.
Yet people suffering from skin disorders, estimated to make up 15 per cent
of the population at any given time, have been poorly served by medical and
pharmaceutical research. Few safe and effective treatments exist for
conditions such as psoriasis, eczema, dermatitis or acne, which - although
rarely life-threatening - can make a misery of patients' lives for years on
end.
The outlook for the next few years is more encouraging, however. Several
large pharmaceutical groups are taking a renewed interest in dermatology.
And many emerging drug companies see topical applications - directly to
affected areas of the skin - as the fastest route to the market, because the
Food and Drug Administration is less concerned about side-effects than for
drugs that have to be swallowed or injected.
Skin disorders as a whole make up a valuable prescription drug market worth
about Dollars 6.5bn (Pounds 4.3bn) in 1992 and growing at more than 10 per
cent a year. But the dermatology market is highly fragmented compared with
other pharmaceutical fields, with no single drug selling more than Dollars
200m a year.
Among the international pharmaceutical groups, Johnson &amp; Johnson and
Schering Plough of the US, Roche of Switzerland and Schering AG of Germany
are current leaders in the dermatology market. But perhaps the most
ambitious is Sandoz of Switzerland. A relatively small player now, it has
dermatology sales of no more than Dollars 170m a year.
Sandoz has designated the skin as a priority business for marketing,
research and development. 'Dermatology is going to provide the most growth
of any area for Sandoz over the next five years,' says David Pearson, who is
responsible for international dermatology marketing at the company's Basle
headquarters. If Sandoz achieves its targets, it will become the world's
largest producer of skin drugs within five years.
The company's decision to focus on the skin was based partly on its
expertise in immunology, because psoriasis and some forms of dermatitis are
linked to dysfunction of the immune system. Sandimmun (cyclosporin A), the
immune suppressant used to prevent rejection of organ transplants, is one of
the few drugs capable of clearing up severe psoriasis. But it is a powerful
systemic medicine with potentially dangerous side-effects. Sandoz scientists
in Switzerland and Austria are now working to develop new cyclosporin
derivatives that patients can apply directly to the skin.
Psoriasis, which affects about 2 per cent of the population, results from
excessive growth of skin cells combined with inflammation. Like other skin
disorders, it can take several forms and in severe cases its lesions can be
life-threatening. Conventional psoriasis treatments, including coal tar
ointments, steroid creams and ultraviolet radiation, may bring temporary
relief but do not tackle the underlying causes.
Although the current market for specific psoriasis drugs is small - an
estimated Dollars 130m last year - psoriasis is a favourite target of
dermatological research. While cyclosporin A is a promising treatment for
severe cases, dermatologists are reporting encouraging results among
patients with mild to moderate psoriasis from Dovonex (calcipotriol), a new
derivative of vitamin D introduced in Europe two years ago by Leo
Pharmaceutical of Denmark.
Dovonex ointment is a potent inhibitor of skin cell proliferation.
Clinical trials at Leicester Royal Infirmary have shown that it is 'highly
effective' at improving psoriasis without toxic side-effects.
Derivatives of vitamin A, known as retinoids, can help to clear up another
distressing skin disorder, acne, which is caused by over-production of oil
by sebaceous glands in the skin. Mild acne - the spots that appear
temporarily in most teenagers - is often treated by applying lotions and
creams containing benzoyl peroxide to dry the skin or antibiotics to kill
the bacteria that can exacerbate the condition. But retinoids are the only
effective treatment for severe acne, which can lead to deep cysts and
permanent scarring. The most powerful retinoid is Roaccutane, developed by
Roche. It is taken by mouth and the side-effects, including birth defects in
pregnant women, are potentially so dangerous that in the UK its use is
restricted to hospitals.
Smaller companies developing novel drugs for skin disorders include:
Sphinx Pharmaceuticals of North Carolina. It has a topical psoriasis drug,
Kynac, in clinical trials. It is designed to inhibit a family of enzymes,
known collectively as protein kinase C, which act as molecular messengers
for skin cell proliferation and inflammation.
Agouron of California which has a psoriasis drug, AG-85, which in-activates
a different enzyme, thymidylate synthase, which is involved in cell
proliferation. Its first clinical test last year gave equivocal results; the
patients' psoriasis improved whether they were treated with AG-85 or
inactive liquid - an illustration of the way some skin disorders are
affected by psychological factors and may tend to respond temporarily to any
sort of attention. Agouron will carry out a second trial this year with
re-formulated AG-85.
Genta of California. It is developing genetic 'anti-sense' drugs designed to
treat skin disease at the point of origin by blocking the genes that control
proliferation and inflammation. These are not ready for clinical testing.
Meanwhile, to build up sales, Genta has filed new drug applications for five
conventional dermatological compounds.
Scotia Pharmaceuticals of the UK which is working on two separate
approaches: fatty acids and lithium salts. Its first prescription drugs,
Epogam (based on evening primrose oil) for atopic eczema and Efalith
(lithium succinate) for seborrhoeic dermatitis, are licensed to Searle for
sales and marketing.
Conventional pharmaceuticals are not the only approach to dermatology. Last
summer, a group of London dermatologists reported in the Lancet a clinical
trial of traditional Chinese herbal remedies - long used to improve skin
conditions. They found that drinking a tea made from 10 dried Chinese herbs
significantly improved the symptoms of patients with atopic eczema. 'An
understanding of the pharmacological basis for the beneficial effect is
limited,' they said.
Also, light-based treatments for severe skin disease may be due for a
renaissance. Ultraviolet rays have been used for decades in conjunction with
photosensitising chemicals but their effect is unpredictable and many
patients fear the side-effects of irradiation. Quadra Logic of Vancouver,
Canada, is now beginning clinical trials of a refined technique, called
photodynamic therapy: psoriasis patients are injected with a light-activated
drug, BPD, and exposed not to ultraviolet but to red light from a medical
laser.
The pharmaceutical outlook is promising for patients with skin disease
serious enough to be referred to a hospital dermatologist. Safe drugs to
provide relief from the milder forms of eczema and dermatitis - which can
still drive patients into a frenzy of itching - are a more distant prospect.
John Berthe-Jones of Leicester Royal Infirmary says the greatest unmet need
in dermatology is a treatment for pruritus (the medical term for itching).
Anti-histamines provide only slight relief. 'Itch is a symptom that
completely defies us,' he says. 'Above all, we need a drug that would block
its transmission from skin to the brain.'
The series continues next month by looking at advances in vaccines.
