THE IRISH PUNT was beleaguered inside the European exchange rate mechanism
yesterday, falling for the first time to its ERM floors against 3
currencies, writes James Blitz.
The Irish currency has survived two speculative attacks in the last six
months, but yesterday's pressures were acutely intense.
Two commercial banks in Dublin raised their prime rates to 28 per cent from
16-17 per cent, putting the burden of defending the currency firmly on
Ireland's consumers and businesses.
The punt's fall to its ERM floor against the D-Mark for the first time since
September also highlighted how severe the selling pressure has been this
week. For most of yesterday it was trading below its ERM floors against the
Belgian franc and Dutch guilder.
Ireland's coalition government has ruled out a devaluation of the currency,
and there was no sign yesterday of a European Monetary Committee being
convened to consider an ERM realignment.
There are good arguments against one taking place this weekend. The French,
for example, are still opposed to any readjustments of the ERM ahead of
their March elections, for fear that instability could spill over to the
franc.
However, the punt is now considered by some analysts to be heavy overvalued
against sterling. Many analysts believe its position is unsustainable.
Concerns remain that a punt devaluation could be followed by renewed selling
of the French franc, as dealers seem out a new currency to victimise in the
ERM.
Although the French franc sat comfortably at around FFr3.85 against the
D-Mark yesterday, French 1-month money rose to 13 1/2 per cent as ERM
tensions grew. However, France's socialist party has virtually acknowledged
defeat in the March parliamentary elections, and it may keep rates at these
levels until the poll is over.
The dollar yesterday rose more than 3 pfennigs against the D-Mark after the
release of figures showing that durable goods orders jumped a startling 9.1
per cent in December.
The dollar rose nearly 2 1/2 pfennigs against the D-Mark, closing at
DM1.6090. It pushed sterling to a six year low of Dollars 1.4830. The pound
closed in London at Dollars 1.4870, some 3 cents down on the day.
Sterling fell back 1 1/4 pfennigs against the D-Mark, closing at DM2.3925.
However, Mr Jim O'Neill, head of research at Swiss Banking Corp in London,
believes that the pound will be underpinned at DM2.38 because the recent
gloom about the UK economy has been over-exaggerated.
