At a season associated with the arrival of wise men, the establishment of a
new institution to supervise European monetary arrangements might be
heralded as a sign of hope. The European Monetary Institute is being
formally set up on January 1 as part of the European Union's so-called
'second stage' of progress towards economic and monetary union. By
concentrating on a few necessary tasks, firmly defined by governments and
central banks, the EMI can improve the prospects for successful monetary
integration.
Conceived as an embryonic European central bank, the institute will have to
lower its sights from the ideas that inspired its creation. An important
priority will be to improve co-ordination within the present European
Monetary System, which is a long way from carrying out its original and
still badly needed function of providing a stable exchange rate environment
for European business.
In view of the EMS disturbances since autumn 1992, along with other setbacks
to the Maastricht timetable for a single currency, the gestation period for
the new monetary body has been highly problematic. Because of delays in
deciding to place the institute in Germany, the EMI will not even be able to
move to a permanent home in Frankfurt before the summer.
In 1988-89, when plans for setting up the institute were first laid, the
European Commission, backed by the French and Italian governments, wanted it
to carry out some fully-fledged central banking operations. This idea has
been watered down, above all because of opposition from the German
Bundesbank. Monetary decision-making will remain the preserve of the EMI's
12 member central banks. French-backed proposals for the EMI to help manage
currency reserves look unlikely to get off the ground.
Harmonisation drive
The task of Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy, the EMI's designated president, will
thus be to assemble a staff of statisticians and economists, rather than to
wield power.
This does not mean that the EMI will not have a job to do. First, it will
have to accomplish detailed technical work to prepare for the harmonisation
of monetary statistics and money market instruments that forms an essential
precondition for Emu. If the harmonisation drive leads to an increase in
efficiency of different countries' monetary systems, then the benefits would
extend beyond making Emu more viable.
Second, the EMI can provide a forum for general debate on European monetary
matters. Mr Lamfalussy sees the need to uphold the consensus on the
desirability of Emu, but he also has the experience and independence to
speak plainly about the hurdles that lie in its path. He will be helped in
his task of nurturing public understanding of Europe's unhealthily secretive
central banking system, if the EMI is required to publish detailed minutes
of its monthly meetings of central bank governors.
Vital arbiter
Third, in a less high-profile role, the EMI president can function as an
arbiter, providing advice and assistance to member countries. The
misunderstandings and mismanagement evident during the monetary system
flare-ups in September 1992 and July-August 1993 could have been lessened
had an intermediary been on hand to adjudicate between countries pursuing
different monetary priorities, or even to ensure that rival positions were
clearly communicated and understood.
After the upsets of the past 17 months, it seems still more likely than
before that Emu, if it takes place at all, will be reached first by a
relatively small group of countries willing to combine a lasting political
commitment to Emu with a readiness to gear their monetary policies to
Germany's. If monetary convergence stops short of Emu, the task of managing
that process will require expertise and sensitivity of the highest order.
Creating a new institute will not, by itself, solve Europe's monetary
problems. But if it can successfully combine the roles of trouble-shooter
and think-tank, the EMI will have a good chance of bringing Europe closer to
objectives that individual central banks are incapable of fulfilling. It is
a welcome addition to the institutional landscape of the European Union.
