THE PROSPECT of the government being defeated over the Maastricht bill has
prompted ministers to consider offering to set up a Commons select committee
on Northern Ireland to win the support of the province's Unionist MPs.
Relaxing opposition to a committee could help win the votes of nine Ulster
Unionist and three Democratic Unionist party MPs - and head off a defeat on
Labour's amendment on Maastricht's social chapter.
The chances of a government defeat, which could wreck the bill, heightened
this week as Euro-sceptic Tories and Liberal Democrat MPs indicated they
would back Labour.
Sir Peter Emery, chairman of the Commons procedure committee, is seeking
views on whether a committee on Northern Ireland, with powers to launch
investigations, should be established. All other main Whitehall departments
have a corresponding select committee.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, has argued that a committee
should only be part of a wider settlement between Unionists and
nationalists. But he has stressed to colleagues that, technically, any
decision on setting one up is a matter for MPs, not the government. In
practice, however, the government's view would be decisive.
One Northern Ireland Office insider said Unionists had a list of demands
that would increase their say on the province's affairs. 'Things crop up
from time to time which may make it necessary to accede to one,' he said.
No offer would be made by the government until nearer the vote, at least
four weeks away, and then only if the government was convinced it would
otherwise lose.
But it is far from clear whether a select committee would convert enough
Unionists, who are strongly opposed to Maastricht. Mr James Molyneaux and
the Rev Ian Paisley, the two Unionist leaders, may refuse to offer support
at any price.
Ministers accept that there is no logical reason why the Northern Ireland
Office should not be made accountable to parliament such as other Whitehall
departments, including the Scottish and Welsh offices - possibly as a
justification for relenting to Unionist demands.
Agreeing to a select committee, however, would undermine government policy
on Northern Ireland by angering the Irish government and nationalists in the
province. It could lead to further delay to resumption of 'round-table'
talks on Northern Ireland.
Separately, the Northern Ireland Office is preparing to come under attack
from Unionist MPs when the government publishes its white paper on the
future of the union between Scotland and the rest of the UK.
That document is expected to be strongly pro-union and opposed to devolution
 -almost the opposite of government policy on Northern Ireland.
Sir Patrick wants a devolved government in Northern Ireland and says it will
remain part of the UK only as long as a majority of its population so
wishes.
