MR JOHN Callaghan, the chief executive of Fyffes, the fruit distribution
group, is to step down at the end of this month, having been in the post for
just over two years.
No reasons were given for his departure other than that, according to a
company statement, he intends to pursue 'other business interests'.
Mr Neil McCann, the group chairman, acknowledged Mr Callaghan's contribution
to the company saying that his management team had successfully handled the
group's transition to the EC single market.
Fyffes is a significant banana importer into the UK and Ireland, and under a
new EC quota system which was approved last July, now stands to benefit in
the wider EC market at the expense of the top 'dollar' producers such as
Chiquita, Dole and Del Monte.
Fyffes has, however, suffered a number of setbacks in the past two years in
its efforts to build a distribution base outside of the British Isles.
Having raised IPounds 60m in a rights issue in 1991, the group made a bid
for the Del Monte group, which was then in the hands of the Polly Peck
liquidator. A Mexican group, however, made the successful bid at a price
believed to be around Dollars 500m.
A IPounds 52m deal to buy a significant stake in the Swedish fruit
distribution group, Saba, was then aborted in the autumn of last year as the
ERM currency crisis caused interest rates to soar in both the Swedish and
Irish markets.
Earlier this year talks were held between Fyffes and Dole, on a possible
agreed takeover by Dole of the Irish-controlled group. It is thought that
the terms offered were not acceptable to controlling interests within the
Fyffes group, however, and Dole subsequently withdrew.
Reports in Dublin at the weekend suggested that it was tensions between Mr
McCann and Mr Callaghan over control of the company and how to spend its
IPounds 100m cash hoard, that have led to Mr Callaghan's departure. Company
sources have been unavailable for comment.
Mr Callaghan joined Fyffes from the accountancy firm KPMG Stokes Kennedy
Crowley, where he had been a managing partner for eight years.
