NOWHERE ARE opposing views more entrenched than in the argument now raging
between environmental campaigners and the chlorine industry.
Environmentalists, led by groups such as Greenpeace, demand that all
chlorine production should cease immediately because the chemical and its
many derivatives cause serious harm to people, animals and the environment.
That is misinformed nonsense, says the industry. Chlorine gives many
benefits to society and will remain a fundamental building block of
industrial chemistry.
The middle ground is difficult to find even though both sides use the same
body of scientific evidence to support opposing arguments.
Until quite recently, the campaigners had chlorine makers and users in full
retreat. For example, paper and pulp manufacturers, traditionally some of
the biggest users, have moved or are changing to alternative bleaching
agents.
Furthermore, a significant number of governments in Europe introduced bans
on the use of PVC plastic in building projects. PVC contains chlorine. Some
large retailers began to look for alternatives to PVC packaging.
But after initial confusion, the chlorine industry has responded to the
threat and its public relations is fighting back amid genuine attempts to
clean up its production processes.
'It is making definite moves to put its house in order, although the
environmental pressure has not eased,' says Mr Stephen Harriman of Harriman
Chemsult, a London-based consultancy.
Mr Jan Wesseldijk, president of Akzo Chlor-Alkali and chairman of Euro
Chlor, a trade body, says the industry takes its environmental
responsibilities seriously.
'Perhaps we have been slow to respond to increased communications needs and
have neglected to highlight the actions already taken to safeguard society.
The way forward lies in investment in research and positive action to
demonstrate and reassure the public.'
Such assurances are badly needed, mainly because some of the suspected
side-effects of chlorine are horrific. The chemical has been implicated in
virtually every environmental nightmare, from the depletion of the ozone
layer to reduced sperm count in men.
In its elemental form, chlorine is a gas formed by passing electricity
through common salt. For every tonne of chlorine made, the process produces
just over a tonne of caustic soda, which is used in industrial processes and
to make detergents.
Chlorine and its derivatives, such as sodium hypochlorite, are used
throughout the world to disinfect drinking water. But most chlorine is used
in the manufacture of a vast range of products, such as drugs, pesticides,
plastics and industrial chemicals. Some of these retain chlorine at the end
of the process, while others do not.
Some chlorinated products, such as DDT (a pesticide), PCB (an insulating
liquid) and CFCs, have been implicated in global environmental problems. And
dioxins - considered to be one of the world's most dangerous group of
poisons - can be created when chlorinated substances, such as PVC and PCB,
are burnt at low temperatures. (Dioxins are also formed when other
non-chlorinated substances, such as wood and tobacco, are burnt).
Furthermore, the traditional method of making chlorine involves mercury, and
small but sometimes dangerous quantities of the metal are emitted as waste
into rivers and seas.
But chlorine is an integral part of modern life and contributes to the
health and wealth of society. Its disinfectant properties, for example, are
unsurpassed in the treatment of drinking water. This is especially true in
developing countries where alternative methods, such as ultra-violet light
and ozone, are not practical.
In 1991 the total production of chlorine in Europe was 9m tonnes, giving the
industry an estimated worth of between ECU 100-120m a year, according to
Euro Chlor.
Only small amounts of elemental chlorine are sold on the open market. Most
of the production goes straight to an associated plant that uses the
chemical to produce other products. About half of the European production is
used to make plastics.
The most popular plastic is PVC, which is made by reacting ethylene -
derived from oil with chlorine. PVC is used, among other things, as
packaging, to insulate electrical equipment and to make window frames. Other
plastic made with the use of chlorine include polyurethanes, polycarbonates
and epoxy resins.
Chlorine is also used as an intermediate in the production of titanium
dioxide (the white pigment in paint and toothpaste) and silicones.
Chlorinated solvents, such as perchloroethylene and methyl chloroform, are
widely used as cleaning agents in industry.
Only a small amount (not more than 6 per cent) of the world's total chlorine
production is used to purify water.
Environmental campaigners have successfully highlighted the possible health
risks from the use and disposal of some chlorinated products. Among these
are the creation of dioxins when PVC is burnt in municipal incinerators and
the production of potentially harmful byproducts when chlorine reacts with
other substances in the environment.
The industry has answers for most of the accusations made against it, but
the campaigners' position is strengthened by chlorine's involvement in
pollution incidents where there is no disagreement about the environmental
damage caused. These include CFC's role in the depletion of the ozone layer
and the harmful affect of DDT and PCBs.
'The chlorine industry is aware now that the end of the road is nigh - it
just depends on how long they can spin it out,' says Ms Madeleine Cobbing of
Greenpeace.
Mr Harriman says it will be difficult for the industry to find new uses for
chlorine to replace the eroded parts of its market. 'In the paper and pulp
market the environmental lobby has certainly won.'
But he says the environmental pressures have yet to break the historical
cycle of the chlorine market. 'The perception that chlorine is in decline is
incorrect. For example, the recent upturn in the US economy has already
increased the demand for chlorine there to a point where it is outstripping
supply.'
