THE GOVERNMENT'S reform of local government in Scotland could well produce a
more efficient, comprehensible structure than that which exists.
But while there was rejoicing in several parts of Scotland that some old
authorities are to be recreated, the exercise could be marred by a
widespread perception that the Conservatives have drawn up many of the
boundaries to suit their own party interests.
The government argues that a move from the two-tier structure of nine
regions and 53 district councils (plus three unitary island authorities) is
justified because many people are confused about what functions are catered
for by the regions and what comes under the districts. Many still talk of
living in Ayrshire or Perthshire - although officially these areas no longer
exist.
Some dispassionate observers of Scottish local government argue that after
the contracting out of many council services it has become a democratic
necessity for communities to have a single, easily identified council.
But they find it difficult to avoid a political interpretation of what the
government is doing in Scotland. Unlike in England there was no independent
commission to decide the new boundaries.
A consultant involved in the process said: 'The government's paramount aim
in this reform was to abolish Strathclyde. The Scottish Office found it
irritatingly independent. For the Conservatives it was irredeemably Labour.'
Lothian region, which includes and surrounds Edinburgh, has also long been
in Tory sights as an irritant. But its size is modest compared with
Strathclyde.
It is in the detail of the new map that the government is vulnerable to the
charge of gerrymandering. Professor Alan Alexander of Strathclyde University
said: 'I know of no local government reform in which the government does not
protect its own territory. But there are some highly questionable things
here.'
He pointed to the disparities in population among the new councils, with
those that might be expected to come under Tory control being much smaller
than adjoining units likely to go to Labour.
'It looks like the kind of gerrymandering they did when they drew up the
borders of the US,' he said. 'You herd all your enemies into a corner.'
It is possible, he thought, that after 1996 Labour would cease to dominate
the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which represents local
government to the Scottish Office.
'After reorganisation there may be only 12 Labour-controlled councils,' he
said. 'They could be outnumbered by a combination of Tory-held authorities
and the rural areas which are not organised on party political lines. Yet
the number of people living in Labour-held councils may well outnumber the
rest.'
On the future of Scotland's water industry, the government has deflated the
opposition by saying that the ownership and operation of water services will
remain in the public sector, under three new authorities. Currently water is
in the hands of the nine regions and three island authorities.
Tremendous opposition had built up to the idea of privatising water in
Scotland and even the franchising of services to the private sector was
unpopular. There was talk of refusing to pay water bills, civil
disobedience, even sabotage.
Scottish Conservatives are almost as strongly opposed to privatisation as
the opposition parties. An opinion poll in May showed only 2 per cent of
those asked favouring privatisation, compared with 95 per cent who opposed
it.
The government has avoided controversy for now by leaving the issue shrouded
in generalisations.
