BRITAIN'S nuclear industry experienced an uncomfortable winter awaiting the
results of the UK's coal review. It emerged intact, and arguably fortified.
Now it must go under the microscope, and this time there is much more at
stake.
As part of the coal review the government brought forward by a year the
nuclear review which it promised in 1989 when it decided, or was rather
forced by the City, to keep the industry in the public sector rather than
privatise it along with the rest of the electricity sector.
The government is expected to publish the terms of reference within the next
few months and to launch the review later in the year. Environmentalists
fear that the wide-ranging debate they have long hoped for will not
materialise.
Nonetheless the review will set the framework and could decide whether
Britain should build a Sizewell C nuclear station in succession to the
Sizewell B station, in Suffolk, to be completed next year.
Separately, the nuclear industry is to learn - it hopes before the start of
the nuclear review - whether it can commission the Thorp nuclear processing
plant in Sellafield. A second public inquiry, following the first in the
1970s, is conceivable if unlikely for the Pounds 2.8bn plant which has
orders, many from overseas, worth Pounds 9bn for the first decade.
Nuclear industry executives go into this period of uncertainty armed with
what they feel is ample evidence of the value of nuclear power.
Improved efficiency has helped Scottish Nuclear, one of the two state-owned
nuclear electricity producers in the UK, to increase its output from 12.2
terawatt hours three years ago to 14.3 last year, a 25 per cent increase
achieved from the same plant, and it expects 15.1 twh this year.
Two years ago it cost 3.2p to generate a unit (kilowatt hour) of
electricity, but that is now down to less than 3p and the target for 1994-5
is 2.5p.
Meanwhile, Nuclear Electric, SN's much larger equivalent in England and
Wales, has increased its share of the electricity market there to 23 per
cent, up from 16 per cent in 1989-90. Staffing levels are falling fast, from
14,200 at the start of the decade to about 9,400 by next March.
According to Dr Robin Jeffrey, Scottish Nuclear chief executive, one of the
main tasks he and and his colleagues have to perform in the nuclear review
is to tell the world that output and efficiency are going up and costs down.
'We have a successful story to tell,' he says.
The environment lobby disagrees, and is pressing for the review to be more
wide-ranging than the government has indicated it will be. Dr Patrick Green,
a Friends of the Earth campaigner, believes ministers want to limit the
review to whether the 'market' wishes to build new power stations.
That means, he says, that aspects including waste management,
decommissioning, financial controls and government cover for future
liabilities, will be brushed aside. That is a mistake, he says. 'It is
certain that before the private capital markets even begin to contemplate
seriously the prospects of investment in new nuclear power stations,
potential investors will want to know who will be responsible for covering
risks and liabilites.'
Behind this lies the belief among environmentalists that the UK is already
seriously undercovered for future liabilities. FoE puts financial liability
associated with the UK's existing civil nuclear installations at Pounds
30bn, nearly double industry estimates.
In a recent report, The National Audit Office said taxpayers may have to
pick up some of the bill for decommissioning civil nuclear facilities,
notwithstanding the Pounds 1.2bn a year paid by electricity consumers for
the nuclear levy created to meet decommissioning costs.
One fear of Nuclear Electric is that pressure from large electricity
consumers, backed by Offer, the electricity industry regulator, will lead to
a reduction in the levy.
However, on another issue raised in the coal review, that of whether its
eight Magnox stations should be closed early, the company believes it is
safe. 'Magnoxes have been examined thoroughly and we got a result,' says Mr
Bob Hawley, Nuclear Electric chief executive.
'The government says they should keep going for as long as they are economic
and we will be pressing that their lives be extended.'
If it loses the case for extension, Nuclear Electric's share of the England
and Wales market will start to fall in the late 1990s from its likely high
of 25 per cent next year when Sizewell B comes on stream. Scottish Nuclear
will also be pressing for an extension of the life of its Hunterston B
advance gas cooled reactor station. For both companies, however, the crucial
issue is Sizewell C: Nuclear Electric because it will build and own it;
Scottish Nuclear because Sizewell C's go-ahead would increase the chances of
it building a new station, Hunterston C, for commissioning around the middle
of the next decade.
Environmentalists and economists will mount a powerful case against Sizewell
C. Nuclear building moratoriums are in place throughout Europe, often in
countries with far less natural resource alternatives than the UK.
Britain has an energy surfeit for the foreseeable future, and the short term
advantage of gas-fired over nuclear power is overwhelming. The Pounds 3.4bn
cost of building Sizewell C compares with Pounds 290m which PowerGen, a
rival generator, spent on building a station with two fifths of Sizewell C's
projected capacity.
The nuclear industry's response also mixes environmental with economic
considerations. Nuclear power is a necessary ingredient of a balanced energy
policy, it says, because it has no carbon dioxide emissions and can
therefore provide a future for coal, which has. Mr Hawley also argues that
gas prices will rise. 'The nuclear input price is next to nothing,' he says.
'Few people deny that nuclear will be needed two decades from now.'
So why not build the stations then? 'Put Sizewell C off and all project
management skills will go,' says Mr Hawley. Britain would lose countless
opportunities to export its technologies.
In the review the government will need to consider where the money will come
from. With its own resources under pressure from a growing public sector
borrowing requirement, the chances are that it is likely to test the waters
for private funds.
The last time it tried to interest the City in nuclear power it received an
unequivocal negative response, the direct cause of the nuclear review now
being planned. There is little to suggest that financiers have changed their
minds about a nuclear industry in the private sector with what they see as
uncertain liabilities for the past.
