The judge in the Singapore trial of five people accused of breaking the
island republic's Official Secrets Act (OSA) by prematurely disclosing an
official economic growth estimate has ruled that the prosecution has failed
to make a case against one of the accused, but invited the attorney general
to bring an amended charge.
Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, director of the economics department at the
Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS), Singapore's de facto central bank,
had been accused of communicating an official 1992 second-quarter economic
growth estimate of 4.6 per cent to two economists, who are alleged to have
then shared it with a journalist, whose editor published it.
All have pleaded not guilty to the charges, which carry penalties of a
maximum of two years in jail or a SDollars 2,000 (Pounds 840) fine or both.
After a trial which has so far lasted for 24 days, the judge said the
prosecution, led by Singapore's attorney general, had not substantiated its
case against Mr Shanmugaratnam on the charge of communicating the growth
figure. But the judge then invited the attorney general to bring an amended
charge of negligence against the economist.
In a case which has both intrigued and concerned Singapore's financial
community, the prosecution's case has centred on what did, or did not,
happen at a meeting in Mr Shanmugaratnam's office at the MAS in June last
year.
The prosecution has alleged that Mr Shanmugaratnam communicated the estimate
to one of the economists, Mr Manu Bhaskaran at the meeting. Mr Bhaskaran has
said he caught sight of the estimate among Mr Shanmugaratnam's papers.
The prosecution claims that, even if Mr Shanmugaratnam did not communicate
the estimate, his actions amounted to recklessness, chargeable under the
OSA.
Today the court is due to hear from prosecution and defence on how they wish
to proceed in view of the new charge against Mr Shanmugaratnam, after which
the judge is expected to decide if the four other accused have cases to
answer.
