HE IS fed up. As chairman of National Breakdown, a British roadside recovery
company, Ernest Smith does not doubt the wisdom of expanding on the
Continent. But he is sick of the paperwork - and executive time is money.
He calculated it would cost Pounds 4m to Pounds 5m over four years to build
a continental operation. With more than Pounds 2.5m already spent, he thinks
the figure will be nearer Pounds 7m.
So far his company's continental venture, Green Flag, has recruited 6,500
independent garages to provide repair and recovery services and his biggest
headache during the two weeks a month he spends at Green Flag's Strasbourg
headquarters is VAT.
'Suppose a German-owned truck breaks down in Italy, the Italian garage
charges VAT to us in France. The Italian authorities have said we can claim
it back - but they have also told us they will never pay. We, however, have
to charge VAT to the German truck owner, which he pays in France and
reclaims in Germany. But there are different VAT rates all over Europe and,
sometimes, several in the same country.
'It's an absolute bureaucratic nightmare and far worse than anything I
expected. It's taking up half my time.
'The only advantage I can see so far is that I can bring back 100 bottles of
wine every time I fly home to Leeds.'
SALMON RUN
ONE IS 29, Belgian, speaks several languages and moved to Shetland four
years ago. The other is French and has lived on the island for a year. Now,
from a telesales room overlooking Lerwick harbour, Marijke Stallaert and
Alix Cailleaux are helping to mastermind Scotland's penetration of the
continental market for salmon.
They work for Framgord, which markets about half the 10,000 tonnes of salmon
produced in Shetland each year and language skills make them vital to the
export operation.
They find buyers, agree prices and organise the transport of Shetland salmon
to wholesalers and smokeries in France, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Italy and elsewhere. In France, for instance, the words saumon ecossais and
saumon fume ecossais are becoming common on restaurant menus.
FASHION FOLLOWING
'THE abolition of European border controls is a blessing,' says Achille
Maramotti, founder of Italy's Max Mara fashion group.
Lorry-loads of merchandise will no longer get stuck at national borders for
customs clearance.
Swift and reliable delivery is essential for a company which sells in more
than 40 countries, and operates in a sector where missed photo calls at
fashion shows can turn into missed contracts.
Nearly 40 per cent of its turnover goes abroad. Max Mara already produces
clothes in the same sizes for all EC countries and so is ready for
harmonised standards.
