The public reaction to the work of young artists can provide a measure of
our response to the complex and difficult universe of modern art. Perhaps
because their work is by definition 'unknown', its display can give licence
to express an underlying anxiety about the contemporary art world, that
perplexing place where constant contradictions reduce even sophisticated and
erudite commentators to occasional bursts of bile and which nevertheless
these novitiates still choose to enter. Their work bears the burden of our
own anxiety, wary consumers, faced with a new and unknown product. For just
as the artists must make their offerings naked, without benefit of history,
so the viewers must make their judgments likewise, without the comforting
cloak of consensus.
With this in mind, a hostile response to the BT New Contemporaries
exhibition, which began a national tour in Manchester last week, is not in
itself surprising, but it raises questions about our expectations of
artists, and the myths about their genesis, which are worthy of
consideration. The show was chosen by professionals, two artists, Caroline
Russell and Willie Doherty, and the critic Stuart Morgan, and has a 'look',
a homogeneity which suggests not so much a similarity of original offerings
but the inevitable consensus reached in hammering out a final selection of
27 exhibitors from an open slide submission which attracted more than 1,000
entries. For all the works, however different in form, are couched in the
common language of these difficult times, a language in which no object or
offering is innocent, but comes loaded with references both to history and
the cultural stew of the present.
Thus 'The Hooded Pitohui (Shit Painting 2)' by Chris Ofili, combines his
remaking of Australian Aboriginal paintings with abstraction and the irony
of Piero Manzoni, as well as demonstrating considerable painterly panache.
Another gifted painter is Laura Daly, whose large abstracts feature
multicoloured dashes of paint arranged in vertical columns on single
coloured backgrounds, evoking Jackson Pollock and Ian Davenport, an old
master and a young pro, in a teasing mixture. The references of some of the
other works are more elusive. Objects, whether found or created, are used to
convey resonance, although their meaning may never be quite clear. The fat
white candle lying on the floor with a leather belt round its middle by
Andrew Bannister entitled 'Fuse' plays with sexuality as dynamite, while his
'Cell,' a wall panel made of white ceramic tiles with an inset photograph of
a room, empty but for a white draped bed, suggests isolation and menace.
As well as this reliance on the inherent mysteriousness of objects to lend
substance where content remains obscure, the exhibitors also demonstrate a
need for drama. Edwin David in 'Towards a Museum of Misreading' assembles a
shotgun, a plinth, a reproduction of Rossetti's 'Rape of Proserpine', a
quote from Freud, a chair, a pomegranate and a pile of broken glass to
suggest a museum incident of unknown significance. Edward Harper goes for it
more directly, arranging some green struts, floorboards and a silver salver
on the gallery floor to impersonate Manet's 'The Balcony.' Those spurious
philosophers of our time, the serial killers, also make a guest appearance.
'Handshake with Nilsen, Using Projector, Draws Olympia to the Phone' by
Thomas Sharpe combines a shaky drawing of the famous murderer of young men
with the image of 'Twin Peaks' star Sherilyn Fenn cut into flesh coloured
PVC dotted with plastic toy noses, an array of references bedazzling in its
lunatic range.
Why such weird variety? Why should a mass murderer be as inspiring as a
great painter? It is simple, really. Not for a century or so have visual
artists typically served apprenticeships in a master's studio, learning to
paint or sculpt while assisting in the manufacture of commissions. The
'apprenticeship' of an art student today is likely to be a more lonely
journey, often conducted in a makeshift 'space' staked out within the rooms
of an institution the nature and even name of which may have undergone
several changes during the student's time of attendance. With few immediate
fixed parameters, a young artist's boundaries, the things against which
skill and understanding must be tested, inevitably stretch both infinitely
outwards across the ocean of mass media culture which engulfs us all, and
deep within, with intuition alone guiding the choice of subject and
material.
The mixed media panels by Marcus Coates offer a touching image of the
complexity of allusion and aspiration which may result from a position at
once so knowledgeable and so vulnerable. He has taken details of two
paintings of women by Jan Van Eyck and blown them up photographically,
separating head-dress from head and head from body. The delicate features
thus unadorned gaze out from above his own naked torso, substituted for the
original sumptuously costumed body. His skill has allowed this young artist
to enter history, paraphrasing the masterpiece in the questioning technology
of our times.
BT New Contemporaries, Cornerhouse, Manchester, until 1 August. Cornerhouse,
70, Oxford Street, Manchester, M1 5NH. Tel 061 228 7621. Touring to Derry,
Sheffield, Stoke on Trent and Glasgow
