SPAIN will cut interest rates by 1 1/2 percentage points today after
devaluing the peseta 8 per cent in the fifth European currency realignment
since last September's monetary crisis.
The Spanish move, accompanied by a 6.5 per cent devaluation of the
Portuguese escudo, took European currency markets by surprise, just three
weeks before Spain's general election on June 6.
In London, Mr John Major, the prime minister, chose a day of new instability
in the European exchange rate mechanism to express the government's strong
reluctance to bringing the pound back into the ERM. Asked in the House of
Commons to make it clear that Britain would not return to 'fixed exchange
rates' by Mr Toby Jessel, a Tory Eurosceptic, Mr Major said the government
would not 'even begin to consider' whether to rejoin the ERM until the
requirements of German and UK monetary policy were 'much more closely in
line'.
The upheaval within the European monetary system comes just five days before
the crucial second Danish referendum on the Maastricht treaty.
Following the peseta and escudo devaluations, the Danish krone weakened
slightly inside the ERM amid fears that the Danes may again vote No to the
treaty.
But other currencies remained unchanged, including the French franc, in
spite of the Bank of France's decision to cut its two main interest rates by
 1/4 percentage point.
The main cause of yesterday's Spanish devaluation was heavy peseta selling
pressure which has caused a sharp fall in the Bank of Spain's reserves.
The Madrid government yesterday morning requested its European Community
partners to agree a devaluation, which was subsequently worked out at a
meeting of the EC's monetary committee in Brussels.
Portugal reluctantly agreed to accompany the devaluation, in a bid to remain
competitive with Spain, its biggest trading partner.
The devaluation, together with the cut in the Bank of Spain's main money
market intervention rate to 11 1/2 per cent from 13 per cent, will bring
some relief to the hard-pressed economy. But the sudden collapse of the
Spanish socialist government's resolve to resist speculative pressure was
fiercely criticised by Spanish employers.
The CEOE, the Spanish employers' organisation which strongly supports the
opposition conservative party, said the devaluation  - the peseta's third
downward move since September  - showed 'the failure of economic policy'.
The CEOE said the government 'had to seek a new devaluation, after having
used up most of our foreign exchange reserves to maintain the exchange rate
and after having held interest rates at unsustainable levels.' Spanish
economists believe Spain may have spent up to Dollars 35bn (Pounds 22.7bn)
since last November to support the peseta. Although the Bank of Spain
officially says that its reserves are around Dollars 45bn, the bank has been
intervening in support of the peseta by buying the currency forward.
Analysts believe that this may have reduced reserves overall to less than
Dollars 20bn.
The foreign exchange markets have been buffeted by rumours of unusual Bank
of Spain transactions in currency options, as part of measures to shore up
the peseta.
The Bank of Spain last night denied any such activities, denouncing rumours
of this as acts of disinformation. Mr Carlos Solchaga, the Spanish finance
minister, said it had been impossible to fight against a market focusing not
on economic fundamentals but on election uncertainty.
The move is likely to reinforce concern in Brussels about the effect of
competitive devaluations on the prospects for European economic and monetary
union, already damaged by doubts about the future of the Maastricht treaty.
However, in a curt statement, officials described the devaluations as a
routine matter reached through mutual agreement, implicitly confirming the
recent conclusion of EC central bankers that the ERM does not need
fundamental reform.
The ERM tensions were discussed in three separate telephone conferences
yesterday among the 12 European Community governors.
One central banker said: 'Everyone was adamant that the peseta and the
escudo stay inside the system.'
Page 2
Exchange rate machismo
Election pressure eases
Exporters pleased
French interest rates reduced
Editorial Comment, Page 17
Capital markets, Page 29
Lex, Page 18
Currencies, Page 31
World Stocks, Page 37
