A Belgian law which laid down different methods for calculating pension
payments depending on the sex of the recipient was declared to be
discriminatory and contrary to European Community law despite the fact that
the retirement age of 60 was the same for men and women.
The case arose in the context of a preliminary reference from the Antwerp
employment tribunal. Under Belgian law, pension rights were calculated on
the basis of the number of years worked; this could not be higher than 45
for a man and 40 for a woman. The amount of the pension was fixed on the
basis of a percentage of the individual's earnings.
However, for the years worked before 1955, the amount fixed was a standard
sum. The male applicant was given his pension on the basis of 45 years'
work, nine of which were pre-1955. Had the applicant been female only four
of the 'standard' years would have been taken into account and the recipient
would have received a higher pension.
The court held that EC social security provisions prohibited discrimination
based on the sex of the individual when calculating benefits. The system
under Belgian law was discriminatory on this basis. The court also held that
the Belgian system did not fall within the exceptions laid down in the
relevant EC provisions.
The Court reiterated that the article in the EC directive laying down the
principle of non-discrimination was of direct effect; and it had been so
from the date set down for its implementation into national law. People
discriminated against, it said, had the right to be treated the same as
those who were at present favoured by national legislation.
C-154/92: Remi van Cant v Rijksdienst voor pensloenen, ECJ, July 1 1993
Parallel imports and the EC- Austria Free Trade Agreement
In a recent case, the Court was requested by a national court in Germany to
give a preliminary ruling on the issue of parallel imports from Austria to
Germany. This required the interpretation of certain provisions in the
EC-Austria Free Trade Agreement.
The case concerned parallel imports of a medicine from Austria to Germany.
The medicine had been made and sold in Germany. It was also exported by the
manufacturer to Austria, where it was sold by the manufacturer's Austrian
company.
A German parallel importer wanted to sell the same product in Germany by
importing it from Austria. The only difference between the imported product
and the domestic one was that the former would display a label with the
importer's name and address.
The importer sought permission for sale in Germany from the domestic
authorities. Documents showing that the product was identical to the
domestic product were lodged in support of the application. Under German
law, it was also necessary to produce evidence on the manufacture of the
product and quality control methods. The importer referred to the
manufacturer's evidence on these points, which had been lodged with the
national authorities.
Authorisation was refused on the grounds that insufficient evidence had been
produced. The matter was brought before a Berlin court, from where a
reference was sent to the ECJ.
The ECJ held that the provisions relating to the free movement of goods in
the EC-Austria Free Trade Agreement, which are identical to the
corresponding provisions in the EC treaty, should be construed as
prohibiting such action by the national authorities.
The British and Italian governments argued that, although the refusal to
grant the relevant authorisation was contrary to the provisions in the EC
treaty, the same could not be said when interpreting the provisions in the
free trade agreement. This was because the free trade agreement did not
envisage legislative harmonisation measures in the pharmaceutical sector.
This argument was rejected by the ECJ.
C-207/91: Eurim-Pharm Gmbh v Bundesgesundheitsamt, ECJ 5CH, July 1 1993
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS
