RUSTING PIPES, broken-down pumps and disintegrating infrastructure have for
years been the physical signs of Peru's declining oil industry. From the
eastern jungles to the coastal desert of the north-west it is a picture of
decay. Production dwindled from a peak of 71.4m barrels in 1980 to below 40m
barrels in 1991, and proven reserves slumped from 900m barrels to less than
400m.
But, as in the mining sector, there are signs of a reversal of fortunes.
Production of crude petroleum rose one per cent last year to 115,000 b/d,
and the government expects a rise of about 10 per cent in 1993 to 127,000
b/d, or 46.5m barrels over the year.
Much of that results from increased production at Occidental Petroleum of
the US, which has recently committed itself to investing more than Dollars
30m in new exploration after settlement of a long-running payments dispute
with state-owned oil concern Petro Peru.
The financial situation of Petro Peru itself has been made healthier by the
August 1990 liberalisation of petrol prices, which has provided a greater
profit incentive for investment in maintenance and exploration for new
reserves. Eventually the government intends to privatise the state group,
which may be split into as many as 40 operating units.
Changing attitudes to the petroleum industry have been consolidated in a new
hydrocarbons law which seeks to make Peru more attractive to foreign
investors. Companies, whose exploration and production contracts will be on
a surer footing, will market their oil output as they see fit. Restrictions
on exploring within 30 miles of Peruvian frontiers have also been lifted.
'The new law is very sound,' says Mr Roger Alderson, general manager at
Great Western Resources of Houston. 'It simplifies the old regulations,
replacing 33 separate statutes. Now, probably for the first time ever,
Peruvians have accepted that they need foreign investment.'
It looks as though new attitudes may pay off. Peru, which has drilled only
eight wells in the past two years against 100 in Argentina, is witnessing
increased exploration.
Great Western has committed Dollars 40m over four years to explore 1m
hectares in the jungle, while American International Petroleum is spending
at least Dollars 12m over two years on offshore drilling. Mobil Oil is
currently undertaking technical evaluation of the Madre de Dios region in
the southern jungle. Mr Alderson expects significant discoveries in the next
few years which, he says, could easily see the restoration of 1980 output
levels.
There is also renewed interest in the enormous Camisea gas field in Cuzco,
which has estimated reserves equivalent to 2bn barrels of oil, plus 700m
barrels of condensates. Shell, which abandoned plans to develop the resource
in 1988 after failure to agree terms with the Garcia government, is reported
to be looking at the project again.
It is estimated that Camisea would require investment of Dollars 1.8bn to
harness its full potential, though it might be possible to phase in
production with initial sales to the local market.
In the hydrocarbons sector generally, smaller petroleum companies have so
far shown more interest in Peruvian investments than their larger
counterparts, a pattern seen in neighbouring Colombia. However, in an annual
survey of international oil companies conducted earlier this year by Simon
Petroleum Technology, Peru jumped to 17th on the world list of attractive
investment propositions. Three years ago it stood at 37.
Mr Alderson believes it could climb as high as eighth by next year.
'There used to be - and still is to a certain extent - enormous trepidation
about coming to Peru,' he says. 'But now it appears that the country is
turning the corner.'
