NATIONAL Westminster Bank, Commerzbank of Germany and Societe Generale of
France yesterday announced that they had signed agreements to develop joint
services including easier cross-border payments for corporate customers.
The banks, which disclosed earlier this year that they had entered talks,
said they were putting in place reciprocal arrangements to streamline
account opening procedures and grant local credit facilities at each partner
banks.
The banks are also working on a cross-border payments system for low value
payments. This is due to be launched early next year. NatWest said the
network was likely to work through each country's clearing system.
The announcement comes as European banks are developing links with each
other rather than buying branch networks. Royal Bank of Scotland and Banco
Santander have formed a cross-border payments system with two other banks.
Mr Martin Kohlhaussen, Commerzbank's chief executive, said the new
association would set 'a good example for a new form of co-operation between
major European banks.' He said he expected other banks to join the
association, stressing that this was not intended to be the 'core of a new
banking group' but rather 'a specific co-operation concentrating on
particular business areas.'
Lord Alexander, NatWest's chairman, said the initiative would 'cut through
much of the bureaucracy involved in establishing cross-border banking
relationships.'
The agreements follow from the failure of more ambitious plans for a link-up
between Credit Lyonnais, the large French state-owned bank whose logo
Commerzbank still carries.
Credit Lyonnais went on to buy majority control of BfG Bank, Germany's sixth
biggest bank, for DM1.2bn (Pounds 460m) last year.
Dresdner Bank, Germany's second largest bank, has forged a co-operation
agreement with Banque Nationale de Paris. Under the agreement, the two banks
will co-operate when expanding into third countries and will rely on each
other's domestic branch networks in France and Germany.
The plan is for the two banks to take 10 per cent shareholdings in each
other, depending on the outcome of plans to privatise the 70-per cent
state-owned BNP.
