BRUCE KEAN, the outgoing boss of Boral, could be said to be ending his days
in style.
By the time he leaves the Australian building materials group in January, Mr
Kean will have neatly executed a ADollars 830m (USDollars 552m) takeover
bid, overseen the Dollars 245m flotation of the group's manufacturing
interests, orchestrated management changes, and hopefully reported a
sustained resumption in profits growth.
He will then hand over the reins to a unexpectedly dynamic successor - Mr
Tony Berg, the former head of Australia's Macquarie Bank.
Given that this is Boral, long-regarded as a drearily mature corporate
earner whose broader strategy has often been found wanting, the flurry of
activity is something of a surprise. For analysts, it comes not a moment too
soon.
Mr Kean himself readily acknowledges that change had become imperative at
Boral. The company, he says, realised in the course of the recent recession
that construction industry cycles at home and abroad were becoming
synchronised. This meant that previous international diversification - into
the US, in particular - offered little protection against a slump in demand
in its core Australian market. 'The whole world went into recession - so
here we were, with a strategy to dampen the cycles, actually accentuating
the cycles.'
For the first time in its history, Boral experienced slumping earnings. Net
operating profits, ahead of extraordinary items, fell from ADollars 322.2m,
to ADollars 211.4m in 1991-1992 and then to ADollars 152m in the following
year. North America produced losses, while returns in Australia were
depressed. Mr Kean denies that the group ever felt subject to a takeover
threat, but a rethink was plainly required.
Boral's chosen path - the ADollars 830m takeover of Sagasco, the
Adelaide-based gas group - actually expands the company's involvement in an
area it has dabbled with for years. Boral's name is an acronym for Bitumen
Oil Refinery Australia Limited, and oil refining was its original
occupation.
'User-related' businesses - from brickworks to gasworks - were then added,
and the refinery itself was eventually sold. Funds were invested into the
building materials side instead, but energy remained a small part of the
group.
The reason for ploughing funds into the gas business now are twofold. The
first is the desire to stabilise earnings. 'We had to have something that
was stable, less cyclical than the construction business,' says Mr Kean.
Analysts add that the possible downturn for the housing market by 1995 may
have provided extra urgency.
Secondly, commercial prospects for Australia's gas industry - once heavily
regulated, costly and fragmented between the states - have improved
significantly as governments have pursued pro-competition, pro-privatisation
policies. 'Things have changed on the energy side,' comments Mr Kean.
'Governments have been privatising gas utilities, the shareholder
restrictions on gas utilities are being removed. The federal government has
been pushing for deregulation of the natural gas industry, looking for free
interstate movements.'
The most recent example of this occured a fortnight ago, when Queensland
agreed to supply gas to South Australia, and the latter then agreeing to
pass ethane on to ICI's petrochemical plant in Botany Bay. As a result of
this evolving process, growth in natural gas consumption in Australia is
forecast to outstrip significantly the growth in energy consumption
generally for the next decade.
By buying Sagasco, Boral obtains large production interests in SA's Cooper
Basin and elsewhere, in addition to the Adelaide-based gas company which
currently supplies about 292,000 domestic customers and 9,000 businesses.
The cost of the deal, meanwhile, will be partly offset by the flotation of
the manufacturing operations, detailed yesterday.
But matters will not end here. Boral is widely expected to acquire more gas
businesses down the road - probably in Victoria, where there has been talk
of privatising Gas and Fuel Corporation, or Western Australia. 'I see this
as the first of three chess moves,' says one BZW analyst. 'With Sagasco we
now have the critical mass to make the next, bigger bid in the energy
industry for Gas and Fuel Corporation or SECWA in Western Australia,'
confirms Mr Kean.
The domestic gas industry is not the extent of Boral's ambitions, either.
The aim, says Mr Kean, is to create a group with income derived equally from
Australian building materials, Australian energy, and building materials
interests overseas. The latter, in turn, would split evenly between North
America, Europe and Asia.
Boral has a way to go in meeting this objective. Sagasco means that energy
will account for about one-fifth of earnings, and future energy-related
purchases should lift this further.
But there is a recognised need to expand on the overseas building materials
front too - especially in Asia and Europe. 'In the mature markets, Europe
and North America, it will be by acquisition,' says Kean, mentioning that
the group is looking at an possible deal in the Czech Republic. In Asia,
operations are more likely to be grown by 'greenfield' investment. Current
plans include a gypsum board factory in Indonesia, and aluminium window
plants in Vietnam and Indonesia.
Achieving the three-fold split will be up to Mr Berg - who arrives at Boral
with a Harvard MBA, a background in investment banking, and a much-respected
record at Macquarie Bank. One analyst estimates that his appointment has
already added about ADollars 200-ADollars 300m to Boral's market
capitalisation. The stockmarket, at least, seems convinced that activity is
set to continue.
