JUST a few weeks ago, Germany's flourishing waste disposal industry was
reported to be one of only two sectors in the entire economy showing any
optimism about prospects for the coming year.
Today, the industry is under attack from two directions.
The feisty Federal Cartel Office in Berlin says it is opening proceedings
against the Duales System Deutschland (DSD), the nationwide rubbish
recycling venture, for seeking to extend its monopoly position from consumer
packaging to the business sector.
At the same time a leading parliamentarian has charged that the big
electricity utilities, led by RWE and VEW, are buying up small
waste-disposal contractors, and rapidly bringing the industry under their
control by the back door.
Caught in the middle are the 16 Lander governments who, it transpires, have
actually been encouraging the monopoly process. It was they who asked DSD to
extend its operations from house-to-house collection of packaging, into the
small business sector.
The cartel office says it has long been concerned about the monopoly
position of DSD in collecting and recycling consumer packaging. However, the
monopoly is effectively written into the packaging law passed by the
Bundestag last year, so the cartel office has been forced to accept it.
Since December, however, DSD has moved into the collection of packaging from
small businesses, hotels, restaurants and hospitals, which are not covered
by the packaging law. That is now the subject of the cartel action.
DSD, covering more than 600 of Germany's largest consumer manufacturers,
packaging companies and packers, runs the 'green point' system to organise
recycling of packaging. Companies pay a fee to print a green point on their
cartons and containers, which are then eligible to be collected and
recycled. Companies which are not signed on to the system are required to
arrange for the disposal or recycling of their packaging themselves.
'We tolerate the DSD monopoly in collecting household packaging, because the
legislature decided the system would not work otherwise,' Mr Jurgen Kiecker
of the cartel office said. 'We are not prepared to tolerate them moving into
the business area.'
The other charge against the industry has been raised by Mr Reinhard Gohner,
chairman of the constitutional commission of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Christian Democrats. He summoned a press conference to accuse RWE, the
Essen-based semi-state electricity utility, of leading a move to effectively
re-nationalise the waste disposal industry, sold off by local authorities in
the 1970s.
He said that RWE had bought 70 such contractors in the last four years.
The cartel office has also confirmed that it is concerned at the rapid
concentration of contractors collecting and processing waste on behalf of
DSD. But the degree of concentration had not, so far, undermined competition
in the industry.
'We are watching the situation closely,' Mr Kiecker said.
