INDIA and Russia yesterday resolved a 15-year-long debt dispute which has
marred relations between the two countries since the collapse of the former
Soviet Union.
President Boris Yeltsin and Mr PV Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister,
agreed that repayment of India's Rs380bn (Pounds 8.2bn) debt to the former
Soviet Union would be based on exchange rates which would reduce the total
amount, and that repayments would be stretched over about 45 years.
Mr Yeltsin, on a three-day visit to India, had cordial talks with Mr Rao as
part of a bid to improve relations which have suffered since the collapse of
Soviet communism, with Delhi turning towards the United States. He expressed
support for India on issues such as its dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir.
The Soviet Union had allowed India to make payments in rupees. But
depreciation of the rouble had made unrealistic Russia's demands for
repayment of debts built up in this way, Indian officials said.
'The rupee-rouble settlement will allow us to establish meaningful bilateral
relations, starting afresh,' an Indian official said.
Under the agreement, details of which were being worked out last night, 63
per cent of the debt will be repaid at the January 1, 1990 rate of Rs19.9
per rouble, and the remainder at the Rs31.57 rate of April 1, 1992.
The two countries have also signed 10 agreements on the second day of
President Yeltsin's visit, including a treaty of friendship and
co-operation, defence co-operation, trade, narcotics control, security, and
co-operation in the fields of science and technology, culture, and
information.
Mr Sharad Pawar, Indian defence minister and his Russian counterpart, Mr
Pavel Grachev, signed a comprehensive defence agreement to guarantee supply
of defence equipment, spares, product support and services needed for the
maintenance, repair and modernisation of frontline Russian armament deployed
by the Indian armed forces.
A defence ministry official said the defence agreement would boost India's
defence preparedness and relieve a crisis of spare parts of the Russian
defence equipment that India heavily relied upon, such as the MiG-29 fighter
aircraft, the upgraded T-72M tanks, mobile anti-aircraft missile systems,
warship missile spares and other ranges of Russian helicopters and giant
transport aircraft.
India and Russia also signed four trade agreements on the modalities of
counter-trade, debt repayment, utilisation of technical credit, and India's
repayment for machinery and equipment from the erstwhile Soviet Union.
Under the counter-trade agreement, persons from either country would be free
to import and export goods and services on the basis of any
internationally-recognised form of business co-operation.
