Sailors are finding the pain barrier at least as relevant as boatspeed when
it comes to driving the Whitbread 60 class. 'It was very wet, very cold and
very dangerous. I wouldn't wish it on anyone,' said Andrew Cape, navigator
of second-placed Tokio, when he stepped ashore in Fremantle at the finish of
the Whitbread second leg.
His colleague, watch-leader Matt Smith, stood barefoot enjoying a cold beer
and the Aussie sunshine. It was first time he had had his fleece-lined
seaboots off since the leg began.
The watch running into the finish was the first without the crew muffled in
foul-weather gear.
'I hate the Southern Ocean,' cursed Winston skipper Brad Butterworth as he
stepped ashore. 'Foggy, rainy. An incredibly bleak and stupid place. No
wonder there's no one down there.'
Tokio is still race-leader, her first leg lead chipped away when Intrum
Justitia finished, two hours ahead of her.
Skipper Chris Dickson was happy to confirm that his tactics were
ultra-cautious through the 7,500 miles of the Southern Ocean.
'In our boat we were very, very conservative. Every time it blew over 40
knots of wind, we'd see Intrum gain between 10 and 20 miles on us in a
six-hour period. After two high-speed broaches which we didn't enjoy at all,
we'd just take the foot off the pedal.'
Probably the worst weather of the leg came a week ago on the night
Brooksfield, the Italian entry, began to sink.
With over 60 knots of wind across the deck Tokio was sailing with no
headsail and just a deep-reefed main. Nevertheless, the lightweight sloop
was still making 15 knots - and according to the next day's satellite
position check had gained on several rivals which had pressed on regardless
and suffered sail and equipment damage.
Intrum, skippered by British helmsman Lawrie Smith, had led the W60 fleet
since leaving Uruguay 25 days ago. During that period she broke the world
speed record for a 24 hour run, covering 425 sea miles. Yet her biggest
trial came two days from the finish just off the West Australian coast.
'We just found a hole between us and Australia,' said navigator Marcel van
Triest, explaining how the yacht drove into a windless localised
high-pressure system that saw boat speed fall to under two knots. Tokio
closed from over 80 miles astern to 19.
'We deserved a bigger lead than two hours. It was pretty frustrating to see
two weeks work eaten away like that,' said Smith. His victory was all the
sweeter for having been achieved against the odds.
Intrum's original skipper Roger Nilson pulled out of the race on medical
grounds. Smith was hired and joined the yacht just days before she left
Uruguay. Morale was a little wobbly after a disappointing first leg that
left the well-funded and highly-organised yacht to finish in fifth place.
'He was very quiet at first, joining each watch and observing how people
performed before making any moves,' said navigator Marcel van Triest.
'Lawrie got respect from the crew because of his capacities as a sailor not
because he was imposed by a sponsor.'
However, it was van Triest's contribution that gave Intrum her vital break.
The destruction in a gale of the vital mid-size gennaker meant that by the
half-way point of Prince Edward Island, Intrum's slender lead over Tokio was
being eaten away to less than two miles.
'As we rounded Prince Edward they had us on visual and we had to get away,'
recalled Smith. 'Marcel said to go south, although it put us on the wrong
gybe and I wasn't too happy about it.'
'I said we had a two-thirds chance of gaining 20 miles and a one third
chance of losing 10, so Lawrie said do it,' said van Triest. 'Then he moaned
about the decision the whole night.'
Van Triest emerged from the leg with his professional reputation sky-high.
Intrum caught a ride on a localised low pressure system and was 50 miles in
front by dawn.
'We could see their sails down to the south just racing away from us and
there was nothing we could do,' said Dickson. In the context of the race
overall, his own performance was near faultless.
'We started this leg with a 10-hour lead over Galicia Pescanova who were
lying second, and we're now 15 hours up on them, so we feel we have
improved,' added Dickson.
Merit Cup, the maxi-ketch skippered by Swiss helmsman Pierre Fehlmann, was
the first of the maxi-class to finish, with an elapsed time of 25 days 21
hours 11 minutes, 44 minutes behind Yamaha.
New Zealand Endeavour, Merit's only serious rival in the five-boat maxi
fleet, came in one hour and 46 minutes later. It was a more than creditable
performance for a yacht that lost the upper 6m of her mizzen mast halfway
through the leg.
Having crossed the line eight hours and 22 minutes ahead of Merit on the
first leg, NZ Endeavour skipper Grant Dalton has finished Part Two of this
33,000-mile epic in much better shape than he could reasonably have expected
and still comfortably leading his division.
Dalton's thesis that one of the outdated but still powerful 80ft maxis could
lead the lightweight W60 class around the world remains unproven.
Without her full sail area NZ Endeavour struggled in lighter air but her
highly-experienced Kiwi crew still did a remarkable job to bring the wounded
boat to the line well in touch with the race leaders.
