In Singapore, the thrusting island state which has one of the busiest ports
in the world, the daily pace of international commerce is being speeded up
by electronics.
Instead of wading through mounds of paper, users of its TradeNet system  - a
nationwide electronic data interchange network (EDI) linking manufacturers,
shipping agents, freight forwarders, traders and government agencies - can
cut hours and even days off the processing of import and export deals. By
saving time, they also save money.
Since governments and companies around the world are constantly seeking ways
of staying competitive in tough markets, Singapore has obtained an extra
technological edge with TradeNet which has significantly increased the
efficiency of trading in Singapore. Under the system, a user can send an
electronic document to relevant government agencies and have it returned
with approvals within half an hour.
A cargo agent who receives within minutes his 'electronic approvals' for
import and export declarations can handle consignments for customers on
short notice, while a competitor would have to wait two or three days for
written approvals from various government departments. The
computer-to-computer exchange of business documents also allows agents to
deliver goods upon arrival, eliminating warehousing costs for temporary
storage.
The sharp rise in efficiency and productivity with the use of EDI is
benefiting the financial performance of many Singapore companies. Although
there has not been a detailed study on the benefits of TradeNet, Pearleen
Chan, managing director of Singapore Network Services, responsible for the
state's electronic network services, told a recent conference in Vancouver
that the success of TradeNet translated into savings of SDollars 1bn a year
for the trading community.
That success stems from humble beginnings. In 1988, with an initial
investment of USDollars 10m (Pounds 6.6m), the Singapore government set up a
state-owned company to operate the network. Fifty companies were included in
the early stages, but the group grew so quickly that TradeNet became
self-financing through user fees. In two and a half years, most of the old
government service counters had been shut down because of companies going
electronic.
Chan says the competitive advantage TradeNet brings the Singapore trading
community is so marked that 'if you are not in it, you are out of business'.
The principles of TradeNet are now being extended to other areas including
the medical, legal, real estate and construction sectors. One application in
particular is gaining attention - a local shipping network called PortNet.
Singapore has one of the most active deep-water harbours in the world and
PortNet allows businesses to screen vessel arrivals, departures and berthing
schedules. It also gives shippers the chance to track cargo electronically
in the port area.
Singapore is also making important EDI links beyond its borders. TradeNet is
linked to the Customs Automated Commercial System (ACS) in the US to assist
in the pre-clearance of cargo at its port of destination. In the shipment of
textiles, for example, a test project is under way which permits the
Singapore government to transmit data on their export licences to US
customs. On arrival of the imports, the licence must match the information
sent by the Singapore government; if there are any discrepancies the cargo
is not released.
Elizabeth Durant, acting director of ACS, says the pilot project has
produced excellent results. A formal evaluation with the Singapore
government on the mutual benefits of the system has been completed and ACS
is waiting for the state department to make the formal agreement with
Singapore.
Durant says Singapore was the pilot 'in every sense', especially in the
technical area. Now the infrastructure is in place, her agency would like
more countries to be added. 'It is a great improvement for us,' she
comments. 'It's definitely a permanent thing.'
Singapore has also completed a pilot project to connect with a network in
the Netherlands run by Intis, a privately held company affiliated with the
Rotterdam Port Authority. Willen Van Hezik, director of research at Intis,
says the reaction from the participants in the project was positive and both
parties are working on new business cases to use the EDI link that has been
established.
The success of Singapore's TradeNet has caught the attention of those
working in EDI circles and government planners, in particular in south-east
Asia. Its status as one of the top players in EDI often gives Singapore an
opportunity to fulfil a consulting role to help other countries connect to
global electronic networks.
This is not an easy task. Chan doubts whether any particular model can be
lifted wholesale and implemented in different countries. 'A lot depends on
the culture, the ability of people to work together.' She points to 20
government agencies and various trade associations that co-operated to
establish TradeNet.
Hassan Ansary, executive vice-president of Ports Canada, agrees. Singapore
is often seen as having a government that imposes its direction on its
citizens rather than working by what Ansary calls the 'consensus building'
process that is part of the political make-up of many other nations.
But whatever its politics, Singapore has achieved an impressive competitive
advantage through the astute use of information technology. Ansary does not
feel that Singapore is getting more credit than it deserves. He says the
island nation is setting standards in different areas and they are at the
EDI frontier. Ansary is certain that EDI is the wave of the future, the
question being who will be in the best position to capitalise on it.
As for the future of TradeNet, Chan says the Singapore government likes what
it sees and notes the technology is moving so rapidly that the 'name of the
game is to stay one step ahead'. The next step is now being taken; the
government plans to link electronically all homes, government agencies and
businesses into a fully networked society.
