Given that 1993 was the year when ITV went down the drain, liked what it
found, and stayed there; and when the BBC was preoccupied with
administrative tribulations - the agonies arising from 'Producer Choice',
anxiety over the government's attitude towards the licence fee, the position
of the Director-General who was found to be neither on the BBC staff nor
paying tax in quite the expected manner - it is astounding how many good
programmes there were.
Of course boo-boos, stumers and downright dogs appeared in the usual
quantities. ITV piloted an Anglicised version of that inimitable American
comedy The Golden Girls and, even though we told them that shifting the
action to Sussex and trying to get people such as Wendy Craig to deliver New
York wisecracks in Surbiton accents was a disaster, they persisted and made
a series called Brighton Belles. Then, when it bombed, they had to pull it
out of the schedules.
BBC2 mounted a live 'animal watch' series called Nightshift in which the
degree of wild eyed enthusiasm from the presenters was in inverse proportion
to the amount of activity among the animals. When the pitch of the voices
approached that of hysteria it meant the foxes and badgers had gone to
sleep, and you could safely switch off before the scene cut to some murky
garden where nothing was happening. There was approximately the same amount
of interest in what Channel 4 decided would be the next big spectator sport
after darts (whatever happened to televised darts?) and sumo wrestling
(whatever . . . ). In the event, World Chess: Short v. Kasparov proved
marginally less interesting than watching blancmange set.
Happily, however, it is mainly the pleasures and triumphs which stick in the
memory, and although recent programmes come most readily to mind  - in
drama, for instance, To Play The King and The Buddha Of Suburbia from the
BBC and Cracker from ITV - you find when you go back through the lists that
there have been treasures throughout the year. Staying with drama, Channel
4's Lipstick On Your Collar was not Dennis Potter's best series, yet there
were several set piece musical numbers including 'Unchained Melody' and
'Blue Suede Shoes' which I would happily watch over and over again.
The performance of Honeysuckle Weeks as 12-year-old Kitty in BBC2's Goggle
Eyes, adapted by Deborah Moggach from Anne Fine's book, should win an award
from somebody: she made the emotions of a child whose mother finds herself a
new man vivid and touchingly funny. In Lady Chatterley on BBC1 one of the
Redgrave clan, Joely Richardson, set a trend in getting her kit off which
was followed later in the year by cousin Jemma Redgrave in The Buddha Of
Suburbia. However, it was not so much the female nudity in Lady Chatterley
which caused the fuss.
So many female viewers offered up hymns to Sean Bean's bottom, that they
were rewarded in the autumn with a reprise when Bean stripped off again for
A Woman's Guide To Adultery on ITV which wins the Dunkley Naff Drama Of The
Year Award. In 1993 political correctness was more evident than ever on
British television, so it was a good job it was women ogling a male
posterior and not the other way about. Unfortunately Ken Russell never found
quite the right approach or tone for putting Lady C on television, so apart
from the usual British fuss over the human body it turned out to be a
non-event.
Once again there were very few original single television dramas, though
late in the year BBC2 screened a 'Performance' series offering several
impressive examples of theatre plays, including Fiona Shaw's Hedda Gabler.
Among the few single dramas that did turn up, Roddy Doyle's adaptation of
his own book, The Snapper, on BBC2 proved outstanding. Directed in Dublin by
Stephen Frears it brought to the television depiction of Irish life a degree
of humanity which is almost invariably missing from the Irish material we
normally see on television.
Honours for the best British serial drama of the year must be fought out
between Granada's Cracker, with Robbie Coltrane playing the drinking,
flirting, gambling police psychologist; and BBC1's Between The Lines, also a
police series, which so obviously stood out even though it did not manage to
sustain the pace, tension, and overall brilliance of the opening series. It
did still manage to combine splendid exterior entertainment with interior
political and social sinews in a manner that is not often achieved on
television, and very rarely beyond a single series.
The drama of the year, however, was not British but German. Having given us
Heimat in 1986, a great pantechnicon of a series about several generations
of life in rural Germany which you might have thought was a once in a
lifetime effort, Edgar Reitz excelled himself this year with The Second
Heimat: A New Generation. Presumably the longest finite drama series ever
made for television - excluding soap operas, in other words - this extended
to 13 two-hour episodes and told the story of modern Germany from the early
1960s. It was intelligent, consistently well acted, charming, provocative,
informative, occasionally infuriating in its dedication to modern music,
and, once you were properly involved, utterly engrossing. In north west
London viewers sought out cassettes of missed episodes with the passion of
philatelists completing sets of stamps.
In another weak year for comedy the top series was, once again, Have I Got
News For You on BBC2. Most memorable of all their episodes was that in which
Roy Hattersley's place was taken by a tub of lard, a programme that proved,
thanks largely though not wholly to Paul Merton, to be much funnier than the
later programme when Hattersley finally turned up in person.
At the year's end only two brand new comedy series seem worth recalling:
Chef on BBC1 with Lenny Henry playing, and occasionally over playing, a
prima donna cook; and Goodnight Sweetheart, also on BBC1, starring Nicholas
Lyndhurst as a television repairman who finds a time warp in a London
alleyway (it does not affect anyone else) and regularly travels back to a
pub in the era of the London Blitz. Absolutely Fabulous would walk off with
the laurels but for the fact that 1993 brought us only a repeat screening of
last year's series. The second series will be with us in spring 1994, thank
goodness. The failure of the new ITV companies to produce even a single
nominee for 'Best Situation Comedy' was rightly emphasised by presenter
Jonathan Ross in this month's British Comedy Awards.
Once more the arts-and-culture series of the year was Without Walls on
Channel 4 which has now succeeded in making all its competitors look
old-fashioned if not downright tatty. From Rory Bremner on Dame Edna to a
series on the effect of drugs upon the arts ('The Art Of Tripping'), from
'Diana Sex Goddess' to the sociology of the Rolls Royce, the series has led
the way and set the pace. BBC1's Omnibus gave us a marvellously mischievous
programme from Kriss Rusmanis on the truth about orchestral conductors; and
the best single arts documentary of the year was Sheree Folkson's
fascinatingly contrived investigation of Gericault's painting, 'The Raft Of
The Medusa' in BBC2's series Every Picture Tells A Story.
The documentary prize must go to Thatcher: The Downing Street Years,
provided there is a separate wildlife category to allow an award for
Attenborough's Life In The Freezer, a magnificent BBC1 series on Antarctica
which, as Attenborough himself would be the first to concede, was made
possible by a big team of astoundingly hardy and inventive film makers. The
Thatcher programmes were unmissable not merely because the title role was
played with such ferocious egotism, but because the series as a whole
proved, perhaps for the first time, that as a tool of history television can
be as useful as books. It may even be superior, once the history in question
 -as in this instance - enters the period for which we possess a huge
archive of television news.
A special award for Striving To Tell The Truth About Aids On Television
Despite The Tunnel Vision Of The Industry's Politically Correct Agenda
Setters, would normally go automatically to Joan Shenton of the independent
company Meditel, the only person who, from the very beginning, has insisted
on keeping a level head and publicising the evidence, even when it does not
put haloes on homosexuals. This year, however, it goes to Barraclough Carey,
another independent production company, which produced The Plague, a
four-part series for Channel 4 surveying the entire history of Aids. The
last programme rather let down the rest, allowing an instinct for compassion
to overcome the necessary rigour of good journalism (it was weak, for
instance, on the true incidence of Aids in sub-Saharan Africa, on the
precise practices of the British haemophiliac who is supposed to have given
Aids to four women, and on the comparative global seriousness of the
disease) yet the series was still such a powerful, admirable and extensive
piece of work that it deserves the prize.
Speaking of good journalism, 1993 was the year when ITV carelessly and
stupidly abandoned This Week, First Tuesday and Viewpoint, three series
known for the seriousness of their approach and the high quality of many of
their results. Having been told repeatedly by the new men (yes, men) in ITV
not to whine for a golden past but to wait and see what was put in its
place, we have now begun to see - and very depressing it is.
There is one spark of hope. The Discovery Channel has announced that, having
shown a First Tuesday programme this month, it has now commissioned
Yorkshire TV to continue the series throughout 1994. I must admit that when
ITV began its systematic abandonment of grown up television it never
occurred to me that the satellite channels might step into the breach. Let
us hope it is the beginning of a major trend: it is high time satellite
television ended its reliance on American, Australian and British repeats
and began to put money into the origination of proper programmes.
No doubt that will take some time. Meanwhile it seems pretty clear that 1994
is going to be the BBC's year.
