THE usually hectic Chicago grain futures pits were quiet yesterday as
traders awaited a government report containing the first official estimates
of the US maize and soyabean harvest since a devastating flood hit the
Midwest in July.
The crop figures were also expected to reflect damage in the US southeast,
where a withering drought caused the US Department of Agriculture to declare
farm regions of North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia disaster areas.
Mr Richard Feltes, analyst for Refco, the international trading company,
said the August report was unusually important this year. 'We've just seen
the largest regional flood disaster since 1947. Usually at this time, we
have production acres fixed, and are just trying to calculate yield. This
time we have two unknown variables, and historic volatility in grains
prices.'
Mr Mike Espy, US secretary of agriculture, was scheduled to speak in
Washington directly after the report, presumably to discuss the disaster aid
legislation President Bill Clinton will sign into law today. Because of the
unusual crop conditions, Mr Espy ordered a broader crop survey than usual
for the August report.
The report, which was scheduled for release after the close of the futures
markets, was expected to put US maize production at about 7.509bn bushels
and soyabeans at about 1.857bn. By comparison, record yields pushed the US
maize crop to 9.479bn last year. US farmers produced 2.197bn bushels of
soyabeans in 1992.
The smaller maize crop must be viewed in the context of large supplies
carried over from last year. With nearly 2.124bn bushels of last year's
harvest still in storage, there is no danger of a feed grain shortage, even
with a smaller maize harvest this year. Soyabean supplies are tighter, with
last year's carryover at only 290m bushels.
Analysts said the USDA's August production estimates would give only a
snapshot of the crop. The USDA survey was completed on August 1. Since then
warm weather has accelerated maize development in Iowa, which was hardest
hit by heavy rain, and in Indiana and Ohio, which have experienced ideal
growing weather this summer.
'The weather rally is far from played out,' said Mr. Steve Assimos, crop
analyst for Cargill Investors Services. 'Iowa and Minnesota are still 1-3
weeks behind schedule, and it won't be until harvest that fears of an early,
killing frost will abate.'
Mr Assimos believed that focus even after the crop data was releases the
market would remain bearish.
