Mr Lou Gerstner is making his biggest product strategy change at
International Business Machines since his appointment as chairman and chief
executive just over a year ago.
The move is centred on realigning IBM's worldwide software development
operations through a strategic initiative, known internally as Workplace.
The aim is to re-establish its market leadership and improve the efficiency
of software development.
In a memo to managers, Mr John Thompson, IBM senior vice-president, said
Workplace technologies would 'revolutionise the way we and our customers
develop and use software'.
IBM will refocus much of its software development work on distributed
computer networks, known as client-server computing, rather than the
mainframe computers that have consumed most of its software development
budget in the past.
Last year, IBM spent almost Dollars 1.1bn on software research and
development, and its total software revenues were close to Dollars 11bn, or
more than 17 per cent of total revenues. However, most of the company's
spending and revenues have come from the mainframe sector, where sales are
declining.
Workplace technologies will create common building blocks for future
versions of IBM's most widely used computer operating systems: MVS for
mainframes, OS/400 for mid-range computers, AIX for workstations and OS/2
for personal computers and network servers. Currently, software for each of
these segments is developed separately.
The company-wide effort will involve unprecedented global collaboration
among IBM's product divisions, research laboratories and marketing
divisions.
This reflects the management philosophy of Mr Gerstner, who has been urging
co-operation, rather than competition, among IBM's product divisions.
The Workplace project emanates from IBM's PC software division where it
began as an effort to expand the capabilities of OS/2 and leap-frog
competition from Microsoft, the leading PC software company.
The elevation of Workplace to a company-wide initiative follows a review of
IBM's software strategies by the company's Corporate Executive Committee
(CEC), a group comprising 10 of the company's top executives that was formed
by Mr Gerstner last year.
'We've developed a single, unifying strategy for the entire spectrum of IBM
software,' said Ms Ellen Hancock, IBM senior vice-president and head of the
CEC task force that has been examining company-wide software strategy.
IBM announced several management changes in connection with the Workplace
initiative. These include the appointment of Mr Peter Schneider, an IBM
vice-president previously in charge of corporate software development and
environmental affairs, to take charge of the Workplace project. Mr Schneider
co-ordinates the development and implementation of the new technologies
across all IBM divisions.
A core element of the project is the development of a 'microkernel' of
software that contains the basic functions that control a computer. This
microkernel will become the common foundation for new versions of OS/400,
AIX and OS/2.
One of the advantages of such technology is that it will allow IBM's
operating systems to be more easily transported to different types of
computers. For example, OS/2 will be able to work on devices ranging from
hand-held PC to high performance workstations.
Another important aspect of the initiative is to incorporate 'object
technology' into IBM's software. Object technology breaks software programs
into components that can be re-used in new applications. IBM will use this
approach to create common 'services', such as database management and
network management, for all of its operating systems.
The object technology will be drawn in part from Taligent, IBM's joint
software venture with Apple Computer and Hewlett-Packard. This move appears
to quash rumours that IBM was losing faith in Taligent.
Workplace will shorten software development cycles and reduce costs,
enabling IBM to bring new software products to market more quickly, said Mr
Thompson. 'With Workplace we have an opportunity to solve customer problems
and assert industry leadership, giving us a clear competitive advantage.'
These are ambitious goals, particularly in the PC arena where IBM's OS/2
operating system, with about 5m copies sold, is trailing way behind
Microsoft's Windows program, which is estimated to be in use on about 50m
PCs.
It will take considerable time for IBM to complete the Workplace project.
The first 'elemental' results will emerge this year, Ms Hancock said. 'You
will start to see more in 1995, but it will take us until 1996 and 1997 to
execute (fully) on these plans.'
The broad scope of the Workplace initiative will test IBM's management team.
Beyond the technical challenges, 'it will require tremendous teamwork,' Mr
Thompson said in his memo.
While senior IBM executives say Mr Gerstner has created an esprit de corp at
the highest levels of the company, they acknowledge this has yet to filter
down to the ranks where divisional loyalties are overriding. Mr Gerstner's
predecessor, Mr John Akers, encouraged product groups to operate as
autonomous business units.
There is a danger that as IBM struggles to co-ordinate software development
across its divisions, the company may lose sight of the real, external,
competition.
The name Workplace suggests IBM believes it can re-establish its role as a
setter of software standards, defining how computers are used in the
workplace. However, several other companies - including Microsoft, Novell
and Oracle - have strong claims to that role.
