The question in most producers' minds as they heard a debate between rival
suppliers at Cereals '94, the premier UK grain event this month, was summed
up by Mr Alan States, a US farmer. 'What you all want to know,' he said, 'is
whether we're going to out-compete you - but we're all in this together and
the most efficient of us will survive.'
Mr States, who farms 4,000 acres (1,600) hectares on his own in Kansas, is
one of the large US producers who will be competing head-to-head with his
European counterparts on world markets as support prices are stripped away
under the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade settlement.
He now makes the equivalent of Pounds 22 an acre profit to cover his fixed
costs after getting a market price of Pounds 75 a tonne for his wheat plus
government support of Pounds 18 a tonne.
His income per tonne puts Mr States near the top of the earnings scale for
the international farmers polled at the seminar. Mr Oliver Walston, the
British producer whose farm was the venue for the cereals show, reckoned
that British farmers were getting Pounds 95 a tonne for their wheat with an
added subsidy of Pounds 30 a tonne.
That put British producers on a par with Mr Jeremy Talbot, who farms 451
hectares in New Zealand, producing 1,000 tonnes of wheat. He is being paid
Pounds 120 a tonne by millers in his own country, where he receives no
subsidies at all.
Mr Talbot said he was trying to adapt to the new unsupported market by
growing specialist crops for Asia, such as Chinese mustard and Chinese
cabbage.
But both Mr Talbot and Mr Peter Barclay, a wheat farmer from Nakuru in
Kenya, had to fight hard against the dumping of subsidised grain from the
European Union and US. 'Wheat is pouring into Mombasa at Dollars 90 and
Dollars 100 a tonne - we can't compete with those prices,' said Mr Barclay.
Mr States called for government aid to farmers to be completely uncoupled
from production - a direction in which both the US and EU are moving - as a
way of getting rid of surplus output. 'We don't care if the French want to
increase their subsidies to farmers as long as they don't have to plant a
crop to get it,' he said.
Mr Esteran Artica, an Argentine wheat farmer, plans, however, to increase
his output in coming years to take advantage of the new, more stable climate
in the country now that inflation is under control. Mr Artica receives the
equivalent of Pounds 80 a tonne for his grain without government support. He
said he wanted to push Argentina as an organic farming area as many farmers
could not afford artificial fertilisers.
One of Mr Artica's main expenses is the cost of sending his wheat to the
nearest port as there are no trains near his 4,300 hectare holding.
Similarly, Mr Roy Levee, a Canadian prairie farmer with 4,000 acres, 35
miles (56km) north of the US border, finds transportation costs eating into
his income.
Mr Levee's farm is 1,000 miles from the nearest port at either Vancouver or
Thunderbay on the Great Lakes and transport for wheat costs are Dollars 26 a
tonne. The government funds Dollars 15 of the cost but pays this directly to
the railroad, which Mr Levee believes subsidises inefficiencies of the rail
operator.
The transport subsidy is the only government support received by Canadian
farmers like Mr Levee, who is getting a payment of around Pounds 60 a tonne
from his local grain elevator. This comes in the form of Pounds 45 a tonne
outright with the rest to follow at the end of the season.
Mr Levee's short growing season, with only 120 frost-free days a year and
extreme heat in summer, means he has a yield of three-quarters of a tonne
per acre compared with Mr States' 1.1 tonnes per acre in Kansas and closer
to 3 tonnes in the UK.
Mr Oliver Walston said he had simplified his production methods as much as
he could to compete with low-cost producers overseas. He sold off a third of
his 3,000-acre farm 5 years ago so that he could pay off debts. 'It's very
difficult to do that because every farmer wants to farm more acres,' he
said. 'But I've seen so many producers all over the world in terrible
trouble because they're too highly geared.'
Mr Walston's fixed costs are now Pounds 120 per acre - Pounds 60 lower than
5 years ago - and he makes a profit of Pounds 150,000 a year.
'Everything will get much more competitive: you either compete by becoming
large and extensive or intensify production in some sectors. There will be
no place for a small farmer growing wheat.'
