In Seville and Malaga the pitches have all been allocated: one
cigarette-seller at every traffic light. When each has sold his quota of
contraband packets he goes to a telephone and another hawker is sent to take
over.
They are known as los winstoneros, after Winston cigarettes, the RJ Reynolds
brand which is Spain's favourite illegal smoke. 'If everything in this
country worked like the contraband network in Seville, we would be very well
organised,' commented a representative of Tabacalera, the semi-state tobacco
company.
Tabacalera controls the legal distribution of cigarettes in Spain and has a
manufacturing monopoly, including American brands made through joint
ventures. Right outside its main office in Madrid is a metro station, where
illegal cigarettes are sold at the entrance. Until a few months ago,
contraband cigarettes were mostly sold through bars and restaurants. Then
the authorities cracked down. Now street sales have shot up.
Tobacco smuggling has been on the rise in other parts of Europe, too,
especially Germany. But in Spain the problem is serious. Last year the
contraband trade is reckoned to have risen 47 per cent to 650m packets,
almost 23 per cent of total sales of Virginia-tobacco cigarettes and
overtaking Italy as Europe's largest illegal market.
These sales, with a street value of almost Dollars 1bn, are reckoned to have
deprived the treasury of Dollars 750m in revenues, Tabacalera of about
Dollars 320m and retailers Dollars 100m.
The reason is tax. Special tobacco taxes, levied in addition to value-added
tax, have increased in the past two years from 46.8 per cent to 55.4 per
cent. Spain has to bring its rates into line with a 57 per cent EU minimum
next year. This rules out taking the same path as Canada, which has slashed
taxes to discourage a flourishing tobacco racket (Canadian cigarettes are
sent to the US and then smuggled back en masse through Mohawk reservations
straddling the border).
Higher Spanish taxes have hit Tabacalera's sales, at the same time offering
bigger margins for the contraband trade. A packet costing Pta270 (Pounds
1.30) at a tobacconist's or Pta300 legally in a bar now sells on the
pavement at Pta200.
Until recently, the main route was the Atlantic coast of Galicia in
north-west Spain. Consignments would be transferred offshore on to 25ft
launches, each with up to six outboard motors, and concealed in mussel farms
and old canneries. Customs took the smugglers on with boats, aircraft and
helicopters.
'At sea I think we have won. But now it's getting in more easily by land,'
says Mr Joaquin Bobillo, director of Spain's customs department. 'The people
who used to run launches now run trucks.'
The lifting of border restrictions within the European single market has
opened up the contraband route by motorway across the French-Spanish
frontier. American cigarettes are landed at Antwerp or Rotterdam. Officially
destined for Morocco or Cyprus, many of them never leave the EU. For Spain,
the traffic is mostly Winstons, for Italy, Marlboros.
There is now also a flow of cigarettes coming through Germany from Russia
and eastern Europe, again supposedly in transit. Mr Bobillo says there has
up to now been no effective way of monitoring the fake papers sent back to
Germany declaring that the goods have left Spanish ports. Other sources are
Andorra and by speedboat from the British colony of Gibraltar.
The recent growth in smuggling is based on solid tradition and a structure
that has long been in place. There is no stigma attached to a contraband
product. It may even be preferred. Spaniards still tend to assume that
foreign is best. 'It is a problem of culture,' says Mr Bobillo, 'and a hard
one to solve in the short term.'
A recently-dismantled operation in Madrid worked by telephone under the
trade name Servitabac, offering discounts for large purchases. The offices
it would call in search of clients included government departments.
Last autumn Spain introduced special stickers on packets of tax-paid
cigarettes and tough penalties for bars and cafes caught selling contraband.
The measures have evidently had some effect. Tabacalera's sales of premium
Virginia brands, which last year fell by almost 21 per cent, have recovered
sharply. More people are buying their Camels, Chesterfields, Winstons and
Marlboros legally.
But Mr Bobillo says it would be impossible to round up all the illegal
sellers. 'What would you do with them?' he asks. 'We know we can't wipe it
out altogether. You cannot pick up and imprison everybody for a few cartons.
We have to work on the people who are getting the tobacco to them.'
It is a frustrating job for customs and police. They have followed trucks
all the way to the southern port of Algeciras without success. They have
carried out 35,000 inspections in bars. Of these, 8,000 have produced
positive results, but even then the average haul is only 20-25 cartons.
Under the law, bars face closure on the second offence. But none has been
closed.
Measures against big contraband operators can have undesired side-effects.
They have led to a growing connection between tobacco and drug traffic. To
compensate for setbacks in their tobacco trade, Mr Bobillo says the same
operators are increasingly moving into higher-profit items - hashish from
North Africa and cocaine from Latin America.
