Monday's agreement between AT&amp;T and Intel, for them to develop and market
desktop video conferencing (DVC), is likely to lead to the widespread
adoption of personal electronic meeting systems.
The deal, between the world's largest chip maker and the leading US
telecommunications company, seems to have defused a situation which could
have led to a standards war within the videoconferencing industry which
would have damaged suppliers and customers.
Mr James Cosgrove, AT&amp;T's general manager for business multimedia services,
said customers and equipment manufacturers would be able to invest in
personal videoconferencing without fear of being trapped in a technological
blind alley.
However, some industry experts reacted with less than wholehearted approval,
arguing that the AT&amp;T/Intel accord fudges the issue rather than promoting
the idea of a single, industry-wide standard.
Intel sees desktop video conferencing as an important new capability that
will drive demand for high performance PCs built around its microprocessor
chips.
Mr Andrew Grove, Intel chairman, said: 'All of this requires microprocessor
power. This is very important for us because every time you do one of these
conferences, you can almost hear your microprocessor take a deep breath . .
. This is a pretty powerful application. It is a good application for high
performance microprocessors. When we optimise our system for Pentium
(Intel's top of the range processor) you will see higher quality video.'
Videoconferences - electronic meetings where images of the participants and
documents are transmitted over telecommunications lines in addition to
conversation - are well established in many international companies. ICL,
the UK-based computer manufacturer, for example, holds weekly management
meetings with Fujitsu, its Tokyo-based parent, using a large
videoconferencing system.
The costs of corporate videoconferencing systems, while declining, remain
high. A typical system from a supplier such as the UK company GPT, costs
about Pounds 34,500 (Dollars 53,475). A videoconferencing studio could cost
a further Pounds 80,000.
A breakthrough has been the development of semiconductor chips that can be
incorporated into electronic circuitry which converts a conventional desk
top personal computer into a videoconferencing station, at an additional
cost of about Pounds 1,000.
The importance of DVC is two-fold. First, given the growing cost of
executive travel, it is seen by many as the future of business
communications. 'The business call of the future will be a conference call
from your PC,' said Mr Frank Gill, general manger of Intel's products group.
Second, it is seen as the application which will drive the growth of
multimedia in business. According to Ovum, a London-based technology
consultancy: 'From 1996 onwards, sales of video PCs will take off rapidly
eclipsing those of dedicated videoconferencing systems.' Ovum estimates that
sales of video PCs could approach Dollars 5bn by 2000.
In January this year, Intel introduced a set of PC add-on products and
software it calls Proshare, which converts a PC into a video telephone. The
heart of the system is a compression technology called Indeo, a joint effort
between Intel and Microsoft, the world's largest software company.
The system is low cost, but the result is not up to dedicated
videoconferencing standards. The picture is small and jerky in movement but
adequate for many purposes. Intel says that video quality will improve as
microprocessor power increases.
However, Proshare is not compatible with video-conferencing standards
developed for dedicated systems, most of which conform to a standard known
as H320. AT&amp;T is a leading member of the industry group that developed the
H320 standard.
The essence of this week's announcement is that Intel and AT&amp;T will work to
build a technology bridge between Proshare and its network services.
Mr Cosgrove said the aim was to provide a system open to any customer no
matter what kind of device was used to make the call. He gave the example of
a customer making a conference call from his or her car - the connection
might be to other participants using video PCs. At the office, the customer
could change from portable phone to video PC. The network would be
responsible for translating between one technology and another.
Mr Cosgrove said AT&amp;T would be testing the new system in December and
selling products based on it next year.
The question remains how businesses want to use DVC. Studies show that
executives only want to see each others' faces at the beginning and end of a
conversation. For the rest of the time, they are more concerned to be able
to share information and work together on documents. Intel Proshare software
can provide this capability without the need for add-on equipment.
