Tucked away along back streets in downtown Tokyo, just a home run hit from
the Tokyo Dome where the Yomiuri Giants baseball team plays, is a quiet
oasis of great beauty. The oldest garden in Tokyo nestles a discreet cheek
to the roistering jowl of the baseball and recreation park, typical of the
Japanese capital's startling juxtapositions.
Though it is now a sanctuary for ordinary salarymen and housewives who want
to take a breather by stepping out of Tokyo's urban roar, Korakuen garden
was at first the exclusive reserve of the city's samurai class. It was laid
out during the early years of the Tokugawa era as a formal strolling garden,
with pathways around landscaped lakes, mountains, waterfalls, rivers and
temples. Famous scenic spots of China and Japan, especially from the former
capital of Kyoto, were faithfully reconstructed in miniature.
Tokugawa Yorifusa, the feudal lord of the Mito branch of the family, started
work on digging ponds and raising hillocks in 1629, but it was his successor
who saw the completion of the task.
Tokugawa Mitsukuni had a keen interest in things Chinese, and had given
protection to Chu Shun-Shui, a refugee from the Ming dynasty of China, who
lived from 1600 to 1682. He was the garden's chief landscape architect and
his influence accounts for some features directly modelled on famous places
in China. One such spot is Korakuen's down-sized version of China's Lu Shan
mountain, as smooth and round and full as the original, the twin hillocks
totally covered with dwarf bamboo.
Originally, the area of the garden was 63 acres, but it was reduced to a
quarter of that during the city planning changes in the middle of the 19th
century. The 16 acres that remained were designated as an outstanding scenic
site of historical importance by the Cultural Property Protection Committee.
Management of the garden was turned over to the Tokyo metropolitan
government in 1936.
Unfortunately, much was destroyed by two shattering disasters to hit Tokyo
this century: the devastating Kanto earthquake and resulting fires in 1923,
and the US fire-bombing of Tokyo in 1945. Although some of the original
trees, planted in the 17th century, have survived, the original buildings on
the site - tea houses, gates, shrines - went up in flames.
The city has been busy since the second world war restoring some of
Korakuen's former glory. For example, a small but exquisite temple to
Benten, an Indian goddess of good luck, first erected 350 years ago, has
been rebuilt on an island in the middle of the garden's large,
horseshoe-shaped central lake.
Other reconstruction work is still going on with the special care so
characteristic of a formal Japanese garden, which may be described as the
enhancement of nature in the search for perfection.
Although Korakuen is overlooked by office blocks such as Toyota's Tokyo
office, it is difficult to believe that you are slap-bang in the middle of a
metropolitan area of more than 12m people. The walls and trees and bushes
mute the city's roar, and the most immediate sounds are natural ones - water
falling, wild birds calling, insects buzzing.
Korakuen has special attractions for each season, which accounts for the
regular visits by those who live or work nearby. Office workers come with
their lunch boxes of cold rice and pickled vegetables; retired men arrive
with their tripods and cameras; young men bring their girlfriends, and
housewives their gossip, to sit on benches and enjoy the parade of the
seasons.
Korakuen is at its finest in spring, when Tokyo comes alive with Japan's
beloved cherry blossoms. It is at this time that the garden has most
visitors. Masuda-san, the head gardener of five, says that 2,000 admission
tickets (Pounds 1.20 each) are sold daily during the peak hanami (cherry
blossom viewing) season in April.
Since children under 15 are admitted free, more than 3,000 may pass each day
under the stunning pink-and-white explosions. Perhaps the most impressive of
these is produced by a fine, 100-year-old weeping cherry tree standing just
inside the garden's entrance. Over 50 years ago the tree was in a sorry
state, slowly dying and unable to blossom in the spring. But it was
rejuvenated in 1942 with the botanic equivalent of a heart transplant; new
roots from a similar tree were successfully grafted on to the old stock.
Not long after the delicate cherry blossoms fade comes the mauve wisteria of
May, weeping down from the trellises. Summer is for irises, and also a time
to search out the turtles on the rocks in the ponds, their necks stretched
out and up but as still as a statue, enjoying the sun on their shells.
In October, the garden's rice field is ready to harvest. Snatch a stalk when
the gardeners are not looking and husk the grains by rubbing them palm to
palm; there is something especially reassuring about being able to pick
Japan's traditional staple in the centre of its capital sprawl.
In November, the stunning colours of autumn run riot in the garden's maple
groves. Tokyo's relatively mild winters provide only the occasional
snowscape, but there are camellias in February to brighten the subdued
browns of winter.
Korakuen abounds in small delights. Look closely in any of the garden's
ponds and you will see, vacuuming the bottom, fat goldfish so startlingly
coloured that they seem not real but painted.
There is a fascinating collection of bridges, from simple stepping stones to
proud vermilion wooden spans to a half-circle stone arch known as the
Full-Moon Bridge because its reflection in the water completes a full
circle. Tucked away in odd corners are a variety of small markers and
monuments, perhaps the most unusual of which is a stone memorial to the
seventh lord of Mito's favourite peregrine falcon.
For the less curious, Korakuen offers the priceless pleasure of immense
peace and quiet. Follow the example of the local salaryman who removes his
trademark tie, slips off his shoes (he places them neatly under his bench,
like a brace of rabbits at rest), and stretches out on a spread-open
newspaper for a delicious 30 minutes of time out.
Rest assured that you will be woken from your reverie by nothing more
jarring than the rolling splosh of a carp, the tseep, tseep of a handful of
whiteyes picking their way through the foliage, or the whiffling whistle of
a wintering wigeon.
Korakuen garden is less than 10 minutes' walk from Suidobashi subway station
on the blue Toei Mita line (all of Tokyo's subway and rail lines are
colour-coded). Walk west (towards Iidabashi) in front of the main entrance
to Tokyo Dome and, after passing the huge Toyota building, turn right down
the next side street: the entrance to the garden is 200 yards on the right.
The garden is open every day except Monday, from 9am to 4pm. If a public
holiday falls on a Monday, the garden opens that day but closes the
following Tuesday. An illustrated guidebook in English and Japanese is
available for about Pounds 1.80.
