Four years after the England and Wales electricity system was privatised,
the companies created for the state sell-off are in a state of flux.
Professor Stephen Littlechild, director general of the Office of Electricity
Regulation, is reviewing price controls which consumers say have allowed the
regional distribution companies to make excessive profits.
He is threatening tough action following charges that their prices and
profits are too high, sometimes blatantly so.
National Power and PowerGen, the generating companies carved from the
non-nuclear assets of the Central Electricity Generating Board, have also
been under the regulator's scrutiny following claims, particularly from
large customers, that they have too much influence over the market.
In this, say critics, the generators are assisted by a trading system, the
wholesale electricity pool, which constitutes one of the most complicated
and arcane markets in the world and is in need of serious reform.
The judge and jury on the charges is Professor Littlechild, the industry
regulator who was appointed earlier this year for a second five year term of
office.
He cleared the generators of abusing their power, but nevertheless struck a
deal to temper their strength.
He is also increasing pressure for reform of the trading pool. One
possibility is that companies will be allowed to bypass the pool when they
trade in electricity; existing rules mean all power must be traded through
the pool.
The pool is also conducting experiments to allow buyers of electricity a
greater role in price determination.
With so much change in the air other countries must be wondering whether the
UK experiment in electricity privatisation has gone wrong.
Not surprisingly the electricity companies deny this. They argue that the
changes are evolutionary rather than revolutionary and are refining a system
that has, after all, kept the lights on and has reduced prices in real terms
for all but the very largest companies.
Consumer groups dispute the claim of price reductions, pointing out that it
depends which date you take as the start of privatisation.
But there is grudging recognition that the industry is more efficient and
more service-oriented than it was before privatisation. Occasional calls for
renationalisation attract little support and the Labour Party would be
unlikely to make it a priority if it won the next general election.
However, few people would deny that the government committed errors when it
laid the groundwork for privatisation at breakneck speed in the late 1980s.
Most industry analysts believe that the CEGB's non-nuclear assets should
have been broken up into a greater number of smaller bundles than the two
chunks allocated to National Power and PowerGen.
Even ministers acknowledge this as a mistake, pointing out it was influenced
by the original plan to include the commercially unattractive nuclear
stations in the sale.
The reasoning was that the stock market would not buy small power companies
that included nuclear stations. In the end, the government was persuaded
that investors would not buy any nuclear stations, whatever the size of the
parent company, and they were kept in the state sector.
By then, however, it was too late to split up National Power and PowerGen
without abandoning the timetable for privatisation. It was left to Prof
Littlechild to sort out the subsequent problems, and this was what he
attempted to do in his settlement with them earlier this year.
The deal is that the generators will endeavour to sell off 5,000 to 6,000MW
of generating plant by the end of next year; until then they have agreed to
adopt policies which will lead to reducing prices in the electricity pool.
In exchange, Prof Littlechild agreed he would not refer the generators to
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission for at least two years. By then,
competition will have grown as independently-owned power plants come on
stream.
The deal satisfied few, other than the large users of electricity including
Imperial Chemical Industries, who buy their power supplies at prices
directly related to the pool price.
However, the vast majority of consumers are unaffected by short term pool
price changes since their supplies are covered by long term hedging
contracts. They were, therefore, indifferent to Prof Littlechild's
settlement with the generators.
Independent generation companies, however, complained that the price cap
would deter them from setting up new plants. Given that the deal was
supposed to foster competition, this is a serious charge.
Another problem is that the settlement may turn out to be merely a temporary
fix. It is far from certain that the generators will be able to find buyers
for their plant at the kind of prices that they consider acceptable.
And even if they do, the plant they keep will probably continue to set the
price in the electricity pool. It is this power to set prices that most
offends free market champions like Prof Littlechild.
Little wonder then that he is pushing for the pool to accept bypass
arrangements. The more trade occurs outside the pool - that is between a
generator and a customer - the less important its prices become. However,
securing the industry's agreement for bypass arrangements will not be easy.
Some companies including regional electricity companies argue that the pool
is effectively bypassed anyway because of the hedging arrangements. They are
concerned that formal bypass arrangements would make the pool even less
transparent and would produce little savings for consumers.
Concerned though the regional electricity companies are about pool reform,
their over-riding consideration this summer is the distribution review which
Prof Littlechild is conducting. Leaks of a letter from his office to the
companies earlier this summer suggested that the companies may have to
reduce distribution prices by up to 20 per cent next April. Future increases
would be limited to inflation minus 4 per cent.
Several of the companies are warning privately that unless Prof Littlechild
softens his line then they will take their case to the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission.
Most analysts think the regulator will compromise and allow the companies a
return on their assets which they can present to shareholders as at least
reasonable.
Undoubtedly the excessively good times are over for the distribution
companies. But the party is not about to end.
