Marine safety investigators from the UK and the Bahamas were last night
preparing to start inquiries into a fire on a cross-Channel ferry which led
to the emergency evacuation of more than 100 passengers and crew.
Lifeboats and rescue helicopters were called out to the Sally Star, a
9,000-tonne ferry en route from Dunkirk to Ramsgate after a fire broke out
in its engine room early yesterday.
One crew member had to be airlifted to hospital with a back injury, but no
one else among the 104-strong crew and 17 truck drivers on board was
injured. Fire officers from Kent were taken out to the vessel by helicopter
and boat.
The fire broke out when the vessel was eight miles from Ramsgate and flames
could be seen from the shore, a witness said. The Sally Star was last night
being towed back to Dunkirk for repairs.
The Department of Transport described the rescue as 'a textbook operation'
but the RMT transport union said the incident revealed the danger of recent
cuts in the emergency services budgets. The first helicopter to attend the
fire flew from an RAF base at Wattisham in Suffolk, following the removal of
helicopter rescue services from Manston in Kent because of defence budget
cuts.
The Sally Star can carry up to 625 cars and 70 trucks as well as up to 1,500
passengers, but was carrying only trucks and their drivers on the overnight
journey.
Sally Line, the owner of the vessel, said the cause of the fire was not
known. The Sally Star was built in 1981 and acquired by the line in 1988.
Ms Linda McLeod, Sally Line marketing director, said: 'The fire is out and
the ship is going to Dunkirk. She will be going into a yard where we will be
checking what caused the fire.'
The British marine accident investigation branch will start an investigation
because the ship was in British waters when the emergency occurred. The
Bahamian authorities will also investigate because it sails under the
Bahamas flag.
The Labour party yesterday called for an inquiry into safety standards on
ferries plying in British waters.
Fires broke out on two other vessels yesterday. Thirty of the 73 crew
members of the Lithuanian fish factory ship Seda were taken off by lifeboat
after an engine room fire off Shetland. In another incident, fire broke out
in the cargo pump room of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship Fort Victoria
moored near Plymouth.
