The fortunes of the Ecu bond market have risen and fallen as the prospects
for European monetary union, with the Ecu as Europe's single currency, have
grown and then receded.
The market was dealt a severe blow when the Danes rejected the Maastricht
Treaty at their first referendum in June 1992, and then again three months
later when sterling and the Italian lira were unceremoniously dumped from
the European exchange rate mechanism.
A year on, in August 1993, the French franc's woes and the widening of the
ERM's bands which occurred as a result precipitated a further sell-off in
Ecu bonds.
Suddenly the market that promised so much had collapsed and it has remained
in the doldrums ever since. Today, issuers and investors alike are scarce.
In June, the yield on the 10-year Ecu bond climbed to 46 basis over its
theoretical counterpart.
The theoretical yield is the yield which would result from constructing a
synthetic Ecu bond from the underlying constituent markets. The actual yield
is that earned from Ecu bonds trading in the market. The comparison of the
two is a good measure of the Ecu bond market's health.
However, 'it is wrong to be too pessimistic about the Ecu bond market', says
Mr Steve Major, head of bond research at Credit Lyonnais in Paris. 'The
performance in absolute terms has been poor but it must be viewed in
context. Government bond markets and other eurobond markets have also had a
disastrous year.'
Certainly, Ecu bonds have been one of the hardest hit as confidence in
Europe's bond markets has evaporated over worries about the size of
government borrowing, inflation and the direction of European interest
rates.
'Two factors have kept the market in the doldrums,' said Mr Philip Cadiz, of
Paribas in Paris.
'One is the fact that EMU seems to have become less of a political
likelihood; the other is this year's protracted and vicious bear market
which has meant that investors have concentrated on their own domestic
markets.'
The bear market looks set to continue for a while yet. With political
troubles in Italy adding to the uncertainty, and the wranglings over
choosing the successor to Jacques Delors as president of the European
Commission presenting the picture of an increasingly divided Europe, the
prospect for the Ecu market would not seem to be a bright one.
Nevertheless, some analysts have recently become more optimistic. 'We have
begun to see some buying interest in the last few months, from institutions
in particular but also from retail investors with money to spend, both
attracted by the relatively high yields,' said Mr Major. Since its peak in
mid-June, the gap between the actual and theoretical yields has closed.
Actual Ecu bonds are now trading two basis points below their theoretical
counterpart.
'Between 75 per cent to 80 per cent of Ecu debt is issued by governments or
organisations such as the World Bank and European Investment Bank, which
means that this is a high quality market with little risk for the investor,'
said Mr Danny Peeters, head of the Ecu desk at Kredietbank in Brussels.
The biggest buyers of Ecu debt are the Benelux countries, Switzerland and,
more recently, German banks have been attracted by the high yields on offer.
'If I were in their position, I would also be tempted,' said Mr Major.
'There is about DM180bn worth of German debt to be issued this year, which
represents a huge supply. The Ecu market does not have those supply
concerns.'
However, there has been some disappointment that less than half of the Ecu
funds currently being freed as many old Ecu bonds come up for redemption,
estimated to be about ECU1bn each month, are not being reinvested in Ecu
bonds.
In addition, the market continues to suffer from a lack of aggressive
marketing of the debt, which has been the case ever since several of the
large investment banks pulled many of its resources out of the Ecu bond
market.
The largest issuer of Ecu debt continues to be the French government, but
even it is limited to small offerings by the expensiveness of current
yields.
'Most recent issues have been small, which means that investors are not
focusing on the Ecu bond market,' said Mr Cadiz. 'If it is to be
resuscitated, we need to begin to focus again on the Ecu and on EMU. At the
moment, these are the last things on people's minds.'
Even if there is a recovery in Europe's bond markets, until monetary union
and the adoption of the Ecu as Europe's single currency become more than a
distant dream, a reversal in the Ecu bond market's fortunes will be
difficult.
