President Eduardo Frei's government takes over in Chile next month facing a
set of economic problems most Latin American governments wish they had.
Growth is forecast to slow to 4 per cent this year as a result of depressed
export markets, from 6 per cent last year and 10.3 per cent in 1992.
Little change is expected in overall economic policy. 'Chile is the one
country in Latin America that really has turned the corner,' says a senior
World Bank official.
Many Chileans shrink from offering their experience as a model, given its
genesis in the 17-year military regime of General Augusto Pinochet. The
importance of authoritarian government to economic success is as yet
unproven.
Mr Alejandro Foxley, the outgoing finance minister, argues that military
regimes are inherently unstable. 'Consensus policies should work better in
the long run. They should provide more stability - military governments
always end up being thrown out of power.'
Stability is a strong theme emerging from conversations with Chile's
economic policy-makers. Mr Roberto Zahler, president of the independent
central bank, says consistency and transparency of policy have been
important concerns, among other things, promoting savings and investment.
'We give lots of weight to stability, to soundness, to avoiding stop-go
policies.'
Mr Gert Rosenthal, head of the Santiago-based Economic Commission for Latin
America, argues that Chile has been the guiding light for many of the
region's market-oriented economic policies.
'Basically Latin America is copying the Chilean model in terms of export
orientation. Countries are looking at private pension fund programmes, at
policies of fiscal restraint, at establishing an autonomous central bank and
at macroeconomic management.'
Mr Foxley says there are elements that would be valid for almost any
country. 'Fiscal discipline, opening up the economy, a body of policies that
allows the private sector to feel it can do its own thing. But I'd add
another point: the importance of the role of the government - in ensuring
public investment in infrastructure and the importance of generating enough
revenue to be able to devote a lot of resources to investment in the social
sectors.'
Other important aspects of Chilean policy may be less appreciated. One has
been managing the exchange rate to keep it as competitive as possible. This
contrasts with Mexican and Argentine policies which have aimed at tackling
inflation in part by keeping the exchange rate strong.
The Chilean government has accepted the downside of this - that inflation
will come down more slowly than otherwise. 'We are not attempting to
stabilise prices instantaneously,' says Mr Zahler. 'We are in the process of
a gradual, consistent, steady reduction in the rate of inflation.'
Chile has also avoided the worst of the problems faced by other Latin
American economies in coping with capital inflows. Many have been stuck in a
policy conundrum: capital inflows led to appreciation of the domestic
currency, generating increases in money supply. This has brought
inflationary pressure. Yet if the government tries to mop up extra liquidity
(by selling government debt) interest rates rise, deterring productive
investment and encouraging further capital inflows.
Chile has managed to avoid this by keeping exchange controls in place, to
the chagrin of some brokers and foreign investors. These have slowed capital
inflows and reduced pressure for the exchange rate to appreciate. 'In
respect of capital controls, I think a lot of countries would be well
advised to follow the Chilean model,' says Mr Rosenthal.
By encouraging exports, it has also established a good environment for
investment in the production of tradeable goods, providing in turn a base
for export growth.
Investment in some countries has been driven by 'a casino mentality', says
Mr Rosenthal. In others, Argentina for example, economists worry that while
there has been direct investment, it has been in services, utilities and
local consumer industries - goods that have provided no base for future
exports. Part of the reason for this, they argue, is that Argentina's strong
exchange rate has made its exports expensive.
Investment in Chile surpassed 27 per cent of gross domestic product last
year, the highest in Latin America. Foreign investors have also been
encouraged by a perception that public administration is not hugely corrupt.
'One aspect in their decision-making that foreign investors always mention
is that we have a reasonably efficient public administration. The general
tone is one of probity, and for someone looking around for a place to
invest, it's a strong point in our favour,' says Mr Foxley.
Investment, however, has been financed mainly by domestic savings, which at
21 per cent of GDP, are the region's highest. This has reduced its
dependence on foreign inflows and allowed it to maintain capital controls.
Although the rising current account deficit does imply a higher dependence
on foreign capital, most economists see it as short-term and easily
financed.
Savings have been encouraged by several factors, including Chile's private
pension fund arrangements, which are being copied elsewhere in Latin America
and which have also helped to develop the domestic capital market.
According to Mr Zahler of the central bank, another important explanation
has been indexation. This has assured Chileans that inflation will not erode
their savings, although it has also increased inflationary inertia. 'In an
economy with such a long history of inflation . . . indexation has been
crucial for the financial system and in developing savings.'
The other factor, he suggests, is growth. 'When you have expectations that
the economy will go on growing, then people tend to save.'
Not everything is rosy. While unemployment has dropped to around 4.5 per
cent, its lowest in 20 years, many of the jobs are low paid and of poor
quality. The country is also still over-dependent on raw materials: only 20
per cent of its exports are manufactured goods, though the figure is rising.
Its health and education systems are in great need of reform, Mr Foxley
says.
Yet so uncontroversial has overall economic policy become in Chile, the new
government has the chance to address these important issues.
