'Americans want their healthcare like they want their food: all you can get
for Dollars 8.'
The comment, by Joe Powell, chief executive of the Baptist Memorial Hospital
in Memphis, sums up a familiar problem: despite soaring costs, Americans'
expectations of healthcare have not moderated, imposing a drain on those who
foot the bill - among them state governments.
Tennessee is no exception. If left unchecked, spiralling healthcare costs
could wreck the state's finances. Through the Medicaid system, it provided
healthcare to 1m people last year. Unlike other states, though, it has opted
for radical and sweeping reforms in an attempt both to extend coverage of
medical care and to bring down its cost. The experiment could provide an
early pointer to the sort of shake-up that may come for the US as a whole
from the Clinton health plan.
'We were getting big increases in Medicaid every year - no one can sustain
that in a responsible government year after year,' says Governor Ned
McWherter. 'It threatened the financial future and stability of Tennessee.
It was taking away (resources) from education and infrastructure.'
In 1987, the Medicaid system set the state back Dollars 700m and covered
400,000 people - a cost of Dollars 1,750 a head. By last year, the cost had
risen to Dollars 3bn, and the number of people covered to 1m - or Dollars
3,000 for every person covered. Over the same period, the proportion of
Medicaid spending met by the state, as opposed to the federal, government,
remained essentially unchanged.
The state's first attempt to deal with this rising cost was to impose a tax
on providers of healthcare - largely hospitals. This brought in Dollars 500m
last year, but hurt hospitals in rural areas in particular.
Last year, the state acted to break the cycle of ever-higher taxes to match
higher spending. Mr David Manning, the state's director of finance and
administration, says: 'No tax system could keep up with the costs.' Instead
of using its power to tax, the state chose to apply its influence another
way - through its role as a big buyer of healthcare services. 'Governments
don't tend to use their purchasing power enough,' says Mr Manning.
Depending upon your point of view, the result - a scheme known as TennCare -
has either unleashed market forces on the healthcare market in Tennessee, or
has brought state-mandated cost-containment of the most direct nature.
There is no surprise about which line the state's administration takes. 'My
intent in the reform was to put the healthcare providers out in the free
market,' says Mr McWherter. 'They are not accustomed to that.'
The response from physicians and hospitals has been equally predictable. 'We
concur with managed competition - but not with managed cost,' says Mr
Stephen Reynolds, president of the Baptist Memorial Hospital.
Under the new scheme, the state has set a flat annual capitation level of
Dollars 1,600 for each individual covered - that is, the amount it has set
for providing care to each person. The organisations which provide care
don't receive the Dollars 1,600, though - the actual amount being paid is
about Dollars 1,200. The difference, says the state, reflects the taxes
which providers no longer have to pay.
This is much less than the Dollars 3,000-a-person average cost of care last
year. But the new scheme does not pay for long-term and nursing home care,
which remains in Medicaid. This accounted for Dollars 700m of the last
year's Dollars 3bn of spending. Also, the state justifies its capitation
level by reference to a similar scheme it has run for state employees for
several years.
Under TennCare, the local Blue Cross-Blue Shield organisation and a number
of private managed care organisations have competed to sign up people
covered by the scheme. They receive cash for each person they sign up, and
are responsible for buying healthcare from physicians, hospitals and others.
Some managed care groups retain all of the financial risk - others share it
with the healthcare providers.
The imposition of a cost ceiling has been accompanied by an extension of the
scheme to as many as 400,000 people. These are people on low earnings who
have not fallen into the Medicaid net before. So far, about 250,000 of these
people have signed up.
The extension of coverage has agitated hospitals in the state. 'To us, the
mathematics do not work. You can't add 400,000 people and do it for the same
amount as before,' says Mr Reynolds at the Baptist Memorial Hospital.
The state hopes that limiting the amount of money available will act as a
spur to greater efficiency, leading to no reduction in the level of care
provided. In part, says Mr Manning, the result will be a switch from
expensive medical interventions towards more cost-effective methods of care.
'We have in the past limited access to the most cost-effective forms of care
 -primary and preventative care,' he says. 'The basic economics in
capitation encourage healthcare organisations to move towards preventative
care.'
The introduction of the scheme at the beginning of this year was accompanied
by widespread confusion. Patients were left without treatment as many
doctors refused to participate. The problem was particularly acute around
Knoxville, in east Tennessee although now the Blue Cross-Blue Shield network
in the area has returned to 95 per cent of its earlier coverage, says the
state administration.
Most big hospitals agreed to take part from the start, although they
grumbled about doing so. In one hospital, when obstetricians and
anaesthetists refused to treat TennCare patients, the numbers of births by
caesarean section fell sharply, as did the use of anaesthetics in
childbirth. Supporters of the reforms point to this as evidence that
'better' healthcare - a lower rate of surgical intervention and less use of
drugs - has been the result. The doctors who would not participate in the
scheme, and the women who gave birth, may well disagree.
It remains too early to judge how successful the scheme will prove. But it
has at least one powerful virtue: it is different from what went before. As
Mr Joe Powell, head of the Baptist Memorial Hospital, growls: 'Medicaid was
so bad, almost anything is better.'
