Mr John Major yesterday underlined the government's determination not to be
stampeded into ordering further changes to the operations of the Child
Support Agency.
In heated exchanges at question time with Mr John Smith, the Labour leader,
the prime minister argued that more time was needed to evaluate the changes
that were announced in December. Stressing that the agency's operations
would be kept under review, Mr Major said any further changes should be made
in the light of 'a little more experience'. If changes proved necessary,
they would be made 'then, but not now'.
In a debate on the agency, Labour's call for further changes was defeated by
316 votes to 285, a government majority of 31. A government amendment
welcoming 'the important changes recently introduced in response to early
experience of the new scheme', was carried by 314 votes to 279, a majority
of 35.
Some Tory backbenchers joined Labour MPs in highlighting the problems faced
by 'absent fathers' who were pushed into financial difficulties by decisions
made by the agency.
Mr Donald Dewar, shadow social security minister, said that in some
instances maintenance payments agreed in earlier settlements had been
greatly increased and no account was taken of the travel costs incurred by
men who lived long distances from their place of work.
Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, said some of the changes already
announced were still being implemented.
While acknowledging the large number of complaints being received by MPs, he
emphasised that the agency was not just pursuing men who were already paying
maintenance for their children.
In the majority of cases the absent parent was 'not paying a penny of
regular maintenance and has not even agreed in principle to do so'.
He added that in 96 per cent of the cases dealt with by the agency, the
child and mother were living on social security benefit.
Mr Lilley denied that officers of the agency were paid a bonus geared to the
amount of money secured from absent parents - 'there is no element of bounty
hunting'.
