The Securities and Investments Board  - chief regulator of the financial
services industry in the UK  - told insurance companies and financial
advisers this week how to compensate thousands of people who incurred
financial loss when they gave up company pension scheme benefits in favour
of a personal pension plan. SIB identified three groups which may qualify
for compensation:
Pension transfers  - people who transferred company pension benefits to a
personal pension plan.
Opt-outs  - employees who left a company scheme to take out a personal plan.
Non-joiners  - employees who did not join a company scheme because they were
sold a personal plan.
Each group is divided into priority and non-priority cases. If yours is a
priority case, it will be reviewed automatically within two years by the
organisation responsible for the sale. If poor advice is proved, the
organisation must follow SIB's rules on calculating and paying compensation.
The provider or adviser must set out compensation details in a 'letter of
redress'. Under SIB's guidelines, you could be reinstated in your former
company scheme or receive a top-up to your personal plan. Either way, the
compensation should return you to a position equivalent to the one in which
you were before you took out the personal plan.
SIB has legal power under the Financial Services Act 1986 to enforce its
rules and will monitor the system closely. But your case will not be
considered for compensation if:
1. You were self-employed when you took out a personal plan.
2. Your employer did not have an occupational scheme.
3. You were advised to transfer, opt out or not join before April 29 1988
when the Financial Services Act began.
4. Your complaint relates solely to investment performance.
If you are not on the priority list but think you have a justified
complaint, you should write to the organisation that sold you the personal
pension, setting out the relevant details. Where individuals complain, SIB
has asked organisations to review the case within two years of the request.
The whole process  - from identifying those who have lost out, to paying
compensation  - is complex and time-consuming. The following guide, together
with the diagram showing priority cases, could help you through the maze.
PENSION TRANSFERS
Total number of cases: 600,000.
Priority cases: 100,000.
Number expected to receive compensation*: 20,000.
Average compensation per case*: Pounds 2,500.
Priority cases: These are split into two groups of older employees, since
these face the most immediate difficulties in the run-up to retirement. The
first group includes men over 55 and women over 50 at the time of transfer;
those who have retired already; and the spouses and dependants of people who
have died. These cases will be reviewed automatically by December 31 1995.
The second group includes men between 50 and 54 and women between 45 and 49
at the time of transfer. These cases will be reviewed automatically by
December 31 1996.
Comment: The number of priority cases is small compared with the total and,
of these, very few are expected to be compensated. Mitchell Philpott,
director of independent adviser Lexis Pensions Consultants, says: 'For many
of these cases, actuarial calculations will show that prospective loss has
not occurred.'
James Higgins, managing director of independent adviser Chamberlain de Broe,
adds: 'Unfortunately, with the way personal pensions are sold, the client
believes the transfer represents a simple choice between two similar pension
arrangements. He probably did not understand what guarantees were given up,
yet might well have signed a statement saying he did.'
PENSION OPT-OUTS
Total cases: 450,000.
Priority cases*: 150,000.
Number expected to receive compensation: 250,000-300,000.
Average compensation per case*: Pounds 10,000.
NON-JOINERS
Total cases: 1m.
Priority cases: 60,000.
Priority cases: SIB assessed the opt-outs and non-joiners together in three
priority groups. The first includes (a) people who are retired, and the
spouses or dependants of those who have died, plus (b) people who left an
employer's scheme, were 35 or over at the time they took out the personal
plan, and who are still with the same employer. These cases should be
reviewed by December 31 1995.
Group 2 includes non-joiners over 35 when they took out a personal plan who
are still with the same employer, plus those who were under 35 when they
left the employer's scheme and who are still with the same employer.
The latter group must be paying contributions in addition to the National
Insurance rebate paid to employees' personal plans where they opt out of the
state earnings related pension scheme (Serps). These cases should be
reviewed by June 30 1996.
Group 3 includes people who were over 35 when they left an employer's scheme
and took out a personal pension (both rebate-only and where extra
contributions are paid) and who are no longer with the same employer. These
cases must be reviewed by December 31 1996.
Where more information is required on the employees' pension options at the
time of the sale, SIB asked providers to send questionnaires to priority
cases. These will go out early next year.
Comment: Most people who were advised to opt out of a company scheme for a
personal pension in theory should receive compensation because personal
pension benefits do not match up to those offered by most schemes. But
Philpott warns: 'The logistics of identifying opt-outs is enormous and
non-response will reduce significantly the numbers compensated.'
Moreover, the priority category includes only those who are still with the
same employer. If you changed jobs since taking out the personal plan  - and
an estimated 60 per cent have done so  - then you are a non-priority case.
Non-joiners represent the most difficult category to assess and experts
believe few will be compensated.
Sources of help. For advice, telephone the Personal Investments Authority
(PIA) pensions unit on 071-417 7001; fax: 417 8100.
If you disagree with your review, you can complain to the relevant ombudsman
or arbitration scheme. The provider or adviser should explain the
appropriate complaints procedure in the redress letter.
To get SIB's fact sheet, The Pension Transfer and Opt-Out Review, send a
large SAE to Pensions Fact Sheet, PO Box 701, Basildon, Essex SS14 3FD.
*Source: Lexis Pension Consultants.
Picking the right pension  - page IX
