One of the two most remarkable features of Doug Lucie's new play, Gaucho, is
the role of the protagonist, Declan Moss. A working-class Englishman, 40
this year, educated at Oxford, he has become the world's pre-eminent drug
baron, is reputed to have given money to the IRA, and currently lives safely
on a little island in the Aegean. And yet money is not his goal. He is a
perpetual outsider, a Utopian, who attacks middle-class values and 'the
system' and who hopes for the day when a new generation will reorder
society. When attacked about the damage done by drugs, he replies that
'drugs are a symptom, not the cause', and he takes them plentifully himself.
They are part of his entry into an alternative system, and into his greatest
goal: freedom.
All kinds of awkward tensions must exist within and around such a character,
and Lucie's play investigates a number of them. During the play, he and his
beautiful Romanian wife Yana are joined in their idyllic island retreat by
three of his old Oxford cronies - one of whom, Stephanie, is a journalist,
accompanied by her photographer, Marsh. They help, by accident and by
design, to pose questions about their host. How serious can Declan's
Utopianism really be? Are his exploitations really less selfish or less
cruel than those of the system he loathes?
Questions, however, arise about the rest of them too. How come they, unlike
Declan, are so hooked on Oxford nostalgia? They are far from exemplary
themselves, and indeed Lucie loads the dice rather too heavily against two
of them. Stephanie is a selfish money-worried middle-class Tory voter;
another of the cronies, Spencer, is a failed Tory candidate (among his other
failures); and both are alcoholics. Tories are always easy targets for a
good joke and a good hate, and it is not hard for Declan to look morally
pretty serious by contrast.
In the first scene, before the others arrive, we understand that Yana
sometimes chains him as part of love-
making. 'One day,' she tells him, 'you will find yourself chained up and I
won't be there any more.' At the time it seems she means she might simply
chain and abandon him. But, as the play develops, other interpretations
emerge. Yet - skilful of Lucie - we do not realise how her words prepare us
for the play's end.
It is also soon apparent that their idyll is threatened. And first one, then
another, of their visitors proves duplicitous. (Lucie never really convinces
us, actually, that Declan - who insists that he trusts nobody - would invite
this questionable bunch of ex-chums to his island.) This leads to the other
extraordinary feature of the play - in which, during one of those 10-minute
gunpoint climaxes that make me thrash around in my seat in terror, Declan
and Yana punish the first traitor by means so original and grotesque that
the audience gasps.
Lucie directs, and Tim McInnerny is excellent as Declan, catching both
violence and calm, rebellion and idealism, cynicism and sexuality, plus a
hint of the trapped animal. Only one of his big speeches sounds like the set
piece it is, amid a performance that is otherwise a model of complex,
assured naturalism. In the performances of the five actors who support him
(Julia Lane, Phyllis Logan, Dominic Jephcott, Kate Fahy, Grant Masters) it
is slightly easier to be reminded of the theatrical artifice of the whole
set-up. But the play is full of suspense. Even when you guess what may
happen next - there are clues to prepare you for Act One's gruesome climax -
you want to see how it will happen.
At the Hampstead Theatre, NW3.
