Confronted by American labour leaders at Tate &amp; Lyle's annual meeting in
London yesterday, Mr Neil Shaw, executive chairman, denied that the sugar
and sweeteners' group was anti-union.
'Union busting is not part of our corporate style,' he insisted as he came
under a barrage of critical questioning from the union officials brandishing
proxy votes.
The men had come to London to publicise the eight month lock-out of 760
workers at the Decatur corn-processing plant in Illinois run by the AE
Staley offshoot.
Mr Shaw told shareholders a fresh attempt would be made to break the
deadlock.
'There are some hopeful signs the company will now seriously negotiate with
us but time will tell,' said Mr Mark Brooks, special projects director of
the United Paperworkers' union, after the meeting.
Mr Larry Pillard, chief executive at Staley in Decatur said the company was
ready to reach a deal with the union but 'not on any terms'. A former member
of the Teamster union, he said the company's 'drastic decision' to lock-out
the workers last June was 'not taken in a capricious manner'.
He added that the company had had no alternative when workers began a
work-to-rule against the imposition of new working conditions.
Mr Shaw said that for two years Staley had been attempting to secure a new
employment contract which would involve sweeping changes in working
practices to bring the plant's productivity into line with its US
competitors.
Mr Dave Watts, local president of the United Paperworkers, said yesterday
what the company wanted was 'the worst contract I have seen in the corn
processing industry'.
Despite the edginess of their public exchanges yesterday, which finally
exasperated the mainly elderly shareholders, Mr Shaw and the union leaders
seemed keen to try and find a way out of the dispute.
The board also faced critical questions over last year's resignation by
'mutual consent' of Mr Stephen Brown as chief executive with Pounds 1.1m in
compensation.
On current performance Mr Shaw said that the level of trading was
encouraging with signs of an improvement in continental Europe helped by
currency movements and rising demand.
