Further losses in oil production and the continued closure of the main
commercial banks yesterday hindered the plan by Nigeria's military regime to
break the six-week oil industry strike and get the economy back to normal.
Anglo-Dutch Shell, which operates about half of the country's 2m b/d oil
industry, announced yesterday the temporary closure of its Forcados
terminal, which exports about 500,000 b/d. Shell has not disclosed how much
of the other 500,000 b/d produced at its Bonny Terminal is lost because of
political strikes by the two oil workers' unions, Nupeng and Pengassan,
aimed at ending military rule and installing jailed opposition leader Mr
Moshood Abiola as president.
But world oil prices, heavily influenced in recent weeks by events in
Nigeria, fell sharply yesterday despite closure of the Forcados terminal.
The price of the benchmark Brent Blend for October fell to Dollars 15.75 in
late London trading yesterday, 60 cents down on its close last Friday.
Traders say the fact that Nigerian oil exports have been maintained despite
production cuts associated with the strike has reduced market fears of
supply shortages. World supplies of high-quality light crude oils, such as
those produced in most Nigerian fields, are currently plentiful because of
relatively high production levels in the North Sea.
Mr Don Etiebet, oil minister, said yesterday that many of the oil workers
had reported to work after being ordered back to their jobs by the military
ruler, Gen Sani Abacha.
Oil industry officials said, however, it was too early to assess if the
strike had been broken.
The biggest refinery, Port Harcourt, closed more than a week ago. The next
biggest, Warri, has not yet been restored after an overhaul begun in March
and the smaller Kaduna refinery can produce little except fuel oil, of which
there is a surplus since many factories are shut.
The closure for the past month of some of the banks is also causing the
government concern. Mr Aminu Saleh, secretary to the government, warned
banks yesterday that unless they opened by tomorrow he would 'review their
licences'.
Instructions from the government to the four or five biggest commercial
banks, with a wide network of branches throughout Lagos, failed to persuade
them to open their doors to the public yesterday.
Many companies pay salaries through these banks and some employees have been
unable to get their July pay. The big commercial banks, which were all
privatised last year, hold most of the banks' deposits and if the government
closed them it would paralyse the banking system.
The banks, which are not releasing cash to the public, took part yesterday
in the latest auction of foreign exchange in which Dollars 100m will be sold
to manufacturers and importers. The acute shortage of foreign currency in
Nigeria has reduced the auctions from fortnightly to once a month.
