A cyclical rebound in earnings from their chemicals businesses helped Exxon
and other big US oil groups to report solid gains in underlying operating
profits for the third quarter.
The overall earnings picture was complicated by one-off factors in both the
latest and 1993 periods, however. As a result, net income at both Exxon and
Amoco fell, while Arco reported a strong rebound in profits.
The US oil majors' latest results come against the backdrop of a rise in oil
prices from a year ago. This has lifted upstream exploration and production
earnings, despite a fall in natural gas prices. Meanwhile, profit margins in
downstream refining and marketing operations were well below the levels hit
in the buoyant 1993 quarter, when the groups benefited from a sliding oil
price.
The improvements in chemical earnings at the three companies in the three
months to the end of September showed that the industry's cyclical recovery
remained on track.
Overall, the US petrochemicals industry has experienced volume growth of 7
per cent over the past year, said Mr Paul Raman, a chemicals analyst at SG
Warburg in New York. European growth in the latest period, at some 3 per
cent, continued the recovery which had lifted earnings during the second
quarter.
Higher US prices in the petrochemical products in which the energy groups
specialise - principally ethylene, polyethylene, polystyrene and polyvinyl
chloride - were supported by a fire at an Exxon plant in Texas during the
summer. By limiting capacity, this helped to underpin price rises in the
industry.
Despite this, Exxon said its chemicals businesses earned Dollars 198m
(Pounds 125m) in the latest period, up from Dollars 46m a year before (which
was struck after a one-off tax charge of Dollars 26m.) 'Chemical product
sales were the highest in over two years, and margins also improved,' said
Mr Lee Raymond, chairman.
Mr Laurance Fuller, Amoco's chairman and chief executive, also pointed to
'higher sales volumes and margins for most (chemicals) products.' The
company reported earnings in this sector of Dollars 154m, compared with
Dollars 60m in the 1993 period. Analysts expect the bounce in petrochemical
earnings to continue in coming quarters. 'We're about halfway through the
cycle,' Mr Raman said.
Exxon reported net income of Dollars 1.15bn, down from Dollars 1.36bn after
Dollars 306m of one-off benefits a year ago. Earnings per share were 92
cents, some 10 cents ahead of expectations.
Amoco's net income of Dollars 445m after a Dollars 32m charge for
environmental clean-up compared with Dollars 520m a year before, when it
benefited from a Dollars 70m gain from asset disposals. It earned 89 cents a
share, which was also ahead of market forecasts. Arco's after-tax profits
were Dollars 435m, up from Dollars 68m, while earnings per share were
Dollars 2.67.
