The South African government yesterday formally reversed its long-standing
opposition to privatisation and said proceeds from the sale of state assets,
as well as a soon-to-be introduced national lottery, would be used to fund
its centrepiece reconstruction and development programme (RDP).
In presenting its White Paper on the RDP to parliament, the government said
it 'recognises that the location and composition of state assets may not be
optimal, and has begun an audit to dispose of those assets not relevant to
the RDP'.
The document also notes that it will use revenue generated from 'lotteries
and gambling', expected soon to be legalised, as well as all directly
received international and domestic grant aid, to help fund development
projects.
According to the document, this revenue will be added to funds raised from
budgetary reallocations and the government will not seek to raise money for
the RDP through extra borrowing. The government spending portion of the
programme is budgeted at R37.5bn over five years.
Although neither move was unexpected, together with other recent policy
statements by the government on reducing the government deficit and lowering
trade barriers, they confirm the African National Congress-led
administration's formal adoption of a broadly free-market approach to
economic policy.
When the RDP was originally drawn up by the ANC before the April elections,
it emphasised the importance of a highly interventionist state to redress
the imbalances of apartheid, and left open the possibility of
nationalisation of major enterprises.
In successive drafts, however, the statist policies have been whittled down
and, while the wording on some issues remains ambiguous, the central thrust
of the government's commitment to private-sector led growth is clear.
Speaking at a press conference, Mr Jay Naidoo, the minister without
portfolio who has responsibility for the RDP, said it was important that
most of the initiatives for the programme came from outside government.
'We don't have the resources in our country to do everything overnight,' he
said. 'We are not giving handouts, we are reallocating resources.'
Testifying to this point, the White Paper emphasises that it regards the
reduction of government spending as essential to economic growth, and makes
a commitment to start cutting the size of the Public Service from next year
while improving its efficiency.
'There has been a struggle between market-oriented government economists and
more interventionist ANC ones and, although there have been some sops thrown
to the latter, the former appear to have triumphed,' noted one policy
analyst.
The document strongly reaffirms the government's commitment to workers'
rights and the principle of labour involvement in strategic decisions,
calling for 'greater worker participation' and endorsing the use of
collective bargaining to negotiate affirmative action.
The government plans to introduce strict anti-trust legislation to try to
create 'a more competitive and dynamic business environment'.
'The central objectives of such legislation are to discourage systematically
the system of pyramids where it leads to over-concentration of economic
power and interlocking directorships to abolish numerous anti-competitive
practices such as market domination and abuse ..'
