JOURNEY TO LIVINGSTONE
by Timothy Holmes
Canongate Press Pounds 17.99, 366 pages
Umbopa, you will recall, announces in the closing pages of King Solomon's
Mines that he will permit no Europeans, and in particular neither traders
nor missionaries, to enter the African kingdom that he has recovered with
the help of Allan Quatermain and Sir Henry Curtis. Rider Haggard had
understood that the missionaries of Victorian times were not exclusively
concerned with the souls of their heathen flock. The most famous of them
all, David Livingstone, was a good example of such extracurricular
priorities; his brother-in-law, John Moffat, who gave up mission work to
become an important colonial servant, was another.
The most interesting element in Timothy Holmes' new biography, Journey To
Livingstone, is that it reveals how small a part the missionary vocation
played in the Scotsman's life. Nor did doctoring appear to play a larger
role. That is hardly surprising. From the time Livingstone arrived in 1841,
in what is today the Western Transvaal, he was obsessed with travel and
exploration and spent less and less time on his official duties for the
London Missionary Society - and you can hardly be an effective medical
missionary if you are tramping through the bush for years on end in search
of another lake or tributary. It is generally agreed that Livingstone made
only one convert in his first 12 years, and that one relapsed.
He made his name by 'discovering' Lake Ngami in 1848. Then, in two stages
between 1853 and 1856, he became the first white man to cross Africa, from
Luanda to Mozambique, and on the way 'discovered' and named the Victoria
Falls. (All this talk of discovery in the 'empty continent' is of course
nonsense: Holmes properly makes the point that the African inhabitants had
an adequate knowledge of the geography of their own regions. Livingstone's
greatest asset was that he was a good linguist and therefore could access
local expertise.)
With Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa Livingstone was
created one of the great heroes of the Victorian age. Holmes is good on the
reasons why post-Crimean Britain was looking for a Christian paragon, though
parallels with a Christ figure seem a bit strong. There followed ten years
when Livingstone no longer seriously pretended to be a missionary but
concentrated on an irregular role as a roving British consul. The Zambesi
Expedition of 1858-64 was a disaster whose detail, well told here, must
always cast doubt on Livingstone's qualities - his judgment of men was
faulty (particularly his inclusion of his brother), his theory of the
navigability of the Zambesi was perverse, his choice of river steamer was an
error, and even his subsequent book was a failure - and it was left to HM
Stanley to 'rescue' Livingstone in more senses than one by reinventing the
myth of the saintly Dr Livingstone at Ujiji after the horrors of the Nile
Expedition of 1866-73. And then he was dead, and immortal, the body returned
to civilisation and to Westminster Abbey by his faithful servants, as we all
learn at our mother's knee.
Livingstone, as Holmes shows, was a driven man. It is never clear why. True,
he went to work in a cotton mill outside Glasgow at ten and hauled himself
up through the Scottish education system - but why this obsessive need to
leave the country, to travel far beyond the frontiers of Calvinist
settlement, to deny any priority to his mission or to his family (and to his
alcoholic wife Mary Moffat, who is a shadowy, tragic figure in the tale)?
The weakness of this book, beyond the scandalous inadequacy of its maps, is
that it never begins to convince us about the man's motivation. Its strength
is not so much the use of 'recently revealed' letters as the depth of its
background analysis.
Livingstone believed in the three 'Cs', Christianity, Commerce and
Civilisation: he was to add a fourth - Colonisation. In 1858 he was writing
of his hopes for 'an English colony in the healthy highlands of Central
Africa' (Umbopa was surely right]) but he had been looking for a suitable
territory for years before that - Barotseland? the Batoka plateau? the Shire
valley? His ideal seems to have been for a colony directed by a small
Christian elite where free labour would produce a cash crop for the benefit
of the natives thanks to export access to the sea. Hence his need to open a
route - east or west - to the ocean: hence the explorer. (Holmes points out
that this vision has parallels with earlier Jesuit blueprints, just as he
reminds us that Livingstone's support for the training of native African
catechists was closer to Jesuits like Francis Xavier than to his own fellow
missionaries.)
And slavery? He was realistic about the existence, and the permanence, of
domestic slavery in Africa, but he came to detest the export trade, and
there - symbolised by the closure of the Zanzibar market in 1873, the year
of his death - lies his memorial. He understood the relationship between
slavery and ivory, and came to think that the development of legitimate and
profitable commerce, a two-way process in in a colonial system, would cut
the ground from beneath the slave trade. Holmes puts it vividly: every
ivory-keyed pianoforte in Victorian England entailed one elephant killed and
two slaves to carry the tusks to the coast] The irony, well-appreciated for
years, is that during the last appalling years of wandering without
medicines in the bush, Livingstone's life was saved again and again by the
charity of passing Zanzibari slave traders.
'The end of the geographical feat is the beginning of the missionary
enterprise' was how Livingstone justified himself, though he might have put
it the other round. 'Dr L. is out of his mind' wrote his exasperated
companion John Kirk, later to become another notable colonial servant in
East Africa. A happier image of madness is 'Dr L' measuring the height of
the Victoria Falls: he took a canoe across the force of the current to a
tiny island overhanging the lip, then leaned over the 300-foot precipice and
lowered a length of rope. Some missionary]
