The Type 23 frigate HMS Northumberland, the latest ship to be built at Swan
Hunter, left the Tyne yesterday to a subdued farewell from a workforce
facing yet more job losses.
Among the Swans men on board, satisfaction at the completion of the latest
of more than 2,700 ships built by the company since 1862 was mixed with
anxiety.
The Pounds 150m Northumberland, fitted with the latest warfare and
communications equipment, may be the penultimate ship built in a region
which once produced two out of every five in the world.
Northumberland is the second of three frigates Swan Hunter was fitting out
when receivers Price Waterhouse were called in last May, after the company
failed to win a crucial Ministry of Defence helicopter carrier order.
Northumberland's departure triggers 237 lay-offs and 148 redundancies.
Today, most of Swans' remaining 1,050 employees - cut from 2,500 since
receivership - will learn who is to be laid off next weekend.
Their only hope of return, and of work at Swans beyond November for the 660
remaining to complete the last frigate, HMS Richmond, rests on the company's
tender to the MoD for the Sir Bedivere landing ship refit, to be awarded in
July.
Eighty Swans workers will carry out final machinery trials on Northumberland
as she sails to Devonport.
All those facing redundancy will be told on Thursday and leave the next day.
'Swans' future is in the hands of the same men it was 12 months ago. I think
they'll make the same decision,' said Mr Eddie Heron, a 32-year-old fitter
For Mr Tom Scott, shipbuilding manager for the three frigates, the next few
days on Northumberland will be difficult. He knows which men are to lose
their jobs.
'It's bloody heartbreaking,' he said. 'The sad thing is, our performance
since receivership has been exceptional.'
Northumberland's marine engineer officer, Commander Andrew Young, said he
felt for Swans' workers in their 'beleaguered position'.
'There's no two ways about it, they build superb ships. It comes down to the
individual in the workforce. He's highly skilled, he has trained
craftsmanship.'
Joint receiver Mr Ed James said selecting the 148 for redundancy had been
very difficult. 'You're down to your best people.'
