For decades, the Federation of Employers Associations (Keidanren), Japan's
leading business lobby, has acted as the control centre for businesses in
realising the government's industrial policy, as the guardian of business
interests, and as fund-raiser for the conservative Liberal Democratic Party.
However, the old order, where business, bureaucrats and politicians worked
closely together to ensure Japan's economic success by directing funds to
specific industries and keeping foreign competition out, is breaking down.
Political realignment which started last year, heightened criticism of the
bureaucracy for its resistance to deregulation. Battered business confidence
due to the prolonged recession has altered the relationship of the three
parties known as the 'iron triangle'.
The influence of the Keidanren has also been undermined by the realisation
among businesses that neither governmental nor political control can provide
answers for the structural problems which Japan's industries face.
Amid such changes, the organisation is trying to promote itself as an
instigator for deregulation. Earlier this year, Mr Shoichiro Toyoda, the
chairman, asked then Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata to cut the number of
bureaucratic regulations by half in the next five years.
The Keidanren believes that deregulation is essential to revive Japanese
industry, presently stifled by bureaucratic and political intrusion. It sees
deregulation also helping to remove the price differentials between consumer
products in Japanese and overseas markets, and activating consumer
confidence.
The Keidanren recently blew a whistle on the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry for allegedly violating the law on administrative procedure,
laid down last October. Complicated and unwritten bureaucratic
decision-making has long been regarded as a regulatory barrier for new
businesses. Companies, including foreign enterprises, have voiced complaints
over the procedures.
The new law aims to make bureaucratic decision-making more transparent and
to curb the influence of lobby groups on bureaucratic decisions by laying
down rules for the processing of applications for government permits or
licences.
The irony is, however, that while the Keidanren is an eager watchdog for the
government's deregulatory process, many of the industries which the
organisation oversees are beneficiaries of administrative guidance and other
government regulations. This includes the motor industry, whose interests Mr
Toyoda, also chairman of Toyota Motor, is keen to protect.
The car industry and the government are under pressure from the US to ease
the vehicle inspection system which has long been blamed for making it
costly for consumers to own the same car for more than five years, and
encouraging regular replacement of vehicles.
The Keidanren is aware of the pain of deregulation. In a recent report, it
predicts that full-scale deregulation would wipe Y10,000bn off gross
domestic product and put 2.84m people out of work in the following few
years.
And while it envisages the eventual benefits of deregulation as a net
increase of 740,000 jobs and a Y177,000bn rise in the national wealth, it
claims that the prerequisite for a successful transition is an improved
infrastructure, telecommunications and social services.
How far the organisation can shrug off the vested interests it embodies and
convince corporations to alter traditional practices in order to promote
fully-fledged deregulation remains to be seen.
