Shipowners belonging to the Trans-Atlantic Agreement, a controversial
shipping 'conference' which sets cargo rates across the north Atlantic,
yesterday offered a concession designed to defuse their dispute with the
European Commission and exporters.
Lord Sterling, chairman of the P&amp;O shipping line and president of the
European Community Shipowners' Associations, last night proposed dropping
the TAA's constraints on capacity on the north Atlantic routes. The offer
was made during a meeting with Mr Karel Van Miert, the EU competition
commissioner.
Exporters have complained that by restricting capacity as well as setting
rates, the TAA was allowing inefficient shipowners to keep excess tonnage in
operation.
The TAA hopes that by dropping its clause on capacity management it will
persuade the European commission's competition directorate - DG4 - to
continue to grant the shipowners exemption from the normal EU competition
rules.
'We are proposing to drop the capacity angle from the package,' Lord
Sterling said. 'It is not necessary because in practice excess tonnage on
these routes was taken out two years ago.'
This is the second time that the shipowners have made changes to the TAA.
They proposed a compromise agreement, the Trans-Atlantic Conference
Agreement (TACA), in July easing some of the terms of the original 1992
conference.
But shippers, companies which export goods across the Atlantic, said this
was simply a delaying tactic and threatened legal action against the
European commission if it did not speedily issue a ruling on both
agreements.
A second objection to the TAA/TACA - that they set rates for containers on
their land journey to the port, thereby increasing costs - is still rejected
by the shipowners. 'Multimodal shipments (by land and water) are a vital
part of the container industry,' Lord Sterling said. 'The efficiency of
multi-modal shipments is essential to the success of containerisation.
Customers say they do not want anything to do with the cargo from the moment
it leaves the factory gate.'
Shipowners believe that the multi-modal issue does not relate solely to the
TAA/TACA but to conferences generally and should be negotiated separately.
'We want to separate TACA from the multimodal debate,' Lord Sterling said.
The British Shippers' Council, representing UK-based exporters, said it was
heartened by the proposal to drop capacity management from the conference
but remained opposed to shipowners cont-rolling the land leg of a journey.
'We are against the shipowners making profits from inland price-fixing,' Mr
Richard Turner, policy director, said. 'They get the cheapest price (for
inland haulage) by tender and then sell it in a cartel at the dearest
price.'
The TAA/TACA groups 15 large shipping lines which account for 85 per cent of
sailings across the north Atlantic. It was introduced to stem considerable
losses by the shipping lines and its members include Nedlloyd and Maersk.
Exporters say these losses were exaggerated and the conference has been used
to push through excessive rate increases.
The European commission has issued a temporary judgment objecting to the TAA
and is expected to produce a final ruling within the next month.
