EVELYN WAUGH: A BIOGRAPHY by Selina Hastings. Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 20,
724 pages
This is the third biography of Evelyn Waugh. The general picture of a
monster who was a comic genius and who wrote like an angel remains; but this
portrait is painted in warm fresh colours; the background is filled in with
an eye for detail based on much new investigation and from personal
knowledge.
Waugh emerges as an even more complex character than before as he travels
through a life that began in 1903 at Fortune Green, North London, as the
second son of Arthur Waugh, publisher and occasional writer.
Waugh does not become any nicer through renewed acquaintance. At Lancing
College he moved in a precocious set that included Tom Driberg, Dudley Crew
(later Times film critic), Roger Fulford and Max Mallowan. The latter
remembered Waugh as: 'courageous and witty and clever but (he) was also an
exhibitionist with a cruel nature that cared nothing about humiliating his
companions as long as he could expose them to riducule.'
Those traits remained for the rest of his life. At Oxford, he fell foul of
his history tutor, CRMF Cruttwell, who became thereafter a constant butt of
Waugh the writer's wit. Waugh went down without a degree but not without
memorable experience. He had fallen in love with inebriate, feckless
Alistair Graham, a Catholic convert (who became Sebastian Flyte in
Brideshead), and had met two homosexual aesthetes Harold Acton and Brian
Howard (who jointly became Anthony Blanche).
Waugh had no job and no prospects. Art seemed an option. He had a talent for
drawing - or perhaps cabinet-making. He revered craftsmen. In the end it had
to be schoolmastering. He went off to Arnold House, Llanddulas,
Denbighshire, where he became popular among the boys on account, we are
told, of 'his enlightened policy of laisser faire'. He hated it but it was
all wonderful copy. When Decline and Fall came out, illustrated by him in
1928, he enjoyed universal critical success. 'An uncompromising and
brilliantly malicious satire,' said Arnold Bennett in the Evening Standard.
Waugh was still only 24.
His first brief marriage soon came to grief and Waugh, now a celebrity, fell
in love with many of the well-bred young women he met. Most were indifferent
to him as a lover. Sometimes it was whole families of whom he became
enamoured in his upward ascent. There were most importantly the Plunkett
Greenes, two tall brothers, a daughter and a mother Gwen, niece of Baron von
Hugel, the theologian.
It was she - Gwen Greene - who set Waugh on the path to Rome and Father
Martin D'Arcy who instructed him. It took a long time for the Vatican to
annul his youthful marriage, a measure that became urgent when Waugh met his
fate, Laura Herbert, 18, who was of all things the cousin of 'She-Evelyn',
his first wife. 'I thought we had heard the last of that young man,' said
her aunt.
A happy permanent second marriage did not somehow mellow Waugh. Children, of
which they had several, bored him. He tended to disappear when his wife's
pregancies came to term. Instances of his incivility, his outrageous
behaviour in his public life, abound. Feuds with other writers such as Peter
Quennell could be never ending.
His saving grace was courage. He was an intrepid traveller before the war on
various assignments including visits to Abyssinia (see Black Mischief and
Scoop). As an officer in the Royal Marines and Commandos Waugh behaved badly
in the mess and inconsiderately towards his men, but was brave in action
especially during the exodus from Crete.
The contradictions inherent in Evelyn Waugh could be endlessly prolonged.
The role of the landed English Catholic country gentleman, in which he cast
himself, was stressful for him to keep up. Add to it the precariousness of
literature as a means of sustaining a large household and an extravagant
lifestyle and you have the prelude to the ship-board crack-up so well
described in Pinfold. It was precipitated by bromide poisoning; he was
taking it to cure his insomnia.
In his last years Waugh became an icon of English insularity, a volcanic
John Bull-figure in houndstooth suit, brandishing cigar or ear-trumpet which
he put to his ear when he was speaking and lowered when you were. In fact,
you were most unlikely to get anywhere near him especially if you were a
journalist. He saw the intrusive Nancy Spain of the Daily Express literally
off his premises and then successfully pursued her through the courts for
libel. He managed in the famous television Face to Face interview to
discomfit the normally unflappable John Freeman by replying to his probing
questions in brusque monosyllablic one-liners.
After more than quarter of a century, neither the legend nor the bad
behaviour matters. Great comic novelists such as Waugh and Dickens do often
behave badly to their nearest and dearest as well as to their furthest and
most loathed. Waugh the man diminishes to nothing when placed beside the
delights of his still hugely readable fiction.
Selina Hastings does not neglect this. She can be most perceptive when
relating the life to the novels. All are still in print and selling well.
Vile Bodies and Brideshead Revisited both sold between 11,000 and 12,000
copies last year. If Waugh were alive he would, surely, at 91, be gruntled
to know that.
