Mr John Major's tough stance was warmly embraced last night by the
Conservative party's leading Euro-sceptics as he staunchly defended his
suggestion that Britain might opt out of the next stage of European
integration. But the prime minister's vision of a multi-speed, multi-track
Europe provoked anger among pro-European Tories and blistering attacks from
Labour and the Liberal Democrats.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, sought to dampen the controversy by
insisting that in many areas Britain would welcome closer co-operation with
its EU partners.
Speaking in Derby, Mr Hurd singled out Britain's strong support for European
policy co-ordination as an example of where 'we are leading the pack in an
area of crucial importance to Europe'.
But Lord Tebbit, the former party chairman and a prominent sceptic, said the
sentiment and tone of Mr Major's remarks were 'clearly incompatible' with
the Maastricht treaty which had been forced through parliament.
Welcoming the prime minister's apparent conversion to the Euro-sceptic
cause, he said that the speech would persuade many Conservatives not to
abstain in the June 9 European elections.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, insisted that Mr Major had
put his own position ahead of the interests of the country.
Speaking in Edinburgh, Mr Ashdown added: 'Its historic importance is that Mr
Major, in order to save his own skin in the short-term, is now preparing the
way in which the Conservatives - if they lose the next election - will risk
becoming the anti-European party in Britain.'
Members of the Conservative party's pro-European wing also privately
attacked the prime minister for ceding ground to the sceptics. They warned
that his stance would significantly weaken his support from the centre-left
in any contest for the Tory leadership.
But Mr Major was unrepentant over his suggestion that Britain might opt out
of any further moves by its EU partners towards a centralised European
state. He said in London that there was no contradiction between his
oft-stated commitment to keep Britain at 'the heart of Europe'.
Mr Major said the Conservative party alone was committed to 'a realistic
assessment of the future of Europe and of Britain's place in Europe'.
Underlining his determination to preserve the national veto, Mr Major said:
'I approach this question as someone who wishes to see Europe succeed.' But
that did not mean that Britain had to accept every idea that came from its
European partners. Sometimes it would stand aside from 'the nonsense'.
Editorial comment, Page 21
