The UK's first underground nuclear waste dump might have to be strengthened
to prevent radiation leaks to the surface if it is built deep below the
Cumbrian mountains, a government advisory committee warned yesterday.
Scientific investigations into the flows of water in the rocks underneath
Sellafield suggest that water may flow upwards through the proposed site,
according to the Radio-active Waste Management Advisory Committee.
Sir John Knill, the committee's chairman, said that if further research
'demonstrated flows to the surface it would put greater reliance on the
physical and chemical containment' of the radioactive waste to be buried.
The warnings, contained in the committee's 60-page annual report, published
yesterday, come as debate grows over the options for disposing of the UK's
nuclear waste.
Next month the government is due to publish a consultation paper on
radioactive waste disposal, in parallel with the review of the future of
nuclear power now under way.
Mr Tom Curtin of Nirex UK, the nuclear industry company with the task of
finding a site for the store, said yesterday that the past year's research
had left it 'more confident, not less' that Sellafield would eventually
prove suitable.
At present the UK's nuclear waste is stored above ground.
Sir John said that within 'a small number of years, although not immediately
. . . the storage issue will be critical'.
The underground site, which would hold waste of low and intermediate levels
of radioactivity, would be sealed for tens of thousands of years until the
radioactivity had diminished to safe levels.
High-level waste would continue to be stored on the surface where it could
be examined. Plans for the store have been politically and scientifically
controversial, however, and Nirex has repeatedly extended its timescale.
The advisory committee said yesterday that Nirex's latest target of the year
2010 for completion was the most realistic yet, but that it assumed
regulators did not want further tests.
Environmentalists are concerned that radioactivity will leak from the store
into the water table.
Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, which yesterday published its own
74-page report into the proposed store, called on nuclear companies to
repackage waste so that it could be stored for longer at its existing sites.
This, it says, would allow more time to investigate the underground store.
RWMAC 14th annual report. HMSO. Pounds 10.
