Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, is under mounting pressure from
Conservative backbenchers to reject French and German proposals for a
sweeping reform of the European Union that would exclude the UK from an
inner core of EU states.
Tory MPs on both the pro-European and Euro-sceptic wings of the party
yesterday urged the prime minister to use a keynote speech in the
Netherlands this week to criticise the proposals, which call for the
creation of an inner core of five EU states - France, Germany, Belgium, the
Netherlands and Luxembourg. They fear the UK, along with Spain and Italy,
would be relegated to the 'slow lane' of Europe.
Euro-sceptic Tory MPs claimed the proposals would mean that Britain paid the
full cost of EU membership without getting the benefits.
The proposed changes emerged in an interview given by Mr Edouard Balladur,
French prime minister, and in a document published by the senior party in
the governing German coalition, the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
Under the changes, Britain, Spain and Italy would be in a second tier of
states, which would not be obliged to meet all the criteria of European
monetary union. Other European states with weaker economies would be in a
third tier.
Mr James Cran, a rightwing Tory MP and leading Euro-sceptic, said: 'The
conception laid out in these discussion papers is unacceptable. They will
end up consolidating Franco-German domination of the EU.'
Pro-European Tories MPs on the right of the party were also dismayed by the
proposals.
Mr Peter Temple-Morris, one of the party's leading pro-European MPs, said:
'I am very fearful that we will end up with a two-tier system, with us in
the second tier.'
Mr Major will deliver his speech at the University of Leiden on Wednesday.
It will be virtually impossible for him to ignore the Franco-German
proposals, which threaten to open a period of debate over Europe's
constitutional future that may prove as divisive as the wrangling over the
Maastricht treaty. The Italian and Spanish governments last week attacked
the proposals, which many believe are the opening positions in the argument
leading to the EU intergovernmental conference in 1996.
British officials made clear that the government is unhappy with some
aspects of the proposals. which employ a more rigid demarcation of the core
members of the 'multitrack, multispeed' Europe proposed by Mr Major in the
recent European elections.
Mr Major and Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, have argued that there
should be a series of inner cores tailored to particular areas of policy.
The UK, for example, would be in the core group on defence and single market
legislation, but not on social chapter discussions.
Editorial Comment, Page 17
