A year after Gillette was given permission by the Indian government to
acquire a stake in Harbanslal Malhotra and Sons (HMSL), India's biggest
razor blades manufacturer, the US-based multinational's ambitious plans for
the sub-continent have been stalled by a family feud and protracted legal
battle.
At the heart of the dispute is a growing fear and resentment among Indian
industrialists that the government's reform programme, introduced three
years ago, has made it too easy for multinationals to establish themselves
in the Indian market by buying up the most successful local businesses.
Last year, Coca-Cola bought Parle Exports, India's largest soft drinks
manufacturer, and Procter and Gamble acquired a stake in Godrej Soaps to
consolidate its presence in the Indian detergents market.
More recently, Whirlpool, the US white goods giant, has bought Kelvinator
India, one of the country's most established refrigerator manufacturers.
Gillette has identified India as one of three chief markets (with China and
Russia), in which it will expand all its businesses - Gillette shaving
systems, the Oral-B dental care range, Braun home appliances, and Parker
writing equipment - during the next decades. The company will invest Dollars
50m to Dollars 60m in 1994-95, and is carrying out extensive market research
in the country.
Gillette has had a presence in India's Rs2.5bn Indian razor blades market
since 1986. India's reforms programme only encouraged the company to expand
in what it considers the world's largest market, with a vast untapped
potential.
Last year, the company increased its 40 per cent stake in Indian Shaving
Products, a joint venture with the Calcutta-based Poddar group, to 51 per
cent.
Although the Indian company enjoyed an 18 per cent market share, its success
was confined to the upper end of the shaving systems market, which accounts
for a mere 3 per cent of the total market of 47.2bn units a year. To enter
the fast-expanding lower end of the Indian blades market, Gillette decided
to link up with its main Indian competitors, the Malhotras, who control more
than 55 per cent of the blades market.
'Out of 20bn blades sold in the world, 7.8bn are in the lower segment of the
market,' says Mr Gurbrinder Singh Gill, director for strategic projects at
Gillette International and head of Gillette's India operations. 'We cannot
produce cheap blades because of our high R&amp;D costs. An alliance with the
Malhotras will help us establish ourselves in all the segments, and then we
will be in a position to considerably widen the market.'
Gillette estimates that more than 700m Indians use cut-throat razors instead
of blades, and could be persuaded to use more modern shaving systems in
time.
Last October, the government's Foreign Investment Promotion Board cleared
Gillette's proposal to pay Dollars 20m for a 26 per cent stake in NVI
Engineering, a Malhotra group company which manufactures blade-making
machinery.
But Mr Rajinder Malhotra, who with his sons owns 33 per cent of HMSL, the
Rs600m flagship company, contested the deal, saying his two elder brothers
Ved Prakash (who has retired due to ill health) and Surinder Nath (who runs
the business), were selling their stake to Gillette without his knowledge.
He claims that his brothers have valued HMSL at Rs600m while he believes it
to be worth at least Rs15bn.
Mr Rajinder, who with his sons owns Vidyut Metallics, a local blades maker
withabout 27 per cent of the market, fears that apart from the dilution of
the stake in HMSL he inherited from his father, his Rs1bn-a-year turnover
company would find it hard to compete with Gillette once it collaborated
with his two brothers.
If Gillette acquired a 49 per cent stake in HMSL, it could gain an annual
production capacity of 1.5bn blades, the capacity of two HMSL plants in
Calcutta.
If the capacities of other HMSL subsidiaries, Malhotra Shaving Products and
Centron Industrial Alliances, were added, Gillette could increase its
capacity to 2.4bn blades. Since Gillette already has a controlling stake in
Indian Shaving Products, it could control 75 per cent of the Indian blades
market.
In August last year, before the government granted permission for Gillette
to acquire the Malhotra stake, Mr Rajinder asked the Company Law Board to
intervene over the negotiations between Gillette and his brothers. The Law
Board ordered HMSL not to proceed with the collaboration without the
approval of all the shareholders of the company, but this was subsequently
set aside when the elder brothers appealed to the Calcutta High Court.
Mr Rajinder also moved to the Delhi High Court, challenging the Foreign
Investment Promotion Board's right to grant permission to Gillette to expand
its business in India. he alleged that the government had not evolved clear
criteria and principles for processing such applications. He claimed
Gillette had suppressed important facts about the tie-up, and that the
company was importing obsolete machinery which it already possessed.
Gillette, he said, was not ready to bring in sophisticated sensor-blade
technology, but the price of razor blades would increase sharply once
Gillette established a market monopoly.
The Supreme Court was moved to set aside a stay the elder Malhotras acquired
from the Calcutta High Court, and the final hearing in the Delhi High Court
is posted for October 4. Mr Rajinder was also keen to get HMSL's shares
evaluated the Indian company's shares, saying his brothers had grossly
undervalued the company at Rs600m, while he estimated the company to be
worth Rs15bn.
Meanwhile, Gillette is scouting for partners to enter the writing
instruments market, and the home appliances and the dental care market.
These markets will be easier to develop than the shaving products market.
