International Business Machines aims to 'shatter Windows' with the launch
next week (October 11) of Warp, a completely overhauled version of OS/2, its
personal computer operating system software.
Microsoft's Windows dominates the world market for PC operating systems  -
the software that controls the basic functions of a computer. An estimated
60m PCs have Windows installed, while IBM's OS/2 comes a distant second with
about 6m copies in use.
Warp may, however, prove to be a potent challenger to the Microsoft industry
standard. 'There is no question, Warp is technologically superior to
Windows,' says Karl Wong, of Dataquest, a US market research firm.
While the current versions of Windows are 16-bit operating systems - they
process data in 16-bit chunks - OS/2 is a 32-bit operating system that can
take full advantage of the power of the latest microprocessors, he points
out. For PC users, this means applications will run faster, fetching data
from a disk drive will take fewer seconds, and video on a PC screen will be
sharper.
Another advantage of Warp is that it will fit comfortably into 4MB of
memory, the standard configuration of most PCs sold today, says Wong.
With the introduction of Warp, IBM is seizing a rare opportunity to try to
upstage the software market leader. Microsoft was to have launched a 32-bit
version of Windows, popularly known as by its code name Chicago, towards the
end of last year but the launch has been repeatedly postponed and the
company now says that the software, renamed Windows 95, will not appear
until early next year.
'Arrive in Chicago earlier than expected,' say IBM advertisements for OS/2.
'There is no need to wait in a holding pattern for a 32-bit operating
system.' IBM's wisecracks may raise some laughs among computer buffs, but
the biggest challenge facing Big Blue as it tries to break the Windows hold
on the PC market is that familiarity may have more appeal to the average PC
user than technological superiority.
An April survey of 10,500 PC users conducted by Computer Intelligence
Infocorp, a market research group, found that 23 per cent had never heard of
OS/2, although the first version was introduced seven years ago. Only 4 per
cent did not know of Microsoft's Windows.
IBM plans a Dollars 50m (Pounds 31.6m) advertising campaign for OS/2 over
the next three months, and the company is using many of its senior
executives to seek converts to the product worldwide. Still, operating
system software is a hard sell.
In an attempt to give Warp broader appeal, IBM is packaging the new version
of OS/2 with a bundle of applications designed to lure new customers.
Topping the list is a set of programs that will give instant access to the
Internet, the global computer network.
'The information superhighway is the hottest topic among PC users today, yet
many people really have no idea what it is or how to get on it,' says Wally
Casey, IBM personal software products director of marketing. There are a
million new users logging on to the Internet every month, but about 400,000
give up because it is too hard to use, he says.
IBM plans to tap into the excitement surrounding the Internet by providing
easy-to-use software for a wide range of Internet software. The package will
turn the average PC user into a fully-fledged 'Net surfer'.
'We aim to make OS/2 synonymous with the information superhighway,' says
Casey. Warp users will get immediate access to the Internet via the Advantis
network in the US and other IBM networks worldwide. After 10 free hours of
access, 40 hours of use a month will cost about Dollars 25.
'The IBM information highway will have 'on-ramps' (local access) available
in major metropolitan centres worldwide,' says Casey. IBM already has
telephone lines established in 11 countries to handle the 10m users it
counts on signing up in the next year.
Building on another market trend, IBM will include multimedia software that
enables users of PCs with the relevant add-on circuit boards to watch TV on
the PC screen, host a video conference, or display photographs stored on
disk using Kodak's new PhotoCD technology. For less ambitious PC users, a
suite of office applications is included with Warp as well as some games.
The US list price for Warp is expected to be Dollars 80, but retail
discounts will probably bring it below Dollars 50. And existing OS/2 users
can expect to get an upgrade for Dollars 25 or less. Microsoft's Chicago is
also expected to come packed with extra programs, including Internet
software, although the company has yet to provide details or prices.
OS/2 still faces tough hurdles. The biggest may be the wide perception that
there are few third-party applications such as games and office programs to
run on the IBM operating system. Finding OS/2 applications is usually a
challenge.
Although OS/2 can run applications designed for Windows and MS-Dos, IBM
wants to encourage third-party software developers to create 'native' OS/2
programs and will pay retailers to set aside shelf space for OS/2 programs.
Most PC buyers, however, are unlikely to replace the Windows operating
system software that comes on almost every new PC. Part of IBM's attack is
therefore aimed at PC manufacturers. Microsoft's recent antitrust consent
decree, which forces the company to offer new terms to PC manufacturers that
pre-install Windows software on their products, may give IBM the opening it
needs. 'We are prepared to win this battle by selling software packages one
at a time, but we hope to get it pre-loaded before people buy their PCs,'
says Casey.
Yet few PC makers appear willing to risk switching from the popular
Microsoft software: only CompuAdd, a small US PC company, has announced
plans to install Warp on its PCs.
IBM is expected, however, to announce next week that its own PC division
will put its weight behind OS/2 by loading the software on to its products
along with a copy of Microsoft Windows. This will be the acid test for Warp.
Faced with the option to boot up Windows or Warp, which one will PC users
choose?
