Bell Atlantic, the tele-communications group, yesterday announced the most
ambitious plan by a US telephone company to build a commercial multimedia
information network. It will lift AT&amp;T, equipment manufacturer, by making it
prime contractor for the project. Other contracts have been awarded to
General Instrument.
The programme forms the centrepiece of an Dollars 11bn five-year capital
spending programme by Bell Atlantic, the Baby Bell telephone company serving
states from New Jersey to Virginia. Yesterday's contract award is thought to
be one of the largest in telecommunications history.
Bell Atlantic said it would begin offering its 'full service network' -
delivering interactive multimedia television entertainment and information
to the home - in six leading markets in 1995 and in the rest of its 20
largest markets by 1998.
Many US cable and telephone companies are conducting trials of multimedia
and upgrading their networks, but Bell Atlantic's system looks likely to be
the first to go commercial on a large scale.
It said AT&amp;T's Network Systems division, which makes communications capital
equipment, had been selected as the prime contractor and systems integrator
and would be the main network equipment supplier.
It is the latest in a series of big contract wins for AT&amp;T, which is
modernising the network of Pacific Telesis, the Californian
telecommunications group, and it recently won a Dollars 4bn order from Saudi
Arabia.
General Instrument, supplier of set top terminals to the cable television
industry, has been selected to provide a new generation of interactive
multimedia terminals, and provide end-to-end access control, encryption and
digital compression technologies.
BroadBand Technologies, a small North Carolina company will help implement
multimedia network architecture. The deal is a blow to DSC Communications,
which lost a bid to supply transmission gear to the project.
Yesterday's announcement underscores Bell Atlantic's determination to push
ahead and offer multimedia to consumers in its telephone region, in spite of
the collapse in February of its proposed merger with Tele-Communications
which would have opened up multimedia opportunities in other US regions.
