Santa Cruz de la Sierra, misleadingly called 'of the highlands', is
Bolivia's agro-industrial centre and gateway to the Amazon region.
This sprawling city of about 750,000 inhabitants boasts the highest per
capita income of the nation and is rivalling La Paz as the number one city
in Bolivia.
Tens of thousands of migrants arrive annually - principally from the
highlands - in search of employment. Some join the growing service industry,
others end up sorting through the growing trash mounds beyond the last of
the eight highway rings that sub-divide the city.
Architecturally, Santa Cruz cannot compete with the quaint colonial cities
of Sucre or Potos. Yet at the heart of the city lies the picturesque Plaza
24 de Septiembre with its ecliptic-style cathedral (Basilica Menor de San
Lorenzo) and a well-kept park with colourful native Tajibos trees. The
arcaded streets surrounding the plaza maintain something of a colonial air.
Also in the city centre is El Arenal, a type of Central Park with an
open-air market nearby and countless food stalls. In the centre of the park
a mural by the artist Lorgio Vaca depicts the encounter of the Waran Indians
with the first Spaniards coming to the region. The park's anthropological
museum provides an introduction to the Chiquitano Indian culture, but
artifacts on display are poorly labelled.
Among the crowds that wind their way through a seemingly endless commercial
district and the bustling traffic of the city centre are the
characteristically plain-clad Mennonites, of Canadian and Paraguayan origin.
Another group of immigrants, invited by the Bolivian government to settle
the still virgin rainforest surrounding Santa Cruz decades ago, are the
Japanese. They have found employment in numerous professions and established
half a dozen or more good restaurants.
Visitors seeking a cool and shady refuge in the often sweltering mid-day
heat of Santa Cruz should visit the municipal zoo. For those that cannot
make it to any of the outlying national parks to see the fauna in its
natural habitat, the zoo has a good display of some of the rare and
endangered species from all over Latin America.
Santa Cruz's Carnival, celebrated before Lent, is famous throughout the
region. Floats, parades and dancers in the streets reveal the gaiety for
which the people of Santa Cruz are known. Pedestrians should beware the
water-filled balloons which youngsters throw indiscriminately at passers-by.
Santa Cruz offers the traveller a host of excellent hotels and restaurants.
Reservations are especially recommended in September when the annual Santa
Cruz Trade Show is on. It attracts vendors from all of South America and
specialises in agro-industrial products and services.
Business travellers are recommended to stay in the centrally located
four-star Grand Hotel Santa Cruz, which features a swimming pool and
spacious patio, or the Hotel El Arenal, which is somewhat less spacious but
is a good value.
The city's biggest and most exclusive hotel is Los Tajibos which offers a
pool and a restaurant recommended for its ceviche (marinated fish). The
casino is presently closed. A second five-star apart-hotel, Yatau, has
recently been inaugurated. Both lie in the wealthy residential neighbourhood
of San Martn.
The Dunas de Arenas just outside the city are interesting sand formations
and are becoming something of a tourist attraction. They are also a warning
of the dangers of massive erosion due to deforestation and unsustainable
agricultural activities.
The city's airport offers excellent service and daily non-stop connections
to La Paz, Sao Paulo and Miami, but is not busy. The same applies to Santa
Cruz train station.
