The political obsession in Britain over European monetary union is a
'tedious irrelevance', Mr Kenneth Clarke, the chancellor, said yesterday.
He insisted before the Commons Treasury committee that he remained committed
to the long-term goal of a European single currency, in spite of opposition
from the Euro-sceptics in the Conservative party.
But in a conciliatory gesture towards these Euro-sceptics he stressed that
European monetary union was still so remote that it was 'not even on the
agenda' of European ministers at present.
Mr Clarke said: 'I do not think this parliament will be troubled by the
matter and I am not sure that the next one will be either.' He added that
the main issue facing Europe was how to achieve economic convergence between
the different EU members, with low inflation and healthy public finances.
As he answered two hours of questions from the committee about the
Treasury's economic forecast, unveiled last week, Mr Clarke reiterated his
commitment to steady growth, free from the 'boom and bust' cycles that
characterised earlier recoveries.
Although he decline to say precisely when he might change interest rates, he
indicated his readiness to act if the government's stated goal of keeping
inflation below 2.5 per cent by the end of this parliament was breached.
The Bank of England currently forecasts that inflation will be rising over 3
per cent by next year, although the Treasury predicts a lower rate of
inflation.
But Mr Clarke insisted that 'if the Bank's forecasts are correct' the
government would take the appropriate action to keep inflation in check.
He noted, however, that there was 'no set figure' for growth - forecast by
the Treasury to be 2.75 per cent this year and next - which would trigger
this interest rate rise. And he insisted that the British economy appeared
to have sufficient unused capacity to enjoy healthy growth before any
'corrective' monetary action was needed.
Consequently, the recent rise in long-term interest rates in the bond market
were unjustified and the markets were simply 'wrong' to doubt his
anti-inflationary resolve, he said. Nevertheless, Mr Clarke admitted that
this rise in long-term interest rates presented a threat to the upbeat
outlook presented in the Treasury forecast.
Mr Clarke indicated that the government would press ahead with the
government's scheduled increases in value added tax on fuel, in spite of
some hopes from his own back bench that the government might abandon the
scheme in face of public opposition.
