Sullied by scandal, battered by bungs and drowning in drugs and dirty money,
British sport reaches the end of a turbulent year determined to re-assert
its authority over the miscreants who have brought it such shame.
I quote from a national newspaper report: 'Liam Daish, the Birmingham
captain, has been suspended for impersonating Louis Armstrong while playing
a trumpet thrown to him by a fan during Saturday's 4-0 win at Chester.'
Now it is high time that the disgraceful practice of British footballers
impersonating famous jazz musicians was brought to the attention of the
authorities. Note, however, that the booking and subsequent suspension was
prompted, not by the playing of the trumpet per se, but for impersonating
Louis Armstrong.
The hapless Daish must now be sitting at home wondering glumly: could he
have got away with Dizzy Gillespie or Miles Davis? Was his impression
punished for being unconvincing?
What finally tested the patience of the referee? The arrogance of a
jumped-up, overpaid whipper-snapper crooning: 'Then I think to myself, what
a wonderful world]' into his face? Disrespectful or what? No wonder he saw
yellow.
The sad truth is that in sport, as in all sectors of British society, we
mistrust showmanship to such an extent that chastisement becomes a knee-jerk
response.
Poor Daish wanted to raise a few warm smiles on a cold afternoon, but
blowing your own, or even another person's, trumpet is simply not done.
Displays of originality, ostentatious eccentricity or unwarranted emotion
are still considered vulgar, pushy or self-seeking; admonishment is the
automatic antidote. We are simply not a showbiz kind of people.
That is only partly true, however. For every so often, an outbreak of mass
vulgarity occurs which sends the castigating classes reeling in
self-righteous fury; for it tells them that, deep down, we all want to break
out of the straitjacket of national temperament which so inhibits our every
move.
Such an analysis is the only way I can make sense of the utterly
disproportionate amount of invective spent on rubbishing the National
Lottery and the harmless little programme set up to announce its weekly
results.
This has been criticised, amid much wind-baggery about the BBC's national
mission to inform and the decline of civilised values, for being loud and
tacky, for pandering to people's worst instincts, for lacking
sophistication. What do these critics expect? Presenters dressed in Armani
suits, music by Philip Glass, and Joan Bakewell drawing the balls for George
Steiner to read out the numbers?
The programme is a scandal, they say, the lottery itself is a scandal, the
desire to win a grotesque amount of money is a scandal; and there we have
the nub of the matter.
It is no coincidence that these rabid exchanges have taken place during the
hysterical, over-consumptive month of December. Christmas is neither the
religious festival we think it ought to be, nor the mass celebration of
materialism we think, in our gloomy moments, it has become.
Christmas has come to symbolise the struggle within us between two worlds
which cannot be reconciled.
Those few moments on the BBC every Saturday evening, the crudest, most
potent glorification of get-rich-quick values yet devised in our country, do
more than prick at our consciences; they constitute a full-frontal assault,
a devastating reminder of the struggle we all face in balancing the worldly
and the holy.
To mount this assault in the run-up to Christmas was asking for trouble; it
must have been obvious that, not liking the message, we would turn on the
messengers.
So the poor old BBC gets it in the neck because, while we spend most of our
lives trying to swell our coffers with the least possible effort, that
couple of minutes it takes to pick those balls out strikes us as indecently
hasty.
Well, a pox on our hypocrisy. I love the lottery. I love dreaming about what
I would do if I won and I shall tune in without shame every week to see if I
am destined to be a future Mr X.
I love a world in which you can be just a few nail-biting seconds away from
an Pounds 18m fortune.
What a wonderful world]
