three months in the Caribbean or four travelling around Australia - sounds
like an agreeable way of spending the English winter. How nice it must be to
bask in the sunshine in T-shirt and shorts, warm waves lapping your ankles,
beside you a cool beer and a copy of the newspaper reporting the doom and
gloom back home. Occasionally you play a little sport.
Reality is not quite as easy for members of the England touring party, apart
from the doom and gloom back home bit. Yes they may have island hopped round
the West Indies from January through to April, then this month embarked on
their 16-week tour of the Great Outback but no they have not been to any
beaches or even caught a whiff of a pina colada.
Well, that is not quite true. When the team eventually left Antigua in
mid-April this year at the end of a hard-fought test series, there was a day
set aside for sun, sea, sand and the rest of it. 'Before that,' said the
fast bowler Angus Fraser 'all we'd seen was hotels, airports and cricket
grounds. A fortnight in Jamaica may sound fantastic but it's not if you are
stuck in run-down crime-ridden Kingston and more or less imprisoned in your
hotel by security guards.'
The 1994-95 Australian tour lasts 116 days, but only six of these (including
Christmas Day), are completely free of matches, travelling or practice.
There are 20 internal transfers across three time zones leaving little
opportunity or energy for exploration. Most will return with no more
knowledge of Australia than when they left.
Your heart is still probably not bleeding for them. But tours are much
harder than they used to be because of the speed of transport and the advent
of one day internationals, which are played to excess in Australia. The
players do not necessarily help themselves. They are notoriously
unadventurous, preferring to lounge around hotel swimming pools in their
England tracksuits hoping to attract the attentions of other, preferably
female guests, rather than venture further afield.
There are exceptions. Derek Pringle and David Gower disappeared off into the
bush with their zoom lenses (during tours of India private jets or
distinguished travel guides materialise miraculously for international
cricketers) and Bruce French, the wicketkeeper, climbed mountains.
In the main though, overseas tours are routine, neatly summed up by the
title of Frances Edmonds' book about the last England tour of Australia
which was called Cricket, XXXX, Cricket. On match days in Australia, the
Sheraton hotel breakfast will be eaten in the room at 7.15am (players
usually double up as much for economy as team spirit) the team bus will
leave at 8.15, though Phil Tufnell usually keeps it waiting. Repetitive warm
ups are scheduled for 9am (England endured 99 of these sessions during the
West Indies tour) and the game starts at 10am, although one day games often
begin an hour earlier. At the 6pm close of play a crate of beers is brought
to the dressing room and rapidly drunk. Then the players head back to the
hotel for a wash and brush-up before dinner. Most are in bed by 10pm.
During a Test the dressing room floor gradually disappears beneath the
clutter of bats, boots, pads, sweaty clothes and other paraphernalia that
spews out of the players' kitbags. Hauling these around continents is an
ordeal. In some countries there is help. Govind has looked after the kit of
teams touring India since 1949. At night he sleeps with it in the dressing
room, resting his head on a pair of pads. 'I haven't lost one bag in 45
years,' he says proudly.
Sometimes the players are hard to keep track of. John Emburey sailed a
windsurf board out to sea in the Caribbean, but could not turn it round and
had to be rescued by lifeguards; Mike Gatting, captain at the time, missed
the warm-ups and arrived 20 minutes after the start of a match at Melbourne
in 1986 claiming his alarm had not gone off, Allan Lamb disappeared into a
Queensland casino 80 miles from the Test ground; and then there was Gower's
infamous impersonation of a first world war pilot.
The leading stars in any side are wont to go it alone, leaving everyone else
in their wake. Younger players stick together, which on this England tour
means almost everyone except Gatting (37) and Gooch (41). If that pair -
Gatting has discovered fitness - keep up their habit of turning up for
practice an hour before everyone else, they will be sick of the sight of
each other by February.
The fringe players have the worst deal, apart from the wives, who are
usually only 'allowed' on tour for a couple of weeks. Once the big games
have begun, the reserves trail from ground to ground with little prospect of
being involved in the action, nothing but a handful of enthusiastic boys to
practice with and little time off in case there are sudden injuries in the
camp. It is hard work, but even so, I would rather be playing for England in
Australia, than watching them on television in the British winter.
