Mr Jurgen Storbeck, 47, German co-ordinator (head) of the EU's Europol
organisation, charged with combating organised crime. He has 17 years of
police experience at Interpol and Germany's federal police office.
Voters in the European parliament elections appear to want politicians who
can make an impact in combating organised crime. How can Europol contribute?
Europol is helping to overcome existing borders between criminal and justice
authorities to improve crime-fighting capacity. Since being set up at the
beginning of the year in The Hague, we have already been involved in 80
international investigations centering on drugs and related
money-laundering.
How does Europol work? Europol is the first international mix of police,
gendarmerie, and customs. It enables member states to exchange sensitive and
even unevaluated information and intelligence. Europol is unique in that
individual member states liaison officers (ELOs) work for their own national
criminal intelligence services rather than Europol itself. Confidentiality
is thus more readily accepted by member states.
Are individual EU countries putting enough resources into this effort? Every
EU member is represented except Portugal whose ELO arrives next month. The
Netherlands has been exceptionally generous, while Germany, France and the
UK have provided expert staff. The budget, subscribed in proportion to gross
national product, is Ecu2.5m (Pounds 1.9m) this year; Ecu4.5m in 1995.
Which countries in the EU are most at risk from cross-border organised
crime? All are at risk. The Channel makes no difference to criminals. A
large proportion of drugs seized in Britain come from other EU states. Crime
originating from economically weak east European states is a new and
dangerous phenomenon.
Do you fear the possibility of wasteful duplication with national agencies
and, if so, how can this be avoided? Europol has been charged with avoiding
duplication at all costs. We look at cross-border organised crime from an EU
dimension only; and seek to add values to intelligence on a Union basis.
What is the nature of your links with Interpol based in Lyons? Europol will
play a much more operational role than Interpol, especially after the
ratification of the Europol convention. In respect of continuing
investigations, Europol can collect and analyse and transmit sensitive and
highly confidential information and intelligence which law enforcement
agencies of member states hesitate to send via the Interpol channels.
How can Europol increase its links with agencies in central and eastern
Europe to combat Mafia-type organisations? If national criminal intelligence
services consider criminals in eastern Europe carry a disproportionately
high risk in respect of cross-border drugs trafficking and other forms of
organised crime into the EU, we will give them the required attention.
