Nicolas Hayek, the flamboyant chairman of SMH, the leading Swiss watches
group, set last month's annual European Watch, Clock and Jewellery Fair in
Basle off with a bang.
Hayek brought in Neil Armstrong, the astronaut who landed on the moon in
1969, to help promote Omega, one of SMH's many watch brands. Armstrong wore
an Omega Speedmaster chronograph watch on his historic mission.
Together with two other astronauts, Hayek and Armstrong sat at the Omega
stand and tried to have what was billed as an intellectual discussion about
time and the cosmos for 1 1/2 hours.
With the jostling of photographers and some banal initial questioning by the
moderator, the so-called Omega Forum was unlikely to live up to its billing,
but amid tough competition it attracted attention.
Indeed, it was difficult, even without a media event, to maintain focus in
this Aladdin's cave that the Basle Fair has become. Although quaintly titled
'European', it has long been the most important trade fair for the world's
watch and clock makers.
This year, 562 exhibitors from 15 countries participated in the watch and
clock section. Officials claimed that about two thirds of world trade in
these products would be initiated there.
Products ranged from an 18-carat gold skeletonised chiming watch from
Vacheron Constantin, worth about Pounds 400,000, to arrays of plain kitchen
electric clocks.
The main message from the fair this year was the restored prosperity of many
Swiss watchmakers. Companies such as Breitling, Tag Heuer and Oris, on their
knees a decade ago, were confidently displaying new products on lavish
stands. Tag, for example, claims to have raised its turnover tenfold in the
past decade, Oris to have doubled its sales since 1989.
This recovery is closely linked with the resurgence of demand for mechanical
watches, both automatic and manual, following the onslaught of quartz models
in the 1970s and early 1980s.
The Swiss excel at making mechanical watches, and the recovery shows up most
dramatically in the Swiss statistics. Last year, the value of Swiss watch
exports reached SFr7.6bn (Pounds 3.6bn), double the level of a decade ago.
For mechanical watch devotees, the Basle fair offered a feast of new and
revived designs, with ever more impressive complications.
One of the more remarkable was a reversible model from Jaeger-LeCoultre with
a functioning watch on each side, the so called Reverso Duo. Each watch
operates independently but but both are powered by the same movement.
Other unusual collectors' items came from Chronoswiss, a 10-year-old company
which, in spite of its name, is based in Munich. It specialises in
reproductions of antique watches, many with regulator mechanisms, in which
the main face has only the minute hand while the hour hand appears on a
smaller superimposed face.
In the realm of eye-catching gimmicks, it would be difficult to beat
Blancpain's proposal to construct erotic action scenes on the backs of its
elegant watches. For its ladies' models, the company has also developed a
mechanism for easily changing armbands to match the wearer's clothes.
These and many other fantasies could be found mainly in hall 101 at Basle,
the so-called Prestige Hall reserved for the glitterati of the world watch
business.
But the renewed popularity of mechanical watches has gone down-market as
well. The determinedly middle-market Oris has brought out models with
complications in the less-than-Pounds 1,000 price range.
At the regular press conference of Japan's Citizen Watch, an official said
the complexity of many multi-function watches had gone too far, and
predicted that models would become more user-friendly. However, one of the
watches Citizen introduced at the fair, the Promaster Navihawk, may well
have set a record for the number of digits and letters that appear on a
single watch face.
The fair was again notable for its distinguished absentees, including Swatch
and some other companies in the SMH group, and the companies in the Cartier
luxury products group. SMH withdrew seven years ago after a row over space,
but Omega, an SMH company, returned last year and brought Longines with it
this year. The group's policy henceforth will be to have Omega and one other
brand represented at the fair each year.
Cartier, Piaget and Baume &amp; Mercier pulled out three years ago because the
event was not exclusive enough. As a Cartier executive put it at the time:
'Our clients do not like the smell of sausages.' They started their own more
exclusive annual show, the Salon International de la Haute Horlogerie, in
Geneva, which runs concurrently with the Basle fair and which they claim has
already established itself.
Basle officials observed that the Cartier defection has not been followed by
others from the Prestige Hall. Also, a couple of the Cartier brands, Dunhill
and Gerald Genta, have kept their stands in Basle.
Philippe Levy, the chief executive of the Basle fair organisation, departed
in December after the city fathers vetoed a plan to build a regional
exhibition centre together with neighbouring French and German communities.
Fair officials insisted that the parochialism implied by the decision would
not extend to their exhibition policies. Indeed, the name of the Watch Fair
would finally be changed next year to the 'World Fair for Watches, Clocks
and Jewellery'.
But it was bad news for the 500 odd watch and jewellery companies still
waiting for space in the fair's existing cramped quarters.
