The balancing act is encapsulated in the manifesto's title: A strong Britain
in a strong Europe.
The Conservatives will be positive about Europe before the June 9 poll for
the Strasbourg assembly. But the party will be more positive still about its
determination to get Britain's way in Europe.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary and author of the manifesto, has
managed to exclude from the text the more extreme demands of colleagues on
the anti-European right of the party.
The doors are not slammed completely on the possibility of an eventual
return to the European exchange rate mechanism - or of participation in a
single European currency. There is no promise of the referendum sought by
the Euro-sceptics on the next stage of European integration.
As Mr John Major says in the document's foreword, the argument it advances
is not framed in terms of Europe Right or Wrong but Europe Right or Left. It
is the ambitions of the socialist centralisers for Europe's institutions
that the government abhors, not the institutions themselves.
But the manifesto's tone reflects the mood of a party willing to accept,
even embrace, Europe if that can be done on Britain's terms; but quick to
reject it if anyone else threatens to set the agenda. It is as defensive as
it is positive.
First the positive. Mr Major dismisses at the outset the idea floated by
some on the Conservative right that Britain might in the next few years have
to reassess whether it should belong to the EU.
Its opening words state baldly: 'Our membership of the European Union is
vital to Britain.' Mr Major reinforced that point at yesterday's launch when
he ridiculed the notion of a repeat of the 1975 referendum on membership.
A lengthy section on the European economy makes the same point. Britain's
trade, its inward investment and its employment prospects are all linked
inextricably to the EU.
The manifesto argues that the government is winning the debate over the need
for a new focus on competitiveness, flexible labour markets and
de-regulation.
Prosperity and jobs are at the top of the European agenda. Britain's opt-out
from the social chapter will ensure its employment prospects remain bright.
Pledging the government's determination to promote free trade and the
completion of the single market, it adds: 'Open markets are the Oxygen of
Growth.' To that end Britain will press for further liberalisation of the
telecommunications, transport and energy sectors.
Nor will the Conservatives' reservations about the ERM and a single currency
prevent it co-operating with its European partners: 'Britain will play its
part in future discussion of how economic policies can best be co-ordinated
within the European Union.'
The manifesto is replete with examples of where the government has set the
agenda for the rest of Europe: in the push for subsidiarity; in the
promotion of intergovernmental co-operation at Maastricht; and in the
acceleration of enlargement.
It calls on the union to build on co-operation in home-affairs policies to
launch a concerted drive against crime and acknowledges the need for a more
coherent European approach to defence.
The manifesto says the process of enlargement should include the creation of
a free-trade area stretching eastwards as far as Russia as well as the
accession of the four Visegrad countries - Hungary, the Czech Republic,
Slovakia and Poland.
But for every positive idea there is plan or ambition that the Conservatives
will thwart - and a charge that Labour and the Liberal Democrats would sell
Britain's interests short. Labour is said to have signed up for 'a lethal
concoction of high taxation, high borrowing, bureaucratic meddling and extra
burdens on business'.
Conservatives will resist any move to increase the present limits on EU
spending or any threat to the rebate Britain receives on its contribution to
Brussels.
The government will defend implacably the British veto. It will oppose the
interventionist, bureaucratic instincts of Brussels in favour of minimum
interference in national affairs.
There will be no advance commitment on a single currency. The successor
treaty to Maastricht, due for negotiation at the 1996 intergovernmental
conference, must continue the process of decentralisation.
As Mr Major puts it in his foreword: 'We want less interference from
Brussels not more.'
The prime minister has been told by opinion pollsters that this negative
message has the best hope of persuading disgruntled supporters to vote
Conservative on June 9. The odds are that it will quickly drown out the
positive.
