A review of the disposal of radioactive waste will run in parallel with the
review of the nuclear power industry, the government said yesterday.
The 'separate but complementary' review will cover waste from hospitals and
research laboratories as well as from nuclear power stations.
Environmental pressure groups welcomed the review yesterday, but warned that
it could prove as controversial as the government's conclusions on the
future of nuclear power.
Environmental lobbying against nuclear plants has focused on the present
shortcomings of strategies for long-term disposal of waste.
Levels of radioactivity in nuclear waste take decades - or sometimes
thousands of years - to fall to levels not damaging to human beings. The
costs of handling and disposing of the waste safely are a large part of the
nuclear industry's financial liabilities.
The waste review, which will be run by the Department of the Environment,
will be the first wide-ranging examination of policy for a decade.
But it will not look at the suitability of specific sites for waste
disposal. Mr John Gummer, environment secretary, said yesterday these
questions were 'a matter for the planning and regulatory process'.
UK Nirex, the nuclear industry's waste disposal company, which has been
given the task of finding a suitable site for storing waste, has been
investigating whether a chamber could be carved out of the rocks underneath
the Sellafield nuclear site in Cumbria.
The store would contain only low-level and intermediate-level waste.
Separate techniques would be needed for the highly radioactive fuel
extracted from reactor cores.
However, the government's Radioactive Waste Management Advisory Committee
has warned repeatedly that Nirex's investigations are falling behind its
original timetable. According to the committee, the need for further
geological tests means it is unlikely the repository will be ready before
2010, three years behind schedule, even if all concerns were adequately
answered.
Mr Chris Smith, shadow environment secretary, said yesterday that the waste
review should have been carried out before the Thorp reprocessing plant at
Sellafield was allowed to start operating.
The plant, which will treat and separate used reactor fuel rods, will itself
eventually need decommissioning, and so will produce additional waste,
environmentalists have said. However, British Nuclear Fuels, Thorp's owner,
has argued that reprocessing waste makes storage easier because it separates
waste into its different constituents.
Greenpeace, the pressure group, said yesterday that the radioactive waste
review was one of the most important parts of the government's announcement.
'The nuclear industry is unable to deal with the waste it has already
created, let alone the waste it will create in the future,' it said.
The preliminary results of the investigation are due to be announced in the
summer and are likely to feed into the nuclear power review.
