India is about to announce partial liberalisation of its pharmaceutical
industry, in a move which would cut price controls and allow foreign groups
to take majority stakes in their Indian ventures.
The announcement, expected in the next few days, will help revive confidence
in the government's commitment to economic reform and counter criticism that
the liberalisation programme started three years ago is flagging.
The Indian drugs industry has operated for many years under a strict regime
of price controls aimed at ensuring that even the poor have access to
pharmaceuticals. Premier P V Narasimha Rao was initially reluctant to
liberalise the industry, for fear of provoking a backlash from those who
feared decontrol would lead to socially unacceptable price increases. He now
wants to promote investment in the industry, but important curbs will
remain.
Under the new rules, the number of drugs which cannot be sold above
government-specified prices will be cut from 142 to 73. Drugs, which now
come under price controls if their annual sales exceed Rs5m, will now be
free of controls unless their sales exceed Rs40m (Pounds 824,000) a year.
Foreign companies, at present limited to holding minority stakes in Indian
affiliates, will be permitted to buy up to 51 per cent stakes in companies
making bulk drugs, the staples of the industry. The number of drugs that can
be made only by state-owned drugs companies is being cut.
The government hopes the new policy will encourage Indian companies to
invest in research and development. Until now, they have spent little on
research.
Foreign companies are unlikely to rush into India, because they are
concerned about the country's patent laws, which recognise only process
patents and not product patents. This means that Indian drugs companies can
copy western products as long as they find a slightly different way of
making them. Under Gatt's Uruguay Round accord, India is pledged to
strengthening its patent laws, but the legislation has yet to come before
parliament.
