The wind is blowing so hard that it is all Brian Mahony can do to keep his
plans and maps straight. We are deep in the English Lakeland fells looking
across the Duddon Valley at the wooded slopes of Hardknott.
The forest is one of the most sensitive of the many managed by Forest
Enterprise, the operating arm of the Forestry Commission. It covers the east
flank of Harter Fell, a peak close to the central Scafell group which forms
the backdrop to some of the most dramatic scenery in the Lake District
National Park.
Mahony is Forest Enterprise's district manager, and his papers contain plans
to reshape the forest to take account of the growing environmental pressures
which now have to be balanced against the traditional goal of timber
production. It was not always this way.
The Forestry Commission acquired this huge estate at the head of the Duddon
Valley in 1936. But before it could smother the area with trees, it was
prevailed upon by the Council for the Protection of Rural England to sell
off a big part of it, keeping only Hardknott for planting.
The result is that much of the top of the valley remains unspoilt. But
Hardknott bears the marks of the production-driven planting practices of 50
years ago. The 1,400-acre forest is mostly fir, laid out in orderly ranks
with little regard for the contours of the surrounding landscape.
However, half a century later, Hardknott is now being harvested, and this
gives Mahony an opportunity to remodel the forest. He has two master plans.
The first is the felling plan. Rather than raze whole areas in angular
shapes, the aim is to phase the felling in order to soften the outlines and
introduce variety.
The second is the restocking plan. Landscape designers have prepared a
scheme to plant a greater variety of trees in groups which blend in with the
line of the fell.
Mahony's plans are a patchwork of coloured blobs representing different
varieties. Spruce will continue to dominate the upper slopes because it is
best suited to the cold, wet conditions there. The middle slopes will have
more larch and Scots pine with broad-leaved trees for the lower slopes.
Forest Enterprise now has forest design plans for each of its woodlands, all
based around 'multiple purpose forestry' which combines commercial forestry
with the environment, conservation and recreational uses.
Although the organisation would like Hardknott to be exemplary of its
approach to forestry in a national park, it is not typical. 'What we're
doing here is at the upper end of the spectrum because it's a very special
site,' says Geoff Hatfield, director of the north and east England region.
The difficulty is that while Forest Enterprise has become more
environmentally aware, it is also coming under increasing pressure to
operate commercially and transform its annual operating loss into a profit.
This pressure would grow if the government considers privatising the
Forestry Commission, which is one of the options currently before ministers.
The redesign of Hardknott forest will reduce its yield in the long term
because fewer trees will be planted, and a greater proportion will be
slow-growing hardwoods. Harvesting is also expensive there because felling
is to be phased over 30 years, and the logs hauled down the Duddon Valley's
tiny lanes in specially designed lorries which can only manage 100 tonnes a
week. And if the true Lakeland appearance of the forest is to be preserved,
dry stone walls will have to be rebuilt and maintained, at heavy cost.
'Would a private-sector company take so much trouble?' wonders Hatfield,
rather implying that they would not. He also stresses the wide public access
which the Forestry Commission grants to its woodlands, something which
private owners might restrict.
But at the same time, he says that Forest Enterprise 'does not pull its
punches' in its quest for commercial viability. Costs have been sharply
reduced, and much of the work is now contracted out to private firms.
Efficiency is one reason why Forest Enterprise will continue its unpopular
practice of planting trees in tidy rows at Hardknott because it makes access
easier and encourages trees to grow to the required size and shape.
Harvesting is done using highly efficient machines which can fell, strip and
saw several dozen trees per hour.
A few miles east of Hardknott lies Grizedale, the largest Lakeland forest,
where Forest Enterprise has already gone some way to try to balance timber
production with its environmental and leisure objectives. Tourists are
encouraged to use the forest: there is a visitor centre, and cyclists and
walkers can use the tracks and trails.
All told, Forest Enterprise has 11,500 ha of land in the Lake District, and
produces 75,000 tonnes of timber a year, which makes it one of the biggest
landowners and commercial operators in the national park. This puts a
premium on good relations with the park authority.
Alan Fishwick, the park's assistant chief planning officer, says that Forest
Enterprise's new approach based on forest design plans is a welcome
development. 'We are involved at an early stage, which has enabled common
objectives to be agreed,' he says.
Tony Juniper, forestry specialist at Friends of the Earth, agrees there has
been 'a dramatic change' in the Commission's approach. 'They juggle their
various objectives much better than they did 10 years ago,' he says.
But there is also concern in the Lake District park about the growing
commercial pressures on the Forestry Commission, and the possibility of
privatisation. These pressures, Fishwick says, 'are bound to have an
influence on what can be achieved, and we do have concerns about the scale
and impact of clear felling, for example'.
