Walt Disney, the US entertainment group, has agreed terms for an outline
rescue deal worth about FFr13bn (Pounds 1.5bn) for Euro Disney, its troubled
European theme park subsidiary.
The deal, which could save Euro Disney from the threat of closure, involves
a FFr6bn rights issue and a five-year waiver of Disney's royalty
entitlements. It was agreed on Sunday evening after weeks of intricate
negotiations by the US group and a steering committee representing Euro
Disney's 63 banks.
The terms of the rescue were presented to Euro Disney's shareholders at an
annual general meeting yesterday in the Buffalo Bill wild west saloon at the
EuroDisneyland theme park near Paris. However, the steering committee needs
unanimous agreement from the other lenders to implement the deal, which
involves Euro Disney's debt being reduced from FFr20.3bn to FFr10bn and the
banks agreeing to an 18-month interest-rate holiday on their loans.
Mr Baudouin Prot of Banque Nationale de Paris, heading the banks' steering
committee for Euro Disney, said the plan, which was outlined to all 63
banks, was generally favourably received, but it would take some weeks for
every creditor to come to a considered judgment. The plan needs approval by
all creditors. Mr Prot said it was premature to speculate on what would
happen if any institution rejected it.
'Getting all the banks to agree will be the next big hurdle,' said one
negotiator.
Shares in Euro Disney, which faced closure without a rescue agreement, rose
sharply yesterday morning, but fell during the afternoon to close FFr2.90
lower at FFr33.85. In New York at the close Walt Disney's shares were down
Dollars 1 1/8 to Dollars 45 7/8 . The rescue plan's FFr6bn rights issue
involves the creation of 600m new shares at the par value of FFr10.0. Disney
will subscribe for its full 49 per cent stake. The issue will be
underwritten by a group of lenders, notably steering committee members. The
issue will dilute the stakes of existing shareholders 4.5 times by
increasing the number of Euro Disney shares from 170m to 770m.
Disney is injecting FFr1.4bn into Euro Disney by leasing two of the
EuroDisneyland rides. It will also waive for five years its entitlement to
fees and royalties worth about FFr450m annually. The interest payments
holiday should save another FFr800m a year.
Euro Disney, which lost FFr5.3bn in the financial year to September 30, said
it now hopes to break even in 1994/95.
Lex, Page 26
Sharing the pain, Page 27
World stocks, Page 43
London stocks, Page 46
