Tough new rules imposing unlimited financial liability on tankers sailing
into US waters could cause severe damage to the tanker industry and halt oil
shipments to the US, according to shipowners.
The new regulations were first proposed in the wake of the sinking of the
tanker Exxon Valdez off the coast of Alaska in 1989, and repeated appeals to
the US Coast Guard to relax the new rules or delay them have had no effect.
A decline in domestic oil production has made the US more dependent on
imported oil, with about half of its total needs coming from the Middle East
and other overseas oilfields.
Owners of tankers entering US waters after December 28 will be required to
show they can provide unlimited compensation in the event of an oil spill.
Although this deadline is still two months away, vessels are often chartered
well in advance.
In return for proof that they could meet a claim, shipowners will be issued
with a 'certificate of financial responsibility' by the Coast Guard.
The conventional method by which shipowners arrange insurance cover -
through protection and indemnity (P&amp;I) clubs of owners who share risks -
cannot be used because the P&amp;I clubs are unwilling to take on unlimited
liability.
'The Coast Guard has created a claim structure which is unsustainable with
existing insurance systems,' said Mr Miles Kulukundis, chairman of
Intertanko, representing many of the world's tanker owners.
Only 41 tankers, all American and including Mobil Oil Corporation's 24-ship
fleet, have obtained certificates to allow them to sail into US waters. But
at least three other shipowners, including Knock Tankers, an Oslo-based
company with 13 vessels, have announced plans to withdraw from the US trade.
The total world oil tanker fleet is more than 7,000 vessels, of which at
least 1,000 serve US ports. The loss of US business would be a severe
setback for tanker owners.
The International Chamber of Shipping, a London-based shipowners'
organisation representing more than half the world's merchant tonnage, said
that it was a matter of 'deep concern' that the US Coast Guard had 'not
attempted to solve any of the serious problems' posed by its rules.
The shipowners believe the P&amp;I clubs should remain the main method of
covering risk, but said they 'unreservedly' supported them in their refusal
to take on the risk of unlimited liability. Alternatives such as surety
bonds, self-insurance and financial guarantees required the shipowner to
provide large amounts of collateral and were only an option for the largest
corporations.
The alternative for most smaller shipowners was insurance but there were no
insurance schemes available to provide the cover needed. 'In the absence of
insurance cover, oil shipments in US waters will largely cease as from
December 28,' Mr Chris Horrocks, secretary general of the international
chamber, warned.
Mr Kulukundis said shipowners hoped the insurance and financial communities
could devise a means of providing cover. 'The financial community is hungry
for this business,' he said. Failing that, the oil industry might be
persuaded to provide financial backing to ensure sufficient oil for its
refineries.
The requirement for certificates of financial responsibility forms part of
the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, which will also progressively require tankers
to be doubled-hulled to reduce the risk of pollution. A US court recently
awarded Dollars 5bn in punitive damages against Exxon following pollution of
the Alaskan shoreline by the Exxon Valdez in 1989.
