Just 700 miles from the coast of Florida, Haiti is the poorest country in
the western hemisphere.
The average Haitian has just 75 US cents a day to live on. According to the
World Bank's yardstick, anyone living on less than a dollar a day is
suffering dire poverty.
Haiti is an enclave of African-style poverty in Washington's backyard. The
UN Development Programme calculates that, in terms of the quality of life of
its citizens, Haiti ranks 131st out of 173 countries, just ahead of Zambia.
Yet Haiti was once France's richest colony, furnishing two-thirds of its
overseas trade. Rich with plantations of coffee, cotton, indigo and sugar
cane, it supplied Europe with half its tropical produce.
The intervening 300 years tell a tale of appalling government, misbegotten
foreign intervention and violence.
An almost unbroken line of blood connects the arrival of Christopher
Columbus 502 years ago to the present day. Within 50 years of the
navigator's arrival on the island of Hispaniola, which today French-speaking
Haiti shares with the Spanish-speaking Dominican Republic, the estimated
half million Arawak indians had perished, and the pre-Columbian culture had
all but vanished.
It was in Haiti that Columbus is thought to have established the first
European settlement in the New World, 500 years ago this year. When he
returned 11 months later, the settlement had been razed and his men killed.
Haiti provided the world's single example of a successful slave revolt.
After 12 years of struggle, Haiti became independent from Napoleonic France
in 1804, so becoming the first 'third-world' country.
France finally recognised Haiti in 1825, extracting in return a huge
indemnity which remained a burden on the economy for decades, and left
French financiers in positions of influence for almost a century.
Washington put in place a trade embargo in 1806 and the country was not
recognised by the US for almost 60 years, with Washington fearful of the
impact a successful revolt would have on its own slave population.
Recognition was not achieved until the middle of the US civil war in 1862.
Between 1849-1913, US Navy ships entered Haitian waters 24 times with the
stated objective of protecting American lives and property. In 1915, fearing
German rivalry in the Caribbean, and amid a Haitian political crisis, the US
invaded. Its forces stayed for 19 years.
The Americans built 1,600 km of roads, telephone exchanges and medical
facilities, but few of these lasted much beyond an ignominious withdrawal.
There were longer-lasting legacies. The racism of US occupying forces is
widely seen at the root of the development of noirisme, nationalist
black-oriented political thought, of which a leading exponent was a black
medical doctor named Francois Duvalier.
Duvalier, a minister in the late 1940s, was elected president in what was by
Haitian standards a reasonably free and fair election in 1957. Duvalier -
'Papa Doc' - sought to limit the influence of the army, the Roman Catholic
church and the US, and to reduce the political and economic power wielded by
the minority mulatto community.
Haiti's white plantocracy - the French aristocratic slave owners - were
expelled by the revolution. But its spiritual descendants remained in a
mulatto oligarchy, that even now - in co-operation with the black-dominated
army - continues to dominate the economy and politics.
Duvalier subdued the army with the creation of a black militia, the National
Security Volunteers, which became known as the Tontons Macoutes. He put to
shrewd use voodoo, a synthesis of African belief and Catholic ritual that
attributes the events shaping people's lives to myriad spirits. As a belief
system, it is held to limit the responsibility believers feel for their own
actions, and partly explains the lack of cohesiveness of Haitian society.
According to Elizabeth Abbott, the author of a 1988 book on Haiti, Duvalier
studied 'voodoo with as much devotion as an houngan (voodoo priest), and
then twisted it and used it to keep an entire population at his pitiless
mercy'.
Life under Papa Doc quickly degenerated into violence and murder. By 1963,
the US ambassador had been expelled, and one year later Papa Doc made
himself president for life. The dynasty lasted until 1986, when his son
Jean-Claude flew to exile in France. Baby Doc had taken over on his father's
death in 1970. The Duvalier fortune was by that time estimated at Dollars
500m - although now Jean-Claude is reported to be penniless.
Baby Doc's exit was followed by several months of violence as people rid the
country of signs of the dictatorship. The army took over but was eventually
forced by popular pressure to concede elections, held on December 16, 1990.
The victor, a radical priest, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, won 67.5 per cent of
the vote against 14 per cent for his nearest rival. He presided for only
seven months before a military overthrow on September 30, 1991.
Evidence emerging since the mid-1980s suggests a strong link between the
Haitian military and the trafficking of cocaine from Colombia into the US
through Port-au-Prince. This may be one explanation for the tenacity with
which the army has held on to power in the face of US threats. 'President
Aristide is right when he says that one of the reasons the Haitian military
will not let go is that their lifestyle depends on the drugs trade,' US
Senator John Kerry said last year.
