The world will probably seem pretty gloomy to the government a fortnight
from now. Pause a moment, while we rub our hands in glee. The big day is
Friday June 10. The Tories expect to wake up on that morning to news of the
loss of their formerly safe seat of Eastleigh to the Liberal Democrats.
Better yet, they may find that their candidate, their sacrificial lamb, has
been beaten into third place behind Labour. The weekend papers will be full
of talk about alternative leaders of the Labour party, perhaps spiced by
musings on the future of the prime minister.
The results of the elections to the European Parliament will follow. We will
see the great match taking shape: a revived opposition vs a flagging
government. It may become harder than ever to believe that the Conservatives
can recover sufficient support to win a fifth general election, even in the
nearly three years still available to them.
Good. They deserve to be thrashed. I say this in the electoral rather than
the Singaporean sense, you understand. Those of us who doubt the efficacy of
corporal punishment should not change our principles, not even in the case
of Mr John Patten, the education secretary. Mr Patten's sense of honour may
be measured by his retailing earlier this week of what he said was said to
him in a private conversation in a railway carriage. So much for the
gentleman who preaches to the nation's children about moral standards. This
is the kind of thing that gives hypocrisy a bad name.
It is not, however, a reason for encouraging the Conservatives to leave
office. If the bad manners of one particular minister were the problem, the
solution would be simple. The case for throwing all the rascals out is more
complicated. To appreciate it, step back a bit. After 1979 the gov-ernment
of the then Mrs Margaret Thatcher undid much of the damage wrought by the
Labour administration that preceded it. She vanquished the trade unions,
initiated the rolling pri-vatisation of industry, and taught us that simple
book-keeping is a necessary skill in all walks of life and all institutions.
Her successor has curbed inflation, maintained Britain's position at the
Maastricht negotiations on the European Union, and established rapport with
Dublin on the future of Northern Ire-land. These achievements, among others,
deserve recognition. The balance of advantage, however, has turned.
Today the prime minister is struggling to manage an unruly coalition of what
should be separate parties. The government is unable to do very much, beyond
blather. It promises a green paper on this and lists existing policies in a
white paper on that. Here a charter, there an inquiry, everywhere a working
party. It is a ministry of paper initiatives, a taxpayer-financed agency for
self-advertisement. Civil servants are unwilling to propose very much, and
determined not to write down what they do discuss. The urge to further
radicalism may be genuine, but the performance is disappointing.
If that were all, there would be little cause for complaint. The government
could be said to be in a state of do-nothing equilibrium, a minimalist's
ideal. Sadly, that is not all. 'Do-nothing' is often a harmful choice.
Do-something can be worse. Local government has been hobbled. The behaviour
of parliamentarians has brought political life into disrepute. Ministers
spend too much of their time dishing out money and jobs to favoured
individuals, companies or organisations. Fifteen years of continuous office
has resulted in the creation of a patronage state, as described in a report*
published on Monday by a pair of pressure groups, Charter 88 and Democratic
Audit.
The report suggests that there is now one executive quango for every 10,000
population, and that these bodies are responsible for nearly a third of
public spending. It may be right, if not precisely so. Let us halve the
authors' figures to eliminate any chance of exaggeration. The picture that
remains is startling. Britain is replete with opportunities for patronage,
secretive deal-making and good old fashioned corruption. We do not need a
democratic audit to prove this. Just observe. There stands the health
secretary, arms outstretched, guarding every health service trust from
public scrutiny, arousing suspicion by the zealousness with which she
defends the secrets of these spenders of our money.
The Conservatives have torn the heart out of the unwritten British
constitution. The democratic checks on executive power have been replaced in
the name of customer choice. What the latter phrase often means is
placemen's self-preservation. The irony is that the latest evidence of this
comes in a week when all three national parties have published manifestos
for the elections to the European Parliament. Labour and the Liberal
Democrats balance their views on possible reforms of EU institutions with
programmes for the restoration of civic life in Britain. Both summarise
their proposals for domestic constitutional reform in their Europe
manifestos.
Not the Tories. They will have none of it. They talk as if subsidiarity
stops at Calais. They cannot win elections to town halls, so they emasculate
local authorities. They are rejected by the Scots, but will not look at
Scottish self-government. 'A separate Scotland would be relegated to the
lower divisions of Europe,' says their manifesto.
This refusal to contemplate any improvement in our constitutional
arrangements applies to all areas of public life. They shy away from reform
of the House of Lords, although individual Tory peers are more sensible than
that. Simple improvements to House of Commons procedure make little headway.
Several suggestions of reform of the way bills are prepared have been made;
none accepted. The consequence is that more legislation is made in
amendments than in initial bills.
Conservatives need to think these matters through. They have run the country
as if they were in office forever. They govern by ever-increasing
centripetal force. Finding out what an unscrupulous administration of a
different political colour could do with the powers ministers have
accumulated for themselves would teach them a lesson, at our expense. We
must hope that Labour, which is still an unappetising alternative, makes
itself electable before we have to choose.
*Ego trip, Pounds 9.95, from 3-11 Pine Street, London EC1R 0JH
