Ever since science fiction writers began describing their visions of the
future, the idea of machines that can think has fascinated and disturbed
people. Today's computers, however impressive their calculating and
processing power, are far from being electronic brains. But systems designed
to mimic the brain and recognise patterns in vast amounts of data are
penetrating deeply into the practical world.
Called neural networks, they derive from research work first carried out in
the 1940s. It was only around the mid-1980s, however, that the technology
came within reach of commercial users. Applications now range from the
monitoring and control of industrial processes, such as steelmaking, brewing
or the manufacture of chemicals, to predicting the behaviour of financial
markets and trends in consumer demand.
Because of their complexity and the very term neural networks - which tends
to conjure up the image of a mysterious 'black box' to many businessmen -
such systems have met with scepticism as well as approval. Some specialists
prefer not to use the words when talking to customers.
'We find it generates a lot of initial interest if we say 'neural network','
says Richard Hoptroff, managing director of London-based Right Information
Systems, which produces software for commercial use at prices ranging from
Pounds 7,900. 'But then people believe it's a black box. Yet it's a bundle
of equations like any other method.'
These equations are the building blocks for non-linear systems based on
neurons in the human brain. Since the brain contains about 100bn neurons
(nerve cells) linked in a network of myriad connections, it can absorb and
memorise information and images from all the senses in a way computers
cannot possibly match. Neural networks have only a few hundred or thousand
neurons (or processing units).
These are put together in layers, usually three, although more can be used
in highly advanced systems, and the computers 'learn' by being provided with
examples. Information is then passed through the layers to provide answers
to problems which would defy conventional computers - built for high-speed
calculating rather than selecting patterns from a confusing mass of data -
and require far more speed in comprehension and analysis than the human
brain can supply.
Neural networks do not, however, provide all-purpose solutions to tricky
problems. Their value depends on the data with which they are fed and how
effectively the results are used. 'It's not a technology that sweeps
everything out of the way,' says Ray Browne, head of the neural computing
programme at the UK's Department of Trade and Industry. 'It's another tool
in the toolbox.'
The use of this tool is growing rapidly, according to Frost &amp; Sullivan, the
US market research company. Up to 1998, the world neural network market is
expected to expand at a compound rate of 46 per cent a year. Over this
decade, it said in a report, 'neural networks will permeate almost every
area of business, industry and science'. Mostly, they will be integrated
with other applications or systems. 'Neural networks will enable
breakthroughs in such areas as continuous speech recognition, handwritten
character recognition, and autonomous vehicles or robots.'
As well as big names in the electronics industry such as IBM, Fujitsu, NEC,
Hitachi and Intel, a host of smaller, specialised companies are working on
neural computers and applications. In many cases, neural networks are
combined with other types of computer technology such as genetic algorithms
(copying biological mechanisms to produce evolving solutions) and rule
induction systems (generating rules for specific tasks).
In Japan, Fujitsu has developed hybrid systems using fuzzy logic to help
deal with imprecise data. One such neural fuzzy system has been used to
build up a bond rating programme for Nikko Securities. Fujitsu also produced
a neural network system for Nikko to predict the best times to buy and sell
Tokyo-quoted stocks.
Both systems yielded a high degree of accuracy. Because of the extra
analytical dimension provided by neural networks, many banks and financial
institutions use them as aids to bond, foreign exchange and equity trading
as well as for more basic tasks such as credit-checking, fraud detection and
mortgage evaluation.
Thus much of the recent emphasis has been on applications in finance,
although many bankers are hesitant about entrusting large sums of money to
the judgments of a computer. Since it is very hard to work out why a neural
network comes up with a particular answer or recommendation, this wariness
is not easily dispelled. Also, new factors can come into play which have not
been put into the system.
Even so, financial applications will continue to play an important role in
this market. Frost &amp; Sullivan expects them to account for 23 per cent of the
worldwide neural network business in 1998 (against 20 per cent in 1990), by
which time the total market should exceed Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.3bn).
Industrial uses should make up 24 per cent (also 20 per cent in 1990), with
the defence share falling from 39 per cent to 21 per cent. Among other
applications, the medical sector is likely to be in the forefront with 7 per
cent.
Among the most promising fields for neural network technology are retailing
and market research. As in banking, those with successful systems tend not
to want to talk about them. But Paul Freeman, UK-based manager of market
modelling for Kraft General Foods of the US, says neural networks can be of
tremendous use in helping decide on the timing of commodity purchases and
the pricing and marketing of products. 'We build models of things like the
way in which weather in Germany affects chocolate sales there or the impact
of coffee prices on consumption.'
The results of these modelling exercises, combined with other types of
statistical analysis, are used widely in the group. The latest world coffee
price increases have clearly changed the outlook for Kraft's brands. 'In
coffee pricing,' adds Freeman, 'a very very small percentage error can be
very expensive.' Using historical data, Kraft can work out how past price
gyrations affected demand and feed this into its neural network models.
On a narrower front, Radio Rentals uses a neural system devised by Central
Research Laboratories - both are owned by Thorn EMI of the UK - to ensure
greater accuracy in targeting customers for special campaigns. By analysing
customer records, lifestyle and the age of the equipment, it detects which
people are likely to end their hire contracts for televisions and other
goods and which are likely to respond to promotions.
This has led to considerable savings on mailing costs. 'If you're going to
look at market data analysis and see how to earn money, you have to
recognise that some improvements can result in a heck of a lot of money,'
says Jeremy Severwright, business development manager at CRL's advanced
computing solutions group. 'Sometimes this shows through very quickly.'
Banks, book clubs and mail order companies are among users who can extract
more profit from customers by using neural network techniques.
But these can also be put to more heavyweight uses. One of Fujitsu's
earliest systems was developed for Nippon Steel to prevent failures in the
continuous casting process. Kazuo Asakawa, manager of Fujitsu's intelligent
systems laboratory, foresees the day, some years hence, when neural networks
will combine with arrays of sensors to control a new generation of
self-learning robots for the office and home.
Currently, however, neural network experts are preoccupied with the more
basic concern that industry should adopt the technology more widely.
'Industry is not as aware as it should be,' says Suran Goonatilake, a
research fellow at University College London. In Britain, the DTI has been
spreading the message through its awareness programme which has spawned a
number of applications clubs. So although the US and Japan still have the
lead in this area, European countries are catching up quickly.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Forecast growth in neural networks market
Revenue Growth Rate (%)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  1988    89    90    91    92    93    94    95    96    97    98
   na    22.7  31.7  41.4  52.6  58.8  53.7  47.0  40.0  36.3  37.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Frost &amp; Sullivan
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
