Car makers were uneasy two years ago when the Inland Revenue unveiled its
proposals for a new company car tax regime, based on a simple percentage of
cars' list prices.
In previous years considerable effort had gone into producing 'tax break
specials' under the old tax regime, which heavily favoured high-earning
executives compared with lower-paid essential users of company cars.
The old system, based on price and engine capacity bands, meant that an
executive driving a highly-specified 'perk' car of fractionally under 2
litres and Pounds 19,250 paid only the same personal tax on his company car
as an essential user of a utilitarian vehicle of just over 1.4 litres,
provided their marginal tax rates were the same.
Under the new system, effective from April 6, the same executive would have
to swap his Pounds 19,000 car for a model costing a mere Pounds 12,500 so
that the tax bill would be the same. Car makers feared that many executives
would be tempted to downsize and downprice, thus sapping revenue from one of
the most profitable sectors of the new car market. Vehicles with many
executive 'extras' provide disproportionately higher profit per unit
compared with mainstream fleet cars.
It will take two or three years before the effect of the new system, in
terms of vehicle choice, can be fully assessed. Nevertheless, there is
little sign so far of executives opting for less tax-burdensome cars,
according to Mr Michael Banner, Vauxhall's director of fleet sales, and
researchers at Henley Management College who have studied the executive and
fleet car market on Vauxhall's behalf.
While some preference is being shown for smaller cars - but only ones
equipped to executive standards - there is only a very slight trend towards
downpricing, the researchers maintain.
Mr Banner observes that 'the typical executive driving a car priced at the
old Pounds 19,250 tax threshold has looked at the changes, realised that his
current car is going to cost him only another Pounds 20 or Pounds 30 a month
and has decided 'I'll cope'.'
Similar views are being voiced by other manufacturers. But that does not
mean that significant changes in manufacturers' model mixes and marketing
policies are not under way. One major effect of the new tax system was to
eliminate entirely the engine capacity bands which previously had
discriminated severely against larger units.
Particularly badly hit under the old system was the diesel engine. Though
likely to be favoured by many fleet managers because of its one-third
greater fuel economy compared with a petrol unit, it typically reqires
larger capacity to provide comparable on-road performance.
The new tax system is already seeing the introduction of new versions of
mainstream business cars with larger, high-performing V6 engines of 2.5
litres, as well as giving a further boost to the buoyant diesel car sector,
sales of which in the first four months of this year were running 60 per
cent higher than in the same period of 1993.
The diesel sales go on despite two learned reports in the UK, which argue
that diesel exhaust emissions - including particulates suspected of causing
cancer - could contaminate the air in cities if the diesel car population
continues to expand.
One in four new cars sold in the UK is now a diesel. Business car users and
fleet managers, increasingly impressed by the cost advantages, appear to be
taking comfort from the fact that commercial vehicles - many of them elderly
buses - account for at least two-thirds of the diesel exhaust pollution
being created in urban areas.
It is not only at the Pounds 19,250 tax break point that the tax system
changes are having an effect. The scrapping of the second threshold of
Pounds 29,000, above which an executive's personal tax on his company car
rose sharply, has eliminated model range 'bunching' around the breakpoint
while the capping of the new system at a Pounds 60,000 list price means that
the expensive car makers such as Rolls-Royce and Aston Martin are not
significantly disadvantaged.
It is in pricing structures and strategies that the new tax system has had
some of its most notable effects - at least in terms of the notional prices
which are paid for executives' cars. Traditional UK pricing policies - with
a few exceptions such as Mercedes and BMW - have been based on a relatively
high list price which few customers in the business sector actually pay.
There are widespread discounts - 30 per cent or more in a few notorious
deals to particularly large fleet operators. The new list price-based tax
regime makes such policies untenable because they would maximise an
executive's personal tax burden. So manufacturers have been cutting the
profit margins they allow their dealers. Once typically 15-16.5 per cent,
plus the chance of cash bonuses from manufacturers for meeting sales
targets, these 'official' margins have been cut to 10 per cent and in some
cases - over the past few weeks in the executive sector - to 5 per cent.
Indeed, Vauxhall's new Omega executive car range was launched with a 5 per
cent margin. In a few cases, the margin has been dispended with altogther in
favour of a fixed 'handling' charge payable to the dealer. Some Renault and
Volvo models fall into this category. So do some of the cheapest Rover 800
models with a Pounds 500 fee, while Ford is allowing a Pounds 1,500 handling
fee on its US-built Probe coupe and is giving only a token margin on its
Granada/Scorpio executive cars.
The changes have been accompanied by much trumpeting about lower prices.
This is convenient in view of the pan-EU car price comparisons now published
twice a year at the behest of the European Commission, which wants to see
price convergence between EU new car markets and tends to regard the UK as a
high-priced market.
But transaction prices have not changed a lot because dealers were already
giving away much of their official margin and relying on incentive bonuses
from manufacturers to make a return on mainstream executive cars. They now
merely have less room to haggle.
The approach does mean a lower company car tax burden for executives - and a
lower tax take for the Inland Revenue. At the moment, the Revenue can only
stand by gnashing its teeth. How it might react, in the longer term, to an
entrenched system of zero profit margins and 'handling charges' is another
matter altogether.
