A host of golden daffodils hardly seems a source of serious pollution. But
the UK's National Rivers Authority, the river quality watchdog, reported
last month that highly toxic insecticides had seeped from a Cornish daffodil
farm into local streams.
That was just one example of the threat posed by contaminated land revealed
in the NRA's survey, which also reported that in the Severn-Trent region of
central England alone, 186 sites were thought to be polluting water. Just
over half of those cases were of industrial contamination, and the rest of
leaking rubbish dumps.
Many similar instances have been cited in the responses - due in yesterday -
to the government's consultation paper on contaminated land, Paying for our
past. The paper, published in March after the government scrapped proposals
for a register of contaminated land, calls for comments on the size of the
problem and on who should foot the bill. Ministers say they are determined
that the chosen solution should avoid the problems which have bedevilled
Superfund.
So far the full scale of the problem has not been known, as there have been
no systematic surveys, just compilations of incidents such as the NRA
report. Friends of the Earth, the pressure group, has suggested that there
could be 100,000 problem sites in England, concentrated in the former
industrial heartland of the Midlands. The Confederation of British Industry
has also estimated that 200,000 hectares could be contaminated by industrial
use, and that cleaning it up could cost Pounds 20bn.
Not all that pollution may need tackling urgently. Mr Andrew Lees, campaigns
director of Friends of the Earth, says: 'If the pollution is fixed in the
soil and is not moving, then it is possible that it poses no problem. But if
it is contaminating water supplies, for example, then clearly it does.'
However, even if some contaminated sites do not need treatment, the
government is anxious to devise a clean-up policy because it fears that
uncertainty about potential liabilities will hinder development of former
industrial regions. Many of these areas suffer from high unemployment, and
the government is keen to encourage investment. It is also concerned to ease
pressure for construction on green field sites in the south.
Lawyers and bankers confirm the government's fears that uncertainty about
liabilities is making buying and selling property difficult in some regions.
Ms Clare Deanesly of Gouldens, the solicitors, says that a House of Lords
ruling in December - the much-publicised Cambridge Water case - 'only
answered some of lawyers' worries'.
In that case, the Lords ruled that Eastern Counties Leather, a leather
treatment company, could not be held responsible for pollution caused years
ago which had contaminated boreholes, because the company could not
reasonably have foreseen the damage. In doing so, the Lords rejected the
application of strict liability along Superfund lines - that is, polluters
are liable regardless of whether they foresaw the damage or took steps to
alleviate it.
However the case left open the question of whether adequate rules to
determine who should pay could evolve through the courts by the application
of common law, or whether they need to be defined by new legislation.
The government's paper ducks that question. Its only clear recommendation on
the question of who should pay is that banks should, in some circumstances,
be held liable for cleaning up pollution caused by companies to which they
have made loans.
This proposal has attracted fierce criticism: the Royal Institution of
Chartered Surveyors has told the government that 'putting unreasonable
liability' on the financial sector could 'encourage (it) to withdraw from
environmentally vulnerable markets'. In other words, banks would lend money
only for the development of clean land.
The paper, however, points the way forward on some other problems, according
to lawyers, developers, banks and insurers. They have particularly welcomed
the proposal that land need not be cleaned up to a pristine state, only to
the level necessary for its intended use. The proposal - which has been
attacked by environmentalists such as Friends of the Earth - is an attempt
to avoid some of the huge clean-up bills which have arisen under Superfund.
But that does not compensate, according to the paper's critics, for the
paper's failure to address the central question of who should foot the bill
for past pollution. 'The courts passed the buck to parliament on the
Cambridge Water case, and Paying for our past passed it back again,' says Ms
Deanesly.
Because that central question remains untackled, many respondents have
called for the government to pay for cleaning up contamination, possibly by
setting up a fund through levies on industry.
Ms Deanesly says: 'My personal view is that we have all benefited from the
industrial revolution - it produced economic benefits. To the extent that it
has produced disadvantages, those should be funded from the public purse.'
In spite of the problems the US has had in operating such a fund, the
government is likely to find that many of the respondents to its
consultation paper have echoed those views.
