'That's the Sangatta seam we're chasing' says John Arkeveld, pointing at a
thick black line in the hillside. We were standing on a muddy hilltop
overlooking a huge man-made hole. All around us, dump trucks growled their
way about, heaving out huge loads of glistening black coal.
Sangatta is one of the largest open-cast coal mines in the world. Set 13km
inland from Kalimantan's east coast, the three-year-old operation is already
producing some 10m tonnes a year, and is aiming to go up to 12m. Last month
the mine set a world record by loading just under 200,000t of coal on to a
single cargo ship.
The existence of coal in East Kalimantan has been known for some time. But
Sangatta was only developed recently as a result of licensing deregulation
by the Indonesian government. The Sangatta licence was won by Kaltim Prima
Coal (KPC), a 50:50 joint venture between British Petroleum and CRA, the
Australian mining company part owned by RTZ.
The mine is highly attractive. for a number of reasons. The coal is of
exceptionally high quality: it is low in sulphur, ash and moisture; the
seams are thick (up to 14m in places); and the reserves are estimated at
590m tonnes, enough for nearly 50 years. Production is already 50 per cent
above plan.
Furthermore, the mine is linked by conveyor belt to a deep sea berth which
means that the output can be shipped out cheaply. Most of the production is
exported, mainly to power generation utilities in Japan, Taiwan and Hawaii.
But against that, the seams have turned out to be more complicated than the
geologists expected, so mining costs have been higher than first thought.
Also, steaming coal prices have fallen by a quarter since the mine got into
production in 1991.
The mine cost Dollars 570m to develop, and KPC pays the Indonesian state
coal company PT Batubara a 13.5 per cent royalty on all the coal it takes
out. Mr John Slater, the managing director, declines to discuss the
operation's finances, but he says that production costs are at the lower end
of the world scale, mainly because the coal can be shipped out so easily.
He is also optimistic on prices: 'We are at the bottom of the cycle, and
we'll see prices come back a little,' he says, noting that spot prices could
rise in Europe. (CRA reported a profit of Dollars A44m on its half share in
the mine last year, double the previous year's profit).
Another difficulty is that Sangatta lies next door to the Kutai national
park, one of the few areas of virgin forest left in East Kalimantan, which
makes it an easy target for environmentalists. KPC is helping to fund
conservation projects to protect the area, and has a programme to reforest
the open pit itself. What is not specified in the contract is who pays for
the final clean-up costs once mining is finished.
The mine employs 2300 people and provides jobs for another 2000 contractors;
it is the main source of employment for miles around. Employees get access
to high class shops, education and health services. But this also sharpens
the divide between the haves and the have-nots, the latter clustering
hopefully round the mine in little villages.
How long BP and CRA will remain in control at Sangatta remains to be seen.
Under the terms of their agreement with the government, they are required to
offer up to 51 per cent of the business for sale to Indonesian interests
between 1996 and 2001. Ironically, BP has been selling off most of its coal
operations elsewhere in the world as part of its big rationalisation drive.
But it held on to Sangatta because of its exceptional prospects.
