BP is to shut its loss-making ethylene plant at Baglan Bay, West Glamorgan,
with the loss of 600 jobs. The cost will be included in an exceptional
charge of Pounds 200m in the group's fourth quarter results.
BP has lost 'tens of millions of pounds' in ethylene manufacture at Baglan
Bay in each of the last two years. It cut output by almost half last summer
but that was 'not sufficient', said Mr Stephen Pettit, chief executive of
BP's petrochemicals division.
Mr Bryan Sanderson, chief executive of BP Chemicals, said the closure was
forced by overcapacity of the product and the European recession. Operations
to treat gasoline and make ethyl benzene will also close.
Of the jobs lost, 350 work for BP employees and 250 for contractors. The
plant, one of BP Chemicals' four main UK manufacturing sites, will still
employ 510 staff and contractors after the ethylene cracker shuts at the end
of March.
Baglan Bay's cracker was commissioned in 1972 and used to employ more than
2,000. It is still the second largest private-sector employer in West
Glamorgan, after British Steel.
Its closure comes against a background of chronic European over-capacity in
ethylene, which is used in the manufacture of plastics and solvents. A
Europe-wide plan to help companies cut at least 1.5m tonnes of capacity
foundered on December 17. Mr Pettit said the Baglan Bay plant, which has a
capacity of 335,000 tonnes a year, is too small and uses the expensive
naphtha technique for making ethylene.
It accounts for about one fifth of BP Chemicals' ethylene manufacturing
capacity. Production will be increased at BP's plant at Grangemouth, Fife.
The closure will take Pounds 17m a year out of the local economy which BP
has been spending on contracts and supplies. 'This is devastating news for
the area,' said Mr Norman Thomas, chairman of West Glamorgan's economic
development committee.
The 600 job cuts follow 200 other redundancies in West Glamorgan in the past
few weeks. In March, 370 jobs will go at JR Freeman, the Port Talbot cigar
manufacturers.
In recent years BP has contracted out services such as rigging, scaffolding
and insulation, and 250 out of 400 contracting jobs will be lost over the
next year. BP will spend Pounds 3m on a job creation programme.
The county council criticised the government for downgrading the region in
its review of assisted areas last summer.
Mr Vernon Davies, deputy leader, said: 'The difficulties that BP have been
facing are well documented and today's announcement should not have come as
a surprise. But last year's decision was still made, in spite of our
warnings, to reduce the assistance.'
