THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES: MUSIC SCIENCE AND THE NATURAL ORDER OF THE
UNIVERSEby Jamie James Little Brown Pounds 18.99, 260 pages
The power of music over mankind, for dancing, fighting, love-making, praying
or mourning, is one of life's unsolved mysteries. Even cows are said to find
it soothing, while Brahms's spider was literally moved - charmed down its
thread by the composer's harmonies and sent scuttling up again by his
dissonances.
Various solutions to the riddle have been attempted. Deryck Cooke tried 35
years ago in The Language of Music to establish a musical grammar of human
emotions. More recently the psychiatrist Anthony Storr tackled it from the
psycho-biological end in his discursive Music and the Mind.
To describe the abstractions of music in words is notoriously difficult: so
it is not surprising that most music-lovers, and critics, are content to
leave it at that. But it is also a commonplace that science and music have
some affinity (think of all those boffins who play in string quartets), so
that when little Emily passes her Grade 5 piano with distinction the
neighbours exclaim: 'Oh, she must be good at maths]'
Therefore it is somewhat disappointing not to find in this present excursion
into the metaphysics of music any account of current scientific thinking
about why human beings react as they do when they hear certain tones or
rhythms or cadences. Nor are we left much the wiser about that extraordinary
combination of intellectual and emotional satisfaction which the playing and
hearing of 'good' music brings.
The author, an American magazine writer on both science and music, does,
however, trace the history of these phenomena right back to Pythagoras -
credited with discovering the mathematics of musical intervals - and his
cult of mystic number-crunchers. Through Plato, the early Christians, and
the Renaissance the cosmic character of music, the link between the universe
and the soul, went unchallenged. It was Galileo's father who broke the
Pythagorean spell when he discovered that the old Greek's ratios were not
perfect, and a vicious controversy ensued: some even said it against the
natural order to tune keyboards so that music could modulate.
Newton (an alchemist in his spare time) and Kepler (a keen astrologer) were
in thrall to the concept of the music of the spheres; while Leibniz, a
contemporary of JS Bach, said music was 'the hidden arithmetical exercise of
a soul unconscious that it is calculating.' This cosmic conception was only
dispersed by the anthropocentric Romantic movement, a period the author is
reluctant to define too sharply but appears, on balance, to regret.
The feverish cult of the virtuoso and genius gave way in turn to the atonal
Schoenberg, writing at the same time that Einstein was rewriting Newton's
physics. Even so Schoenberg (developer of the 12-tone system) could seem the
most mystical musician since Pythagoras. He was superstitious about the
number 13 (naturally) and displayed, says the author, a similar 'veneration
of the numinous power of number.'
James completes his tour with an essay on what he sees as the fragmented,
selfish sterility of the contemporary scene. Even here, he finds in
Stockhausen's account of the sympathetic and healing vibrations of music a
harking back to the time of Boethius.
This is a learned, sophisticated book, full of surprises. But it is not at
all clear what conclusion the author wants us to draw from his exegesis: he
is by no means anti-science, yetseems to be saying that music composed in
the cheerless, random world depicted for us by modern hypotheses is bound to
leave us cold and unsatisfied.
If so, he should talk to John Tavener.
