Britain said yesterday that it smelled 'a stinking fish' in European
Commission plans for opening up European Union waters around Ireland to the
Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets in 1996.
Mr Michael Jack, UK fisheries minister, said Britain would call on the
commission at next week's fisheries council in Brussels to rethink proposals
that were 'a bureaucratic and administrative nightmare'.
The government has come under strong pressure from the fishing industry to
oppose the plans, which are designed to share out access among member states
to waters lying west of the UK, France and north-west Spain.
Mr Jack said British fishermen feared the new rules were so complex that the
huge Spanish fleet would be able to flout them with impunity. 'There's a
very real worry that in some way an increase in Spanish fishing effort will
be unleashed on these sensitive waters and there will be no means of
controlling it,' he said.
When they joined the community, Spain and Portugal were barred access to the
so-called Irish Box, which covers the waters immediately surrounding
Ireland. That exclusion ends on December 31 next year, although they will
still not be allowed to fish in the Irish Sea for species subject to quotas.
They will also remain barred from the North Sea.
The commission has tabled two draft regulations covering access to the EU's
'western waters' for all member states and monitoring compliance by
individual vessels with the new rules. It agreed the rules would not cause
member states to lose quota and would entail no increase in fishing.
However, its proposal to allocate countries with a fixed number of fishing
days has run foul of the British government, which says its position is
backed by Ireland and France.
In a letter to 48 members of parliament from fishing constituencies released
yesterday, Mr Jack questioned the way the allocation of days - known as
Standard Vessel Days - had been calculated.
'It is not clear that the allocations of SVDs set out in the proposal would
represent equitable allocations among member states or respect relative
stability (existing quotas),' he said. Britain feared it had not been
allocated enough days to fulfil its quotas, whereas Ireland might have been
granted too many.
He added that the proposals for monitoring compliance were complex and would
impose 'excessive burdens on our fishermen'.
Britain is particularly unhappy that the commission has left it up to member
states to allocate days to individual vessels in their own fleets - a highly
sensitive task - without prescribing how this should be decided.
The council on September 28 is unlikely to decide this issue, which could
drag on into next year. Mr Jack said Britain would present a 'practical and
simple' alternative, but he was unable to give details beforehand.
