Drama is the glamourpuss of television, as the opening of the new autumn
season reminds us. Drama is more expensive than anything else, involves more
famous people, and is promoted more enthusiastically by the television
companies. If you have an 85-minute film such as Pat And Margaret written by
Victoria Wood, directed by Gavin Millar, with a cast led by Julie Walters,
Celia Imrie and Victoria Wood, or a four-part mini-series such as Faith,
with Michael Gambon starring in a story about sexual shenanigans among
politicians, then you are going to try to ensure that everyone knows about
it.
This applies not only to so-called prestige productions and single dramas,
but also in such well-tried categories as the British detective story -
ITV's Ruth Rendell Mysteries for instance - and the working class comedy
drama, such as BBC1's Common As Muck which is clearly aiming for high
ratings and intended for a long run. For all these dramas there will be
glossy brochures and press launches, cassettes will be biked to the
burgeoning army of preview writers, and the stars will be chauffeured around
to do their bit on daytime sofa shows, local radio, and Woman's Hour.
The same does not apply to programmes such as the Channel 4 science series
Equinox or the BBC2 series White Heat, about the development of technology:
budgets are lower, audiences smaller, and there are no stars to chat on the
sofas, so there is no hope of their being promoted with the same vigour. And
yet it is White Heat and Equinox which, in the last 10 days or so, have been
making me sit up straight on the old green sofa, and have literally altered
my perception of the world and of mankind. However long the longest running
of the new dramas proves to be, it is hard to see how it could ever equal
the impact of those programmes about technology.
Which is not to suggest that the drama has been poor. On the contrary, even
the least impressive, the Ruth Rendell Mystery, which has been
disappointingly familiar in its approach and atmosphere, has still succeeded
in hooking me firmly enough to ensure that I shall be watching on Friday to
discover whodunnit. It is hard to avoid the feeling that familiarity and
predictability are precisely the qualities for which ITV is now striving in
its drama. Faith, which was shown in one-hour segments on either side of
News At Ten on Wednesday and Thursday, would have been improved by dropping
all the material about the reporter's daughter, and ruthless editing to
reduce the four hours to two or less. It might then have become a taut, pacy
drama about politicians and the press instead of the diffuse piece of work
we saw, which gave us too much time to muse upon the last political drama
series in which the affair turned out to be homosexual (To Play The King).
The drama surprise of the new season is Common As Muck, a series about
northern dustmen which is presumably intended to do for BBC1 what Minder did
for ITV. The surprise is that it works so well, or did in the opening
episode. Matters may deteriorate, you always need three or four episodes to
be sure, but already it seems that comedy and plot are to emerge from
character rather than being draped over prefabricated 'characters'.
The seeming paradox of discovering that the dustman most ready to make
racist remarks is himself married to a black woman is (in my experience as a
junior reporter in the ethnic rainbow that was Slough in the 1960s)
absolutely true to life. As for Pat And Margaret, it was a deliciously
malicious character study which fulfilled all the promise of 'Acorn
Antiques' in Victoria Wood's sketch shows.
But while those dramas entertained me, Equinox with its programme 'The
Cyborg Cometh', and the opening programme in the White Heat series,
'Butcher's Blade', managed to startle me. Anyone who has read a fair amount
of science fiction will be familiar with two popular themes: first the
extension of individual human power via machinery (whether built in and
'bionic', or built on as hugely powerful robotic extensions) and second, the
assertion that the answer to the question 'Why are we here?' is 'To build a
machine cleverer than ourselves'. Between them these two programmes created
a picture, impressionistic yet vivid, of mankind standing on the brink of a
period when those fantasies could turn into realities, and we could change
dramatically in the process.
If they are right then the rapid evolution of mankind up to the point where,
today, he dominates the world, will look like kids' stuff compared to the
leap he is about to make. The most pleasing aspect of White Heat (which was
made for the BBC and the Discovery Channel by Uden Associates) is that, far
from being one of those typical gee-whiz television series that cannot wait
to zap you with the next bit of miraculous hardware, it is much more
concerned with aesthetics; with the emotional and cultural implications of
technological development. If you took the preoccupations of this series and
kept them in mind while watching Equinox it was not difficult to imagine man
achieving (if that is the right word) within only two or three generations
something close to immortality.
The picture emerging from the two programmes is of technology, from robotics
to genetic engineering, largely negating the weaknesses of the human body
and leaving human brains served by renewable mechanical parts. We are
already a long way down that road, and of course the journey has its
problems. Equinox told the chilling story of a woman in hospital who was
clearly brain-dead but whose heart would not stop beating. She had a
pacemaker and, this being the US, her family faced bankruptcy as the bills
mounted up while the ethics were being sorted out. 'Technology is evolving
faster than homo sapiens' said the commentary.
Clearly no such programme is ever going to out-rate Victoria Wood and Julie
Walters playing long lost sisters brought together by a ghastly TV show
called 'Magic Moments' (a title and concept which are probably being
developed in earnest somewhere even as you read this). But the implications
of White Heat and Equinox, for the smaller number of people who have been
watching them, are far more significant and much more long lasting . . .
even if they do not earn anyone any space on any of those sofas.
