The UK government is now deep into its deliberations on the future of the
state-owned nuclear power industry. One of the key issues is whether private
money can finance further development of the industry, through privatisation
or funding new projects. Without it, the nuclear power industry has a highly
uncertain future in the UK: it is most unlikely that any further nuclear
power stations would be paid for by any government, Tory or Labour.
But is the City ready to put up the money instead?
This was not the case when the electricity industry was privatised in 1989.
The intention then was to sell off the nuclear component as well, but the
plan was withdrawn because investors were unhappy with the risks and high
cost of decommissioning old nuclear power stations.
The City has since become more sanguine about nuclear energy. Several City
institutions are looking for ways of involving the private sector. BZW, the
investment bank, and KPMG, the accountancy firm, are advising the Department
of Trade and Industry on the prospects for privatising the two generators,
Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear, which, by some estimates, could raise
more than Pounds 2bn.
Nuclear Electric has hired Morgan Stanley, the US investment house, to
explore investor attitudes to nuclear energy. It has also asked NM
Rothschild if private money could be raised to finance construction of a new
nuclear power station.
Morgan Stanley's report, the only one so far issued, was bullish about the
prospects. Based on other countries' experiences with private sector nuclear
utilities, such as the US, Germany, and Japan, Morgan Stanley concluded
investors were sophisticated enough to understand the risks - the
implication being that Nuclear Electric could be privatised.
The Rothschilds report is not yet complete. But Mr Mike Kirwan, Nuclear
Electric's finance director, says it is edging towards positive - if
qualified - conclusions. It will say that private sector money could be
found for nuclear power station construction provided a well-tried design
was used and Nuclear Electric was closely involved in the building and
operation of any new station. Such a project could be put together using
rates of return close to those of the new gas-fired power plants currently
being financed - and below the 11 per cent assumed by Nuclear Electric up to
now.
But these institutions are all working for the industry. What of independent
bankers and financiers? Here, views are more mixed. Several analysts say the
City has paid little attention to the nuclear review. 'Investors only start
thinking about a project when someone sticks a prospectus under their
noses,' says one. 'We are a long way from that.'
But the City is now clearly less concerned about the risk of catastrophe or
environmental contamination.
The perception of Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear has also shifted:
they are now seen as commercial concerns with capable and communicative
managements. The fact that they have made determined efforts to cut costs
and become profitable has been noted, and their annual accounts have begun
to acquire greater credibility with financial analysts. In particular, the
companies' estimates of decommissioning costs are considered to be more
realistic than in 1989.
But the more commercial nuclear energy becomes, the more the City is
inclined to ask hard-nosed questions about the nuclear generation business.
A large risk overhanging the industry is seen to be government interference.
Nuclear companies would need government promises of full commercial freedom
for privatisation to succeed. But this would be no guarantee against future
government intervention which might try to restrict nuclear activities, or
require heavier decommissioning provisions, so affecting profits.
This freedom would have to extend to managing one of the industry's major
costs: waste. At the moment, the two companies have to use the expensive
services of British Nuclear Fuels, the state monopoly, when cheaper means
are available, such as on-site storage. They are also shareholders in Nirex,
the state agency which handles long-term radioactive waste disposal.
Analysts say these ties would have to be loosened if the two companies were
to be truly commercial.
The point about commercial freedom is of particular concern because few
analysts believe more power stations will be built, due to public
opposition. The two companies must therefore be able to branch out if they
are to grow and pay rising dividends.
For privatisation to work, the government would have to create a package
attractive to the City. This means the dirtiest and costliest parts - the
first generation Magnox reactors - remaining in state ownership. But both
companies would also have to set up a segregated fund for their
decommissioning provisions to persuade investors they were safe for the long
term. Currently, these appear on the general balance sheet where they can
easily be diverted.
The City's mixed views on privatisation are an improvement from the wholly
negative ones held in 1989. Mr Kirwan of Nuclear Electric says he is
encouraged by conversations with financiers. 'I think investors realise
decommissioning is only construction in reverse, albeit with a longer time
frame,' he says. 'It is normal for investors to accept it and pay for it.'
Some analysts agree that privatisation could be on the cards. 'It's do-able,
but it's really a matter of political will,' says Mr John Reynolds,
electricity analyst at James Capel, who thinks that the sale could be done
in 1996.
But few analysts expect action under this government. Although there would
be gains for the Treasury from an early sale, and the electricity market
would benefit from greater competition, the implications of nuclear
privatisation may be too momentous for a precarious government in the run-up
to an election by mid-1997.
