The actor Brian Cox has made no secret of the fact that his real life is
strikingly similar to that of the central character in Ibsen's The Master
Builder.
On stage he plays Halvard Solness, a man in late middle age who is
captivated by the young Hilde Wangel; offstage he lives with Siri Neal, an
actress 27 years his junior who plays Hilda Wangel in this production.
It may sound risky or even claustrophobic but Cox's position is entirely in
keeping with the spirit of the play which is itself a daring act of
self-analysis.
Ibsen wrote this late psychological drama partly in response to his own
predicament: at 61 his life was shaken by meeting the 18-year-old Emilie
Bardach, a meeting that proved both an inspiration and a scourge.
Brian Cox, given a free hand at the Edinburgh Lyceum where this production
originated, deliberately chose to produce this play, hoping to bring to it
his own personal experience.
It certainly pays dividends; his performance is totally compelling,
penetrating and vital and he mines all the possibilities in Ibsen's complex
exploration of self-doubt and idealism.
Ibsen's play calls for a mature understanding.
Like many of his masterpieces, it is maddeningly patchy. At its heart is a
painfully honest account of fear - fear of ageing, fear of failure, fear of
retribution from God.
Yet it is full of booby-traps for a modern cast. In the midst of believable
dialogue it suddenly becomes stilted, seeming almost to stutter to a halt in
places; among profound insights into human behaviour comes to our ears
heavy-handed, sometimes ludicrous symbolism. Cox and his director John
Crowley find their answer to this by sprinkling the production liberally
with humour.
It is surprisingly funny, which heads off some of the problems. By the time
we get to talk of trolls, demons and castles in the air, we have laughed
enough not to giggle and Cox has made his Solness pompous, arrogant but
desperate enough for us to understand why he grasps at the fantasies Hilde
offers him.
This Solness has a Glasgow accent and is clearly the self-made man -
brusque, jovial and terrified of being discovered.
It is easy to see why he falls for Hilde's flattery and is pricked by her
taunting. Cox and Neal manage the nuances of this relationship skilfully,
making it clear that the crisis her arrival precipitates is just as much
spiritual as physical.
Neal's Hilde is at first attractively forthright, but gradually her desire
to drive Solness to face the truth about himself appears arrogant and
selfish.
The production is rather slow off the blocks, and sometimes oddly paced, but
the performances are thoughtful and pleasing.
Andy McEwan is strong as the tight-lipped apprentice whose talent Solness is
trying to suppress; John Fraser is amusing as the self-contained doctor, who
conveys how much he knows with the slight twitch of an eyebrow.
And Morag Hood is fascinating as Solness's long-suffering wife. Pretty,
patient and all-seeing, she appears at first to shame Solness with her
decency, but as the evening wears on it becomes clear that she has trapped
both of them with her sense of guilt and her inability to cast off the cloak
of the sweet-natured martyr.
The evening, however, really belongs to Cox whose tormented dynamic
performance drives the play forward.
The masterbuilder may scale the height of his steeple and then fall off; Cox
manages to hold on tight.
Riverside Studios (081-741 2255)
