MOTHER'S BOYS by Margaret Forster Chatto &amp; Windus Pounds 14.99, 313 pages
THE BINGO PALACE by Louise Erdrich Flamingo Pounds 14.99, 274 pages
Margaret Forster's novels catalogue the anxieties of family life: conflicts
between generations, the impact of Alzheimer's disease, the rights and
wrongs of mixed-race adoption. Her new novel marks a shift in emphasis,
moving from the internal politics of individual families to the impact on
them of outside events over which they have no control.
Joe, an introverted 15-year-old living in a quiet northern town, is the
victim of a vicious and unprovoked attack by two youths. Forster holds back
the nastiest detail of the assault for around a hundred pages, placing the
reader in the same position as the confused relatives who observe Joe's
traumatised state without fully understanding it.
As Joe's parents, Harriet and Sam, struggle to help him recover, another
family in a nearby town is facing a different ordeal. Sheila is the
grandmother, in effect the mother, of one of the teenagers convicted of the
attack; she brought him up after her own daughter died. Thus Forster sets
the scene for a novel about mother love, and about the fierce protectiveness
both women feel towards the boys they have brought up - a protectiveness
which, far from helping them to understand what has happened, actually gets
in the way of it.
For the heart of this novel, unusually for Forster, is not illumination but
its opposite. It has a fly-on-the-wall quality, exposing the women's inner
lives and even bringing them together in an ineffectual attempt at mutual
understanding. Yet all Forster seems to be offering is a statement about the
limits of unconditional love. Clearly Mother's Boys does not set out to
offer resolution, or even plot development, but even as gifted a writer as
Margaret Forster is not able to overcome the longueurs inherent in a novel
whose keynote is bewilderment.
There is no lack of plot in The Bingo Palace, the fourth in Louise Erdrich'
s quartet of novels about the Chippewa Indians of North Dakota. The book is
essentially a love story in which a young drifter, Lipsha Morrissey,
competes with Lyman Lamartine, his boss and half-brother (or possibly his
half-uncle), for the love of Shawnee Ray, a gifted seamstress who is also
the mother of Lyman's illegitimate son.
The novel is set on an Indian Reservation whose inhabitants simultaneously
live in the mundane present (Lyman is the owner of the Reservation's chief
attraction, a bingo hall) and a mythic past. Erdrich has written about this
past in the earlier novels, demonstrating the way in which the Indians'
continual creation of myth - making themselves larger than life, endowing
themselves with supernatural powers - was a means of compensating for the
bitter reality of the white settlers' decimation of the tribe.
The problem with The Bingo Palace is that it displays no ironic detachment.
What seemed in the earlier books a celebration of tradition now feels like
whimsical folkiness; we are continually presented with characters who refuse
to die or who possess magical powers. Erdrich's writing strains after
effect, imposing mystical interpretations on everyday events like birth and
death: 'The red rope between the mother and her baby is the hope of our
nation. It pulls, it sings, it snags, it feeds and holds. How it holds.'
This is all the more disappointing because Erdrich is a talented writer.
Perhaps she has come up against a present which she is at a loss to
interpret, and has fallen back on a narrative style whose limitations are
now obvious. It will be interesting to see what she does now, and whether
she can escape from her self-created cul-de-sac of Reservation chic.
