A country once synonymous with tyranny and economic disaster is undergoing a
transformation.
Tourists are returning to Uganda's game parks. Asians expelled by Idi Amin
are returning to reclaim homes and businesses. And IMF officials have taken
up residence in the Central Bank offices in Kampala, where they are
scratching their heads over a rarely encountered problem: how to cope with
an appreciating African currency.
Eight years after Yoweri Museveni, then 41, and his National Resistance
Movement fought their way into power, Uganda has made remarkable progress in
overcoming as grim a legacy as any African government has known.
The chaos and slaughter of the eight-year regime of Idi Amin, and the havoc
wrought by the war that finally toppled him in April 1979, would have been
challenge enough.
It defeated no fewer than three governments, who wasted time and squandered
resources until December 1980, when the country went to the polls for its
first multiparty election since independence in 1962.
Far from marking a fresh start, it opened what was to prove another grim
chapter. Former president Milton Obote, ousted by Amin in 1971, returned
from exile to lead the Uganda Peoples Congress to victory in what many
regarded as a rigged poll.
By the time Mr Obote was forced to flee the country, a brief economic
revival had been destroyed by increasingly brutal suppression of dissent.
Mr Museveni, however, has triumphed over his inherited disaster ensuring
political stability, often through harsh measures, and by performing an
intellectual somersault in pursuit of economic recovery.
As late as August 1988, the president was attacking what he called the IMF
'orthodoxy', and seemingly resisting the government's Economic Recovery
Programme, launched in May the previous year.
'If you insist that market forces become the dominant feature in an
economy,' he told a Zambian audience, 'it will lead to increased trade
liberalisation.' This would be 'very dangerous', he warned, 'if it means
that anybody is allowed to import anything they like . . . I can compromise
with the IMF on other things but not on this.'
Mr Museveni must have had second thoughts. As reform gathered pace, all
restrictions on foreign exchange current account transactions were lifted
and today Uganda has the most liberal exchange rate policy in sub-Saharan
Africa, while the price controls he defended in the same speech have also
gone.
The results have been remarkable. GDP growth has averaged 5 per cent
annually since 1987. The budget deficit has shrunk, the size of the army and
civil service has declined, foreign exchange reserves are heathy, a
privatisation programme is under way, foreign investors are returning,
albeit cautiously, and the Ugandan shilling has strengthened by 18 per cent
against the US dollar over the past 18 months.
The benefits of economic orthodoxy are unmistakeable, and the evidence of a
recovery widespread, though far from uniform.
It is seen at its most striking on the journey south from Kampala to Masaka,
the road then curving north-west through Mbarara and on to Mweya Safari
Lodge, perched above Lake Edward on the western border with .
The journey took in a region which seemed to have been devastated beyond
recovery during the 1978-9 war, when invading Tanzanian troops and Ugandan
guerrillas forced Amin into exile.
Today, roadside kilns provide the bricks for a mini building boom, stalls
along the route sell maize, fruit and vegetable and matoke, the green banana
which is a staple food, and coffee bushes give way to rolling green tea
estates.
A separate journey to the far north-east showed that recovery is much weaker
in Gulu and Arua, ravaged by a more recent war, this time against the
Museveni government, waged since 1986 by rebel forces that range from a
bizarre religious sect to diehard supporters of past regimes. But even
there, a tentative peace is paving the way to a better life.
In Jinja, an hour's drive east from Kampala, the giant Kakira sugar estate,
part of the Madhvani business empire seized under Amin, is back with its
former owners. But a city that was once Uganda's industrial centre remains
depressed, with the government's privatisation programme failing to find
buyers for the state-owned factories with obsolete plants.
Corruption is also hampering the privatisation programme, say independent
commentators, who cite cases of delays and prevarication designed to favour
candidates with government links. For these and other reasons - few Ugandans
have been able to protect their savings from economic disasters of the past
 -the level of domestic and foreign investment falls well short of the level
required for Uganda's recovery to become self sustaining.
Mr Museveni, who frequently lectured fellow Africans on the dangers of
economic dependency on the west, now relies on aid to provide half his
government's income. Donors have increased assistance from Dollars 230m in
1986 to more than Dollars 550m in 1993, and outright grants have increased
from under 10 per cent of government income in 1988 to 52 per cent last
year.
And, as one leading donor recently warned, 'such sources are not
indefinitely sustainable'. None of this would have been possible without
stability provided by a government that is somewhere between a coalition and
an autocracy,
Within limits determined informally by Mr Museveni rather than by law,
opposition voices are heard, including that of an often critical press. But
any opposition that sets out to mount an organised challenge to the
president and the NRM and the concept of participatory one-party democracy
is effectively banned.
Under the all-embracing umbrella of the NRM are stalwarts of the two parties
which used to dominate Uganda's politics, including Paul Ssemogerere, leader
of the Democratic Party, and minister of foreign affairs, and Ateker Ejalu,
minister of labour, a prominent member of the Uganda Peoples Congress, once
led by self-exiled former president Milton Obote.
At the grass roots, Mr Museveni has introduced countrywide resistance
councils, with responsibility for community affairs. Meanwhile, a
constituent assembly, elected earlier this year, will draw up a new
constitution in which a multiparty system is not ruled out.
Whether this all adds up to a potential model for the rest of Africa,
struggling to combine economic and political reform, remains to be seen. So
far donors have given Mr Museveni the benefit of the doubt about this
protracted transition to a yet-to-be-defined democracy. This may be
pragmatic, but risks the charge of inconsistency.
Elsewhere in Africa they have made the introduction of multiparty politics a
condition to their aid. And while they have been critical of human rights
abuse by government, at its worst between 1986 and 1991, they appear to have
allowed Uganda a leeway not enjoyed by neighbouring Kenya.
Undoubtedly both donor and domestic tolerance of Mr Museveni's style owes
much to fear of what could be the alternative.
With stark reminders in their own recent past, and with death and disaster
in neighbouring Rwanda, Sudan and Zaire, stability may reasonably be prized
above multiparty politics by many Ugandans and donors alike.
'At its best,' summarises one western diplomat, 'Museveni's government can
be characterised as a government of cohabitation, led by a benevolent
military leader of strong intellectual quality.
'At its worst, it could be described as a government dominated by one man
and a small politico-military elite who are bent on imposing their
particular vision upon civil society.'
Just as the economy has to wean itself from aid dependency, so the political
system must end its dependence on one man if Uganda is to achieve long-term
stability.
At present, donors are prepared to accept Mr Museveni's de facto one-party
state as a transitional administration with special dispensations to deal
with the traumas of the past.
But the same donors are looking to see whether Mr Museveni has the vision
and the will to lay the foundations for a political system that will outlive
him.
At present, Mr Museveni has sufficient support in the new Constituent
Assembly to legalise his 'Movement' system of government until the turn of
the century - postponing the resumption of multiparty politics until then.
But western diplomats are warning Mr Museveni that if he fails to put in
place a democratic system based on freedom of association and freedom of
assembly, Uganda's stability will not last longer than his reign.
'He would only be delaying the return of political chaos to a very
fragmented and divided society,' says one ambassador in Kampala.
Economic and political reform should go hand in hand. When Ugandans and
potential foreign investors are confident of the latter, Uganda's economic
growth is more likely to become self-sustaining and the achievements of Mr
Museveni will be consolidated.
And should that happen, Uganda would indeed be a model for Africa.
