In trying to nudge Switzerland closer to formal European integration the
Swiss government is having as much success as Sisyphus in the Greek myth.
Yet, like him, it is condemned to keep trying.
Situated in the heart of western Europe and intimately bound to it by
history, culture and strong economic ties, Switzerland cannot divorce its
destiny from that of its powerful neighbours. The only question is whether
it can influence the outcome more effectively inside European political and
economic structures or outside them.
While the economic arguments seem to point firmly in the direction of
increased integration, the political hurdles are formidable for a fiercely
independent nation built on three constitutional pillars of permanent
neutrality, direct democracy and local autonomy.
In 1992, after much hesitation, the Swiss coalition government finally took
the plunge and deposited Switzerland's membership application with Brussels.
The following December, Swiss voters narrowly refused to join the European
Economic Area (EEA), which since January has allowed goods, services,
capital and labour to circulate freely between the EU and five fellow
members of the European Free Trade Association (Efta).
Switzerland's EU membership application was put on ice, and Berne spent much
of 1993 in a damage-limitation exercise. In Brussels it lobbied for
bilateral negotiations in areas of vital interest to Switzerland such as
transport and participation in EU research programmes.
At home it launched an economic revitalisation programme to make Swiss laws
and practices more Eurocompatible and to boost competition in domestic
markets. Attempts were made to heal the rift between French-speaking Swiss,
who voted overwhelmingly for the EEA, and German speakers, who firmly
rejected it.
When last November Swiss voters approved introduction of a Eurocompatible
value-added tax, this was rashly seen by some as proof of a pro-European
shift in public opinion. Then came February's unexpected referendum decision
to ban transit freight from Swiss roads within 10 years. Though billed as a
vote to save the Alps from annihilation by lorry traffic, the move has
infuriated Switzerland's neighbours.
As a result of the vote, relationships with Brussels have gone from cool to
frigid. Switzerland has once again been branded an untrustworthy negotiating
partner.
The start of bilateral negotiations on transport, scheduled for April, may
be delayed. European transport ministers, some of whom have muttered darkly
of retaliation, are in no mood to give the Swiss an easy ride.
Swissair, the national carrier, which is seeking access to EU open skies,
could become an early casualty. Brussels will also be demanding a relaxation
of existing Swiss lorry curbs in return for better access to the EU road
haulage market for Swiss operators.
More generally, the EU is determined to prevent Switzerland securing full
EEA benefits too cheaply.
Agreement to Switzerland's bilateral negotiating agenda has been made
contingent on parallel negotiations on an EU slate that includes the highly
sensitive issue of Swiss immigration restrictions and import curbs on EU
agricultural produce.
Supporters of EU entry, with an eye to concessions won by Austria and the
three Nordic applicants for EU membership, argue that Switzerland would
secure a better balance of benefits inside the Union, including a say,
albeit limited, in formulating EU rules and policies.
Pro-Europeans, who include most of Switzerland's political, business and
financial establishment, also point to economic studies suggesting that
joining the EU could add half a percentage point to annual economic growth.
Staying out will inhibit exports, intensify the long-term trend to shifting
production abroad - sometimes just across the border in France or Germany -
and insulate protected inefficient domestic markets, they argue.
Swiss Eurosceptics dismiss the pessimism, claiming that Switzerland has
already reaped big benefits by staying out of the EEA. They believe the No
vote, by underscoring Switzerland's economic and financial independence, was
a contributory factor behind the huge influx of foreign funds last year.
As a result, the Swiss stock market was one of Europe's best performers in
1993 and the strong Swiss franc allowed interest rates to fall steadily,
helping the Swiss economy to pull slowly out of recession. Inflation is low
and the balance of payments is in record surplus.
Despite these arguments, the government's white paper on foreign policy in
the 1990s, published last December, insists that full EU membership must
remain a long-term goal. Mr Flavio Cotti, Switzerland's foreign minister,
has said he hopes the country could be a member by the year 2000.
Berne says there will be no attempt to negotiate membership of either the
EEA or the EU until after the next federal elections in October 1995. By
then Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden may be inside a 16-member EU,
leaving just Iceland and Liechtenstein as the only outsiders in the EEA.
In that event, Switzerland can be expected to head straight for Brussels.
Whether it arrives is another matter.
