The West Indies island of St Lucia lost 70,000 tonnes of bananas or 68 per
cent of its crop in the recent tropical storm that ravaged the Windward
Islands. It will cost Pounds 60m and take about two years to repair the
damage and get the island's agriculture industry back on its feet again,
said Mr John Compton, prime minister, last week.
But he stressed that the country was using the damage wrought by tropical
storm Debbie to step up its programme of agricultural diversification.
'We're looking at tree crops such as mangoes and avocado pears to grow in
the hills for niche markets in Europe,' Mr Compton said.
Bananas have traditionally been a mainstay of St Lucia's economy with most
destined for the British market. But Mr Compton believes Caribbean producers
must become more competitive and diversify their farm industries.
'We plan to re-organise the whole structure of our banana industry as we
realise that competition in Europe will continue to be strong,' he said. The
country is looking for around Pounds 10m in aid from European Union
programmes to assist in increasing production and productivity in bananas as
well as diversifying.
Mr Compton believes producers in St Lucia can increase productivity by 50
per cent in fertile valleys by using irrigation methods, better drainage,
better disease and pest control. He aims to produce the country's quota to
the EU market - 127,000 tonnes - on less acreage.
But the storm caused major structural damage, altering the course of rivers,
knocking out all but one of the island's water supplies. and silting up some
rivers. Mr Compton reckons that 20 per cent of the island's fertile valley
land is irrecoverably damaged.
'The storm has set back our efforts considerably, but we want to use this
opportunity to go ahead and properly re-organise our farming industry,' Mr
Compton said.
In the meantime, the Windward Islands, which supply 3 to 4 per cent of EU
bananas are looking to buy in bananas from elsewhere to fulfil their quota
and hold on to market share. But the commission has yet to approve the
request.
Belize is asking for an increase in its EU quota to reflect the growth in
its own banana industry - the country has a quota for 40,000 tonnes, but
production will exceed 55,000 tonnes this year.
