Monaco is really little more than a smallish seaside city. Prince Rainier
rules over a country that stretches across three kilometres of rugged
Mediterranean cliff but is still one of the most popular destinations on the
Cote d'Azur.
The principality is divided into four areas. Monaco Ville, the original
heart of Monaco, is the political centre as the home of the vielle ville,
the old town, and the Grimaldis' candy-coloured palace. Monte Carlo is much
younger. It was a scrappy olive and lemon grove until the mid-19th century
when Prince Charles III, one of Prince Rainier's more imaginative ancestors,
built the famous casino and luxury hotels there.
Most of Monaco's foreign residents live in the jungle of modern apartment
blocks flung up in La Condamine, the flat area lying between the more
picturesque hills of Monte Carlo and Monaco Ville. The Monegasques
themselves occupy the cheaper housing that has been built in Fontvieille,
the strip of land to the south of Monaco Ville which was reclaimed from the
sea in the 1970s and now houses a small industrial zone.
Yet to most people Monaco is synonymous with the belle epoque glitz of Monte
Carlo. Nothing sums it up better than the Casino (tel: 9216 2121), an
extraordinary edifice designed by Charles Garnier, architect of the
Paris-Opera. The Casino merits a visit for its aesthetic excesses - from the
Bohemian crystal chandeliers in the Salle Europe which weigh more than 150
kilos, to the scantily clad women in the Galelli fresco on the ceiling of
the smoking room whose eyes are said to follow the visitor around the room -
even if you do not plan to risk frittering away your francs on the roulette
wheels or slot machines.
No superstitious gambler should go into the Casino without first wishing
themselves luck by stroking the knee of the bronze horse bearing Louis XIV
in the statue outside the Hotel de Paris (tel: 9216 3000). The hotel is
almost as elaborate as the Casino with an extraordinary bar where Monaco's
Chanel-clad residents knock back cocktails during afternoon piano sessions.
It is also the home of the Louis XV (tel: 9216 3004), one of the few
restaurants on the Cote d'Azur to boast three Michelin stars thanks to the
talent of Alain Ducasse, its young chef. Donald Trump was so impressed with
Ducasse's culinary skills that he once flew him over to Manhattan to cook a
family meal.
Anyone whose budget does not quite run to a meal at the Louis XV - let alone
to Concorde tickets for the chef - can dabble in the Trump lifestyle by
window shopping at Chanel, Valentino, Cartier, Van Cleef &amp; Arpels or any of
the other expensive shops around Place du Casino and along Boulevard des
Moulins. They can also stroll around the Casino gardens to gawp at the
stunning sea views or at the work of Cesar, the French sculptor who is the
subject of the latest summer exhibition.
There are more gardens to see in Monaco Ville, where the cliff tops have
been covered with Aleppo pines, agaves, and aloes to offer spectacular views
across the Mediterranean cliffs. The narrow streets of the vieille ville
still offer an occasional glimpse of the sleepy charm of medieval Monaco,
but most of the old town is a commercialised clutter of souvenir shops
selling Prince Rainier mugs and Casino tea-towels.
The Grimaldis' Palace (tel: 9325 1831) looks like a souvenir in itself with
its pastel pink walls and comic book battlements. The ceremonial changing of
the guard, which takes place just before noon each day, completes the
picture with the soldiers sporting black uniforms in winter and white in
summer. Day after day the Place du Palais is packed with tourists waiting to
see the soldiers or hoping for a glimpse of Prince Rainier, Princess
Caroline and the other Grimaldis.
The vieille ville is also the home of Monaco's two most interesting museums.
The Musee des Souvenirs Napoleon (tel: 9325 1831) in the southern wing of
the palace is a treasure trove of Napoleonic memorabilia with more than
1,000 of his documents and objects ranging from his socks and handkerchieves
to medals and weapons.
But the principality's main museological asset is Musee Oceonographique
(tel: 9315 3600), which was built in 1910 at the behest of Prince Albert I
and has since established itself as an important centre for scientific
research and one of Europe's best aquariums. It contains some 90 tanks of
rare fish from all over the world with stunning colours and shapes. It also
houses Prince Albert I's own collection of marine fauna and stuffed sea
creatures (including a 20-metre whale) together with models of his
laboratory ships.
The other academic curiousity in Monaco is the Jardin Exotique (tel: 9303
3365) high on the rocks above the principality. The gardens, which were
founded in 1933, now encompass more than 7,000 different types of succulent
plants including surreal cacti from central and southern America and giant
African Euphorbia. Tucked beneath the gardens is another surreal scene in
the Prehistoric Observatory Caves with their stalagmites and stalactites.
Finally, one of Monaco's main claims to fame and a fierce point of local
pride is AS Monaco, the football club which is widely regarded as one of the
most successful in France. AS Monaco has, like other European clubs,
brandished its cheque book to sign a number of imported players over the
years, including Mark Hateley and Glen Hoddle.
Similarly, no expense has been spared on its state-of-the-art stadium at
Fontvieille. The head of one foreign bank remembers sending a visiting
director from his London head office to see AS Monaco. 'All he talked about
after the match was the escalators that carry the supporters up to the
terraces,' recalls the banker. 'It was the escalators that made him realise
Monaco really isn't like anywhere else]'
