Four years ago, it was pizza-loving turtles that lived in sewers. This year
it is US high-school kids who draw on the spirit of dinosaurs to
metamorphose into karate-kicking superheroes and fight evil.
The fickle and unpredictable nature of children's taste makes selling toys
one of the most difficult branches of retailing. Few in the trade -
including their Japanese manufacturer, Bandai - predicted that Mighty
Morphin Power Rangers, dolls based on characters from a children's
television series, would become the hit of 1994.
But the toys have not merely sold well - as did Tracy Island, a replica of
the headquarters of Thunderbirds from the revived 1960s sci-fi puppet
series, last Christmas.
They have become a phenomenon of the ilk of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles in
1990, launched on the back of a successful film; Transformers, the
futuristic cars and aircraft that converted into robots, in 1985; and
characters from the film Star Wars in the 1970s.
Indeed, Bandai claims they are likely to be the best-selling toys ever in a
single Christmas, having sold 9m in the UK already - against 3m Ninja
Turtles in 1990.
Bandai, one of Japan's largest toy manufacturers, does not yet know how many
Rangers have sold around the world this Christmas. But retail experts
believe the dolls will beat the original estimate of Y30bn (Pounds 190m)
sales in the US and Europe, pushing the Bandai group's pre-tax profits for
the year to March 1995 above current forecasts of Y13.5bn - compared with
Y5.4bn last year.
The toys range from 10cm models of the Rangers for Pounds 3.99 each to
22cm-30cm 'zords' - the robot dinosaurs into which the Rangers 'morph' when
they have to fight particularly tricky enemies - at Pounds 28-Pounds 50.
'They really are a phenomenon for this year,' says Stephen Woodbridge,
managing director of Hamleys, the toyshop in London's Regent Street. 'They
are one of those things where you just don't know how many you could sell,
if only you could get the stock.'
Getting the stock is proving a problem. Parents have been queueing for hours
outside Toys R Us and Argos waiting for deliveries, only to find there are
not enough to go round. Pirate copies have emerged to meet the demand.
Bandai has even been forced to run advertisements apologising for the short
supply.
The company admits that it underestimated demand. But once interest in the
toys started to become apparent in the autumn, its ability to respond was
constrained by European Union import quotas on toys from China, where most
of the toys were originally produced. Bandai was forced to switch production
elsewhere: some 33 factories across Taiwan, Thailand, Japan, Hong Kong and
Mexico, as well as China, are now turning out the products 24 hours a day.
Bandai has a good record in picking winners, as the manufacturer of Ninja
Turtles. But forecasting the big hit of the year is tricky. Many in the
trade had thought merchandise from Disney's film The Lion King would be this
year's best performer.
It was the unexpected success of the Power Rangers TV series that boosted
the toys. It also lifted the ratings of Britain's GMTV, the breakfast
television show that first screened it in the UK. The series is now being
brodcast by BSkyB, the satellite channel, and is showing in 80 countries.
'It is the first time a toy company has had to deal with the simultaneous
launch of a programme in so many countries worldwide,' says Bandai.
The success of the TV series has perhaps caused most bemusement in Japan,
which has been familiar with the characters, known there as Go Rangers, for
17 years in comic books and then on television.
Japan's Go Rangers were five anonymous superheroes, who battled with
monsters using martial arts and huge robots, usually to save Tokyo from
disaster. In late 1992, a Califor-nian production company called Saban
Entertainment brought the characters to a wider audience by turning them
into American teenagers. It interwove newly filmed storylines with action
se-quences from the original Japanese programmes.
In spite of its popularity, the television series has aroused controversy. A
Norwegian channel took it off the air following complaints of copycat
violence by children. In the UK, a four-year-old boy from Bristol was taken
to hospital with a split kidney after a friend kicked him in imitation of a
Ranger. However, the controversy has had little effect on the sales of the
toys.
Just why Power Rangers have taken such a hold on childish imaginations is a
mystery. 'We don't think anyone really knows why they're so popular,' says
Bandai.
It suggests the TV series combines a number of elements that appeal to
children: martial arts, science fiction, a battle between good and evil, and
dinosaurs. Also, two of the five Rangers are girls, so they appeal to both
sexes.
Bandai also detects a trend away from computer games back towards toys such
as dolls, which require more imagination on the part of children. That view
is supported by the resurgence this year of old favourites such as Barbie
dolls and Action Man.
This is a trend the company hopes to gain from further, thanks to the
'evolving soap-opera' format of the Power Rangers series. New characters are
already being introduced in the US, which could be the best-sellers of next
Christmas.
However, whatever plans and marketing initiatives the toy companies come up
with, ultimately they have to win approval from the toughest judges of all -
the children.
