The stock market continued to take its medicine manfully last week - smiling
when the construction sector delivered a fresh batch of dividend increases
and then grimacing when the UK and global bond traders showed they still had
the power to disrupt the share market as well as their own. The flow of data
on the domestic economy tended to confirm investors' belief that the British
consumer is proving a poor leader for economic recovery.
It is clear that equities will remain strongly influenced by the gilt-edged
market until the institutions have finished reshaping their portfolios in
the light of the rise in bond yields since the beginning of February. Shares
are still at the mercy of sudden swings of mood in bonds and, with the
Bundesbank effectively sidelined for a month, are now at the fickle mercy of
the US Federal securities market.
It is difficult to be sanguine ahead of a trading week which will include a
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, auctions of Dollars 28m in US
short-term bonds, trade figures on both sides of the Atlantic, and be topped
up by an Opec meeting. The latest domestic retail price index arrives at
mid-week, but should not change the timescale for the next cut in base
rates.
'Rebalancing the recovery away from consumption . . .' sums up the new view
taken of the stores sector by BZW, and others in the market. The UK
investment bank, pinpointing 'the problem that the economy has in sustaining
consumer-led growth', believes that the weakening of gross margins in the
stores sector over Christmas will continue, perhaps for a full 12 months.
Combined with the effective breakdown of orderly, non-price competition in
such areas as the electrical, DIY and durable goods sectors, this implies an
unusually risky outlook for the stores sector. Such strong names as Marks
and Spencer, GUS and Boots are benefiting from the protection afforded them
by brand franchises, cost advantages and the difficulties any upstart rival
would find in entering their established markets. At the other end of the
defensive scale, Argos, Dixons and Kingfisher are identified by BZW as
facing vulnerable profit margin structures; gross margins on DIY are around
five points below those for the industry average already.
Longer-term views on the stock market are still bullish. 'The bull market is
now well established,' is the opinion at Strauss Turnbull, which expects
domestic interest rates to fall to 5 per cent very soon. Downward pressures
on European rates and benign inflation in the UK should balance UK tax rises
in April.
The overall opinion is still that rates will come down, the economy will
recover and this combination can only be good for share prices in the medium
term. But the underlying worry is that the bond market may have already
decided that interest rates are going higher later this year and that the
stock market may have already discounted all the recovery on offer at
present.
