The chancellor yesterday fulfilled his commitment to a 3 per cent real
increase in tax on tobacco to support the government's aim of reducing
smoking.
From 6pm last night, tax on each packet of 20 cigarettes rose by 10p and the
chancellor promised that duty on other tobacco products would rise by a
similar proportion.
However, the tax on alcohol was left unchanged as the chancellor responded
to complaints from the drinks industry about duties and the increase in
cross-Channel shopping and smuggling.
The chancellor's action on beer was largely expected as a Treasury select
committee last week rejected a call by brewers for beer duty to be halved to
curb cross-Channel imports and stimulate UK sales.
In his speech Mr Kenneth Clarke said cross-border shopping and smuggling had
'meant a loss of duty to the exchequer'.
He said that 'no chancellor can remain unmoved in the face of this but
neither can any chancellor simply adopt popular measures to cut taxes on
alcohol that would threaten the revenue and require taxes on other goods to
be raised'.
Last night the drinks industry was sceptical about Mr Clarke's claim that he
would campaign for higher duties throughout Europe. Mr Robin Simpson,
director of the Brewers and Licensed Retailers Association, said: 'Frankly,
other European countries are not going to raise their beer duties to solve a
UK problem.'
Carlsberg Tetley said that 15 per cent of all beer drunk at home in Britain
was bought on the Continent. 'The differential is too huge and needs
something more drastic than just leaving the tax alone,' said a spokesman.
Mr Peter Lewis, director of the Wine and Spirits Association said: ' . . .
cross-border shopping remains a threat to the pub, off-licence and
supermarket trade.'
However, Mr Tony Greener, chairman of Guinness, the largest spirits company,
said: 'We are satisfied with the chancellor's decision not to increase the
duty on alcoholic drinks. We welcome the chancellor's promise to support the
industry when he enters negotiations on European excise duties.'
The tobacco industry was disappointed in Mr Clarke's decision to raise tax
on cigarettes. The Tobacco Manufacturers Association said: 'Tonight the
bootleggers will be celebrating with a bottle of bootlegged champagne and
lighting up a smuggled cigar.'
Mr Paul Mason, an independent retailer in Southampton and spokesman for the
Tobacco Alliance, said: 'The chancellor has put another nail in the
corner-shop's coffin.'
