The Pounds 2bn CrossRail project to link London's Paddington and Liverpool
Street stations has been approved by consultants commissioned by the
Department of Transport to evaluate the scheme and consider proposals to
reduce the cost.
The consultants' report rejects alternative routes and recommends that plans
for the line should include six stations - one at Holborn in addition to the
five proposed by British Rail.
The report, from a consortium of consultants which included Bovis and
Alexander Gibb, concludes that keeping all options open for stations will
make it easier to raise private finance for the project.
The final decision over CrossRail is expected to be taken by the cabinet
next week so that the legislation needed to proceed with the project can
resume its parliamentary passage.
The project is strongly opposed by the Treasury, which is unwilling to
commit more than the Pounds 64m already earmarked in spending plans for the
next three years. It argues that demand for transport into central London
has eased and congestion declined.
But Mr John Major, the prime minister, is coming under intense pressure to
back CrossRail from business leaders and the City Corporation, the local
authority for London's financial district.
Cancellation of the project would be a blow to London First, the
business-led initiative established with government backing to promote
London in the absence of a city-wide local authority.
Mr Stephen O'Brien, London First's chief executive, has also warned against
attempts to scale down the project by opening fewer stations or reducing the
line's capacity. 'This would be exactly the short-sightedness that will do
London no favours in the future,' he said.
Demand for transport projects such as the M25 London orbital motorway and
the Thameslink north/south rail line has been underestimated in the past, he
says.
Keeping all possible station options open could make it easier to finance
CrossRail, the report says.
The BR plan is for five stations: Paddington, Bond Street, Tottenham Court
Road, Farringdon and Liverpool Street. The report says the parliamentary
bill to build CrossRail - due to enter its committee stage in the Commons on
January 25 - should include permission for a station at Holborn.
The private sector promoter that wins the contract to build the line would
then have maximum flexibility to attract finance from property developers
wishing to develop sites along the line. Developers have said that most of
the cost of building the line could be raised from joint ventures to exploit
the development potential of sites above the stations.
