About 1.4m telephone calls were made by a group of 65 charities last year,
as part of their fundraising efforts.
Attempts by charities to solicit pledges of money over the telephone
represent one of the fastest growing areas of fundraising. But it can expose
potential donors to the risk of high-pressure techniques and other abuse,
and the Institute of Charity Fundraising Managers last month issued strong
guidelines on its conduct.
The 1.4m calls by the 65 charities included in a survey by the institute
raised Pounds 10.7m. Many fundraising calls are made by external agencies,
rather than a charity's own staff - 63 per cent of charities included in the
survey use agencies.
The institute's code, designed to ensure that telephone fundraising is
conducted in a 'professional and sensitive manner', applies to both directly
employed and agency staff. When charities use agencies, says the institute,
they should be engaged on the basis of service fees agreed in advance,
rather than commission related to the amount raised.
For each telephone contact, agencies must supply their names and addresses,
and the fee paid by the charity they are representing, if potential donors
seek such information.
'In all instances, fundraisers should be able to quote a specific figure,'
says the code. 'Any accompanying explanation or rationale for the
expenditure should be in addition to, not in place of, a clear statement of
the costs.'
The code says telephone fundraisers must give their names and that of the
voluntary organisation they represent, and make it clear that the purpose of
the call is to request support. Tone, content and style of calls must comply
with the requirements of the Advertising Standards Authority.
Fundraisers must accept the right of potential donors to terminate a
conversation at any stage, and must be able to disclose the name and address
of a 'properly authorised person' to whom complaints can be made.
Charities are advised that, where possible, householders should be sent
advance letters warning them to expect a telephone fundraiser to call. These
would give recipients the opportunity to write back saying that they did not
wish to be called.
Mr Karl Holweger, who chairs the institute's telephone working group, says
he expects telephone fundraising to 'increase dramatically' in the next few
years. It should be a cost-effective way of matching donors with causes they
wished to support, but must be conducted in a responsible way by charities
and their agents.
