Will a radical change in construction materials and techniques put Audi up
among the front runners in the luxury car stakes in 1995? Its new A8 quattro
saloon's light alloy space frame and panels save weight and fuel; Tiptronic
transmission gives drivers the benefits of automatic or manual shifting; and
four-wheel drive allows them to make full use of its 4.0-litre, multi-valve
V8s 300 horsepower on wet or dry surfaces.
But by itself, this technology may not be enough to ensure sales success.
When it comes to styling and mechanical layout, status conscious luxury car
drivers are remarkably conservative. Thus the new BMW 7-Series has classic
rear-wheel drive and lines remarkably like those of its predecessor, while
the new Jaguar XJ saloon, roomier inside yet slimmer looking, has even
reverted to the twin round headlamps of an earlier model.
In business motoring's middle reaches, General Motors has stayed faithful to
rear-wheel drive for its Opel (Vauxhall in the UK) Omega, as has Ford with
its heavily revamped Scorpio.
Drivers of these classes of car know what they want - smoothness and
silence, ample power and air conditioning, automatic transmission and a
built-in telephone, airbags and anti-lock brakes.
Next year the list will extend to satellite navigation, to be offered in
Mercedes-Benz's most prestigious S-Class, BMW's 7-Series and, probably the
successor to Japan's trend-setting luxury car, the Lexus LS400.
In the medium/large class most of the past year's newcomers - the Renault
Laguna is typical - have conformed to a pattern; front-wheel drive
(occasionally with an all-wheel drive option), space-saving
transversely-mounted engines, standard airbags and anti-lock brakes and the
easy availability of air-conditioning and automatic transmission.
Choice of a diesel as an alternative to a petrol engine has become
essential. Only two European business car providers of any consequence -
Saab and Jaguar - do not have diesels in their product ranges. Both are
likely to add diesels, with engines bought-in rather than developed in-
house, within the next two or three years.
Great strides are being made in car diesel technology. For now, BMW's
in-line turbocharged and intercooled six-cylinder units have no peers for
urgent and near silent power delivery.
Mercedes-Benz, with the world's first four valves-per-cylinder passenger car
diesels, and PSA Group's latest 2.5-litre diesels with twin balancer shafts,
have brought diesel smoothness close to petrol engine standards while
benefiting from higher torque at low revolutions and cleaner exhaust
emissions.
BMW's just introduced four-cylinder diesel is raising the stakes in the
market for less expensive, fuel efficient business cars. For fuel economy
combined with acceptable refinement, VW-Audi's direct-injection diesels, as
fitted in Audi 80 and 100 and VW Golf and Passat models, lead the pack.
Rover's direct-injection engined 600 diesel saloon will soon rival their
standards.
Sales of on-off road 4x4s have maintained their impetus. The vehicles have
become civilised, if rather thirsty, on-road car substitutes and rarely
venture on to the rough terrain which they were designed to tackle.
Land Rover's latest Range Rover with height-adjustable air suspension is put
forward as an alternative to conventional luxury cars in the BMW, Jaguar and
Mercedes-Benz class.
Although its two beam axles cannot reasonably be expected to equal the ride
comfort of a sophisticated all-independent system, it is a most urbane
performer on the road and remains capable off it.
One of the attractions of on-off road vehicles such as Range Rover is their
so-called command driving position. It gives users a feeling of superiority
and allows them to see over the tops of normal cars ahead.
Similar benefits are offered by multi-purpose vehicles (MPVs) which lack the
high-slung 4x4s largely unused off-road capability.
Their market penetration is forecast to grow substantially in Europe as new
models such as the joint Portugese-produced Ford-VW project come on stream.
Whether this will be at the expense of on-off road 4x4s or conventional
estate cars remains to be seen.
In the past eight years, sales of MPVs such as the Renault Espace (still
market leader in Europe) have risen by an average 80 per cent per annum.
By the end of the century it is expected that 700,000 MPVs will be sold in
Europe each year.
This forecast makes the introduction of a range of MPVs built by PSA but
which will be sold badged as Citroens, Peugeots, Fiats and Lancias among the
most significant motoring events of 1994.
