Mr Yegor Gaidar, Russia's most prominent economic reformer, said yesterday
he was pulling out of the government to avoid being forced to share
responsibility for 'dangerous' policy decisions.
Announcing his refusal to serve in the new cabinet that Mr Viktor
Chernomyrdin, prime minister, is to name this week, Mr Gaidar said: 'I
cannot work without having the necessary levers at my command . . . where
decisions I have taken are not approved and at the same time decisions I
regard as dangerous are embraced by the government.'
His decision, which appears final, will cause deep concern among western
governments and financial institutions already worried about the prospects
for reform in Russia after December elections that gave anti-reform parties
a majority in the parliament's lower house.
It comes only a day after the departure of President Bill Clinton, who had
been convinced by President Boris Yeltsin during a two-day summit that
reforms would continue and deepen. The government now seems almost certain
to pursue the much slower course of reform favoured by Mr Chernomyrdin.
Mr Gaidar, first deputy prime minister since last September and prime
minister for 10 months in 1992, led the Russia's Choice party in last
month's elections. He will now concentrate on leading his party in the state
duma, the lower house. 'I cannot be, at one and the same time, in the
government and in opposition to it,' he said.
Attempts may still be made, however, to entice Mr Gaidar back into the
cabinet. Mr Vyacheslav Kostikov, Mr Yeltsin's press secretary, said last
night that the resignation 'would seriously weaken the president's reform
flank', and that pressure would be put on him to stay.
Mr Yeltsin is due to meet Mr Chernomyrdin today, and the announcement of the
new government is due today or tomorrow.
The future of other reformers in the cabinet is uncertain - although so far
only one, Mrs Ella Pamfilova, the social security minister and the only
woman in cabinet, has chosen to follow Mr Gaidar. Mr Boris Fyodorov, finance
minister, said: 'One's enthusiasm for work in the government is low.'
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Fyodorov emphasised that he
would not serve if Mr Viktor Gerashchenko, the central bank chairman, was
confirmed in his post - and said that he, like Mr Gaidar, strongly objected
to a draft agreement with Belarus for the unification of its economy with
Russia's, signed by Mr Yeltsin this month.
'Such agreements cannot be made without reference to either the cabinet or
the state duma. It is effectively the union of one state with another.
However, I may be able to get changes in that agreement, I will have to
see.'
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy premier for privatisation and the only member
of the present government confirmed in post by a presidential decree, was
advised by Mr Gaidar to stay on - as was Mr Andrei Kozyrev, the foreign
minister.
Mr Gaidar said Mr Chernomyrdin had mentioned Mr Grigory Yavlinsky - leader
of the Yabloko group, a rival reform faction to Russia's Choice, in the
lower house - as a possible successor.
Mr Yavlinsky, a well known reformer in Russia and the west, favours stronger
policies on privatisation and de-monopolisation, and on economic union
between the former Soviet republics - but is less concerned about securing a
rapid reduction in inflation and stabilisation of the rouble.
Mr Yavlinsky, asked by the Interfax news agency last night night if he would
serve in government, replied: 'I don't think so, but it's too early to say.'
Gaidar passes the poisoned chalice, Page 3
West puts faith in central bank, Page 3
Editorial Comment, Page 13
