Malaysia is 'a country of cheap and docile labour which has banished free
trade unions', Mr Lane Kirkland, one of the most powerful trade unionists in
the western world, recently told the UK Trades Union Congress.
The views of Mr Kirkland, head of the US union umbrella, the AFL-CIO, are
typical of western union leaders. The reason for such attacks is not hard to
find. Dr Mahathir Mohamad, the Malaysian prime minister, is one of the most
outspoken critics of the idea of worldwide minimum labour standards.
Supporters of minimum standards - especially among the unions - therefore
assume that Malaysia is teeming with sweat shops and child labour.
There are poor working conditions in some sectors of the Malaysian economy,
particularly among immigrant plantation workers. There are also some
restrictions on trade unions. But in most other respects, Mr Kirkland's
views are being left behind by events, as Malaysia races to catch up with
Asian tigers such as Korea and Taiwan.
'When workers come here for an interview, it is not us interviewing them, it
is them interviewing us about holidays and fringe benefits,' says Mr Neoh
Soon Bin of the Soon Soon flour mill in Penang, north-western Malaysia.
With unemployment running at less than 3 per cent and annual growth in gross
domestic product at more than 8 per cent, workers can afford to be choosy,
even if, in sectors such as electronics, they are not allowed to join
independent unions. The result is that annual labour turnover is soaring -
up to 45 per cent in some areas - and average wages are rising at nearly 7
per cent a year.
According to Mr Thian Hoo Tan, who runs the advanced disc-drive plant of US
electronics company Komag in Penang, his real wage costs are rising at more
than 10 per cent a year and will converge with US wage rates in about 10
years.
These wage increases are not won at the expense of decent employment
standards. Malaysian workers have some job security and the government
regularly encourages employers to adopt high standards of health and safety.
And even trade unionism is 'semi-free', according to Mr G. Rajasekaran,
secretary general of the Malaysian Trades Union Congress. Throughout much of
the manufacturing sector they operate with greater freedom than in most
other countries in the region.
Malasia's high wages are already causing many assembly operations to
relocate to China or Thailand, says Mr Tan. The government wants to emulate
neighbouring Singapore in shifting to high value-added production. With its
GDP per capita nearly USDollars 8,000 (using purchasing power parity), just
above Greece, the poorest European Union country, it can no longer compete
with the new low-wage Asian competition.
Thus, Malaysia is now too advanced to be affected by most of the minimum
labour standards that union leaders such as Mr Kirkland would like to impose
in return for access to western markets.
'Malaysia would scarcely be affected by what is proposed. If the plan really
was for a global minimum wage - as Mahathir claims - we would be the first
to oppose it,' says Mr Abdul Razak Hamid, head of the Malaysian textile
union in Penang.
So why does Dr Mahathir persist in his attacks on the west and on Malaysia's
own trade union leaders?
Accusations of western hypocrisy on labour issues have helped to raise his
standing in the developing world. He is also worried that the west will try
to impose what he believes to be an inappropriate form of trade unionism on
countries such as Malaysia through minimum labour standards.
Yet beneath the rhetoric, some flexibility is apparent. Mr Anthony Yeo, the
senior official at the Ministry of Human Resources who represents Malaysia
at International Labour Organisation meetings, opposes any link between
trade and labour standards. But he adds that the ILO should be given more
authority to stamp out real abuses, such as child and slave labour. He also
says that, while restricted company unions are currently the most
appropriate for the Malaysian electronics sector, 'we might at some future
stage adopt a different approach'.
If Malaysia is to make the transition to a high value-added economy, it will
have to relax the paternalism that pervades the country. Modern production
methods require an educated workforce capable of making independent
decisions.
'That also means trusting citizens to form free trade unions,' says Mr Steve
Pursey of the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions based in
Brussels
Mr Pursey - reflecting a more sophisticated trade union view than Mr
Kirkland's - believes that developing countries such as Malaysia, which have
advanced beyond the first stage of industrialisation, have most to gain from
minimum standards legislation. It will protect them, he argues, from being
undercut by the cheapest labour economies before they are ready to switch to
higher value-added production.
From their different perspectives, Mr Pursey and Mr Yeo suggest that the
debate about minimum standards is at last moving beyond the realm of
caricature.
