The bitter feud within Peru's first family continues to dominate the
country's political centre-stage - with President Alberto Fujimori this week
stripping his wife, Ms Susana Higuchi, of first lady status after she
persisted in allegations of corruption against cabinet ministers. Behind the
scenes, however, the agenda for next April's general elections is starting
to take shape.
Since his arrival in the Peruvian capital a week ago, Mr Javier Perez de
Cuellar, former UN secretary-general, has been closeted in meetings with a
series of prestigious economic analysts. Mr Perez de Cuellar has not yet
formally announced he will run against Mr Fujimori - who has also still to
declare an official candidacy - but his public addresses hint more strongly
each day at the substance of his eventual campaign.
The suggestion that an elderly former diplomat might pose a serious threat
to the buoyant Mr Fujimori provokes incredulity among many businessmen, both
Peruvian and among the increasing numbers of foreigners who are flocking
back to Peru to seize investment opportunities. 'Fujimori is the best
president this country's ever had,' said one leading Peruvian manufacturer.
'We couldn't be so incredibly stupid as to reject him.'
Indeed, most macroeconomic indicators suggest things are coming right for
long-beleaguered Peru. Inflation this year should be below 20 per cent, down
from a staggering 7,000 per cent when Mr Fujimori took office in 1990. After
expanding 7 per cent last year, GDP growth could top 10 per cent in 1994.
International reserves, at more than Dollars 5bn (Pounds 3.2bn), are the
highest in Peru's history.
Equally important, after more than a decade of terror and killing, guerrilla
activity has virtually ceased. Mining and petroleum exploration and
development has been resumed in many remoter areas of the country while
dozens of foreign concerns are either returning or setting up Peruvian
offices for the first time.
But there is a bleaker side to the Peruvian 'economic miracle', which both
Ms Higuchi and Mr Perez de Cuellar have pinpointed. Only one in 10 Peruvians
of working age is judged 'adequately' employed; another eight survive
through subsistence agriculture or a host of 'informal' activities outside
the legal economy.
Reform of the bloated state apparatus has pushed tens of thousands of former
civil servants and state company employees on to the street, literally. They
have swollen the army of informal vendors eking out a living in the centre
of Lima.
For the 300,000 or so young people who join the national workforce each
year, the task of finding secure employment is all but hopeless.
Attending to the nation's poor has not, so far, been a priority for the
government. In the early days of the Fujimori administration, as food
subsidies and price controls were eliminated, the need to re-establish a
working relationship with the multilateral organisations was more urgent.
Repayments to the International Monetary Fund and World Bank cost the
Treasury in a month what the social emergency programme doled out in a year.
More recent efforts to create a 'compensation' programme similar to that
designed for post-stabilisation Bolivia have been only partially successful.
The Foncodes fund has for the past two years been channelling cash to
community projects, focusing on small building projects, drinking water and
sewerage systems.
Now, in this pre-election year, the government finds itself swimming in cash
from privatisations. The IMF has authorised spending of up to Dollars 876m
on 'social' programmes. But Foncodes does not have the organisational
capacity to spend more than about Dollars 120m. Other hastily hatched plans
to funnel more money into health posts and schools may succeed in spending
about the same amount again.
Multilateral organisations such as the World Bank and the Inter-American
Development Bank which have resumed lending to Peru are pouring money into
upgrading infrastructure. Several hundred million dollars will, by 1995,
have been pumped into road and bridge repairs; poverty alleviation is
limited to, at best, inadequate food handouts and short-term palliatives.
Ms Higuchi has emerged in recent weeks as one of Mr Fujimori's harshest
critics amid the couple's highly public falling out, fuelling rumours that
she harbours political ambitions herself. She has made a series of attacks
on her husband's regime, accusing him of personal authoritarianism and
neglect of the 'human factor' in the economic programme.
'There is too much emphasis on infrastructure,' Ms Higuchi said. 'The head
of a household can't promise a fine mansion but keep his family starving
whilst it is being built.'
Those close to Mr Perez de Cuellar say his eventual campaign platform will
echo this theme and propose reorienting Peru's economic programme to
farther-reaching solutions to unemployment and poverty. This would imply
tougher negotiations with the IMF, World Bank and IADB and, possibly, a halt
to the breakneck privatisation of state assets.
'So far no one's taken a long hard look at where Peru is going,' says Mr
Francisco Sagasti, a former senior World Bank official now heading a Lima
research institute. 'Pulling the neo-liberal economic model back to the
centre from the extremes where it's been for the past four years and
renegotiating with the multilaterals would make a lot of sense.'
